Homelessness and Housing Instability
Among LGBTQ Youth
| 1


Table of Contents
Table of Contents
2
Executive Summary
4
Key Findings
4
Recommendation Summary
5
Background
7
Risks Associated with LGBTQ Youth Homelessness
7
Complexities of Measuring Housing Status Among LGBTQ Youth
8
Impacts of the COVID-19 Pandemic and Housing
9
Methods
10
Sample and Procedures
10
Measures of Housing Instability
10
Measures of Mental Health and Suicide Risk
11
Measures of Factors Associated with Homelessness and Housing Instability
11
Findings
11
Homelessness and Housing Instability Among LGBTQ Youth
12
Demographics of LGBTQ Youth Experiencing Homelessness and Housing Instability
12
Race
12
Gender Identity
13
Sexual Identity
14
Census Region
14
Mental Health and Suicide Risk among LGBTQ Youth Experiencing Homelessness and Housing
Instability
14
Anxiety, Depression, and Self Harm
15
Seriously Considered or Attempted Suicide
16
Barriers to Mental Health Care
16
Experiences Associated with Homelessness and Housing Instability
17
Victimization
18
Foster Care
18
Food Insecurity
19
Recommendations
20
Preventing LGBTQ Youth Homelessness
20
Increased Funding for Low-Barrier Housing Programs
21
Reimagining Shelter Services
22
Improved Data Collection on LGBTQ Youth Homelessness
23
Anti-Poverty Economic Policies
23
Conclusion
24
About The Trevor Project
25
| 2


Media inquiries:
25
Research-related inquiries:
25
References
26
Table 1: Demographic Characteristics by Subgroup
28
Table 2: Mental Health and Suicide Risk among LGBTQ Youth Experiencing Homelessness and
Housing Instability
30
Table 3: Experiences Associated with Homelessness and Housing Instability
31
| 3


Executive Summary
LGBTQ youth are overrepresented among young people experiencing homelessness and
housing instability in the United States. This elevated risk of homelessness and housing
instability has detrimental effects on LGBTQ youths’ mental health. This report uses data
from the 2021 National Survey on LGBTQ Youth Mental Health to examine the prevalence of
homelessness and various manifestations of housing instability among LGBTQ youth and
their mental health symptoms. It also examines rates of homelessness and housing
instability among various subgroups within the LGBTQ community and the prevalence of
experiences which are frequently connected to housing instability (e.g., food insecurity).
Finally,
it
includes
recommendations
for
preventing
and
combating
LGBTQ
youth
homelessness.
Key Findings
Overall, 28% of LGBTQ youth reported experiencing homelessness or housing instability
at some point in their lives.
●
Nearly half (44%) of Native/Indigenous LGBTQ youth have experienced homelessness
or housing instability at some point in their life, compared to 16% of Asian
American/Pacific Islander youth, 27% of White LGBTQ youth, 27% of Latinx LGBTQ
youth, 26% of Black LGBTQ youth, and 36% of multiracial LGBTQ youth.
●
Homelessness and housing instability were reported at higher rates among
transgender and nonbinary youth, including 38% of transgender girls/women, 39% of
transgender boys/men, and 35% of nonbinary youth, compared to 23% of cisgender
LGBQ youth.
●
16% of LGBTQ youth reported that they had slept away from parents or caregivers
because they ran away from home, with more than half (55%) reporting that they ran
away from home because of mistreatment or fear of mistreatment due to their LGBTQ
identity.
●
14% of LGBTQ youth reported that they had slept away from parents or caregivers
because they were kicked out or abandoned, with 40% reporting that they were
kicked out or abandoned due to their LGBTQ identity.
LGBTQ youth who experienced homelessness or housing instability reported higher
rates of mental health challenges, compared to their stably housed LGBTQ peers.
●
LGBTQ youth in our sample who reported housing instability or homelessness had
nearly two to four times the odds of reporting depression (aOR = 2.07), anxiety (aOR
= 1.96), self-harm (aOR = 2.30), considering suicide (aOR = 2.62), and attempting
suicide (aOR = 3.70) compared to those who did not report any housing instability.
●
69% of youth who reported past housing instability and 68% of youth who were
currently homeless reported that they had engaged in self-harm in the last year –
compared to 49% of youth who had not experienced housing instability,
●
58% of youth who reported past housing instability and 62% of youth who were
currently homeless reported having seriously considered suicide in the last year –
compared to 35% of youth who had not experienced housing instability,
●
28% of youth who reported past housing instability and 35% of youth who were
currently homeless reported a suicide attempt in the last year – compared to 10% of
youth who had not experienced housing instability,
| 4


LGBTQ youth who reported experiencing homelessness or housing instability had higher
rates of victimization, being in foster care, and food insecurity, compared to their stably
housed LGBTQ peers
●
LGBTQ youth who reported past housing instability or current homelessness had
more than three times greater odds (aOR = 3.46) of ever being physically threatened
or abused due to their sexual orientation or, among transgender and nonbinary
identity,  gender identity (aOR = 3.13).
●
LGBTQ youth who reported past housing instability or current homelessness had
nearly six times greater odds (aOR = 5.81) of reporting that they had been in foster
care at any point in their life.
●
LGBTQ youth who reported past housing instability or current homelessness had
more than three times greater odds (aOR = 3.53) of reporting food insecurity in the
last month.
Recommendation Summary
●
Preventing LGBTQ Youth Homelessness. Strong anti-discrimination policies in the
workplace and strong anti-bully and harassment policies in schools can be effective in
helping LGBTQ youth stay connected to school and employment, increasing their
skills and future earnings, and making it easier for them to maintain stable housing.
Additionally, since family conflict around youths’ LGBTQ identities is a driving factor in
LGBTQ youth homelessness, developing family counseling or mediation programs
may be effective at decreasing conflict and keeping LGBTQ youth in their homes and
connected to their families. Special attention should also be paid to preventing
housing instability among LGBTQ youth in foster care through case management and
exit planning for youth exiting care.
●
Increased Funding for Low-Barrier Housing Programs.
More funding should be
allocated for safe, low-barrier housing programs which can have an immediate
positive impact on LGBTQ youth experiencing housing instability.
●
Reimagining Shelter Services. One immediate action that housing providers can
take to support LGBTQ youth experiencing homelessness is to make sure that all
shelter and housing facilities provide culturally competent services to LGBTQ youth.
●
Improved Data Collection on LGBTQ Youth Homelessness. Better data is needed to
understand the full scope and impact of LGBTQ youth homelessness in the United
States. Questions about both LGBTQ identity and housing status should be added to
population surveys of youth and young adults, such as the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention’s Youth Risk Behavior Survey (YRBS).
●
Anti-Poverty Economic Policies. LGBTQ youth are impacted by their families’ and
communities’ economic stability. Policies that combat poverty at the societal level will
have a positive impact on LGBTQ youths’ access to safe and secure housing.
Economic upheavals, such as what we are seeing with the COVID-19 pandemic,
increase economic pressure on low-income households and make it even more
urgent for legislators to tackle root causes of poverty in the United States to the
benefit of LGBTQ youth, their families, and their communities.
| 5


Background
LGBTQ youth are overrepresented among young people experiencing homelessness (Choi,
Wilson, Shelton, & Gates, 2015; Durso & Gates, 2012; Morton, et al., 2018; Baams et al., 2019).
While the challenges of identifying and contacting youth experiencing homelessness make it
difficult to establish the exact prevalence of LGBTQ youth homelessness, it is estimated that
lesbian, gay, and bisexual (LGB) youth make up 7-9% of the general population (Wilson,
1
Cooper, Kastanis, & Nezhad, 2014) but 29% of youth experiencing homelessness (Choi et al.,
2015). Studies show that nearly one in four (23%) of transgender young adults between the
ages of 18 and 25 experience homelessness, Further, a study by the Williams Institute found
that 23% of transgender young adults between the ages of 18 and 25 reported ever
experiencing homelessness, compared to 12.5% of the overall population of 18-25 year-olds
(O’Neill, Wilson, & Herman, 2020; Morton et al., 2018).
This report is intentionally using the phrase “homelessness and housing instability” to
capture the wide variety of experiences that can negatively impact a young person’s housing
stability. The state of not having a permanent home is a complicated and non-linear
experience that can be difficult to capture and measure in survey research. Homelessness
and housing instability include a variety of circumstances: living on the streets, staying in
emergency shelters or transitional housing, living in one’s car, staying at a hotel due to lack of
other housing options, sleeping in a public place or on public transportation, or temporarily
moving in with friends and family. Over the course of days or weeks, a young person may
sleep on the bus, move in with a friend, stay in an emergency shelter, and then move in with
an extended family member. This frequently unplanned movement makes it difficult for
researchers and practitioners to connect with youth experiencing homelessness or housing
instability, whether to conduct research or offer services. Each of these housing
circumstances also comes with unique risks. Couch-surfing with friends is generally
considered to be safer than sleeping on the streets; however, youth staying with friends,
extended family, and acquaintances are still vulnerable to theft, exploitation, and violence.
The volatility of housing instability also makes it difficult for young people to stay connected
to supportive institutions such as school, employment, or case management.
Risks Associated with LGBTQ Youth Homelessness
Experiencing homelessness or housing instability is associated with a number of safety risks
for LGBTQ youth. For example, with the exception of marijuana use, LGBTQ youth
experiencing homelessness are more likely to report drug use compared to their straight,
cisgender
peers
experiencing
homelessness
(Gattis,
2013;
Kattari, Barman-Adhikari,
DeChants, & Rice, 2017; Saewyc et al., 2017). This substance use increases LGBTQ youths’
risk of violence. For example, LGBTQ youth experiencing homelessness report higher
incidences of being injured or having sex when they did not want to because of substance
use (Saewyc et al., 2017). LGBTQ youth experiencing homelessness are more likely to report
engaging in survival sex, defined as exchanging sex for money, a place to stay, or to fulfill
1 It is important to note that due to a failure to collect nuanced sexual orientation and gender identity
data in many large-scale surveys, much of the previous research on LGBTQ youth actually only covers
those who are lesbian, gay, or bisexual. In this report, findings that only apply to lesbian, gay, or
bisexual youth will be denoted with the acronym LGB and findings which apply to lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender, queer, or questioning youth will be denoted with acronym LGBTQ.
| 6


other basic needs (Bauermeister, Eaton, Meanley, Pingel, & UHIP Partnership, 2017; Ecker,
2016; Gattis, 2013; Tyler, 2013). LGB youth experiencing homelessness are more likely to
report a variety of risky sexual behaviors, including having unprotected anal sex and having
sex with a sex worker, an intravenous drug user, or a person living with HIV (Ecker, 2016;
Gattis, 2013; Rice et al., 2013). LGBTQ youth experiencing homelessness are also more likely
to have been either physically or sexually assaulted or abused (Gattis, 2013; Ecker, 2016;
Saewyc et al., 2017).
Homelessness or housing instability can have strong negative impacts on LGBTQ youths’
mental health, even when compared to their unhoused straight, cisgender peers or housed
LGBTQ youth. LGB youth experiencing homelessness report higher rates of depression,
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), self-harm, suicidal ideation, or suicide attempts than
their straight, cisgender peers experiencing homelessness (Ecker, 2016; Gattis & Larson,
2017; Gattis, 2013; Moskowitz et al., 2012; Saewyc et al, 2017). LGBTQ youth experiencing
homelessness are also more likely to report high levels of stress compared to their straight,
cisgender peers experiencing homelessness (Moskowitz et al., 2012). Previous research
from The Trevor Project shows that LGBTQ youth who had experienced housing instability
reported attempting suicide at more than three times the rate of their LGBTQ peers who had
not experienced housing instability (The Trevor Project, 2019).
Complexities of Measuring Housing Status Among LGBTQ Youth
This complexity also extends to data about LGBTQ youth experiencing homelessness. Few
large data sets that include youth experiences of homelessness exist due to the difficulty of
finding and recruiting youth experiencing homelessness into study participation. The CDC’s
Youth Risk and Behavior Survey (YRBS) measures health behaviors and outcomes among
youth in middle and high school across the United States (Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 2021). Since 2015, a question on sexual orientation was added to the standard
YRBS questionnaire for high school students, and states and local jurisdictions had the
discretion to add questions about homelessness as well as transgender identity. However,
only 27 states ask questions about housing and sexual orientation and very few ask about
gender identity in ways that include transgender students. This creates a lack of data about
the combined experiences of homelessness and LGBTQ identity. The California Healthy Kids
Survey is one iteration of the YRBS which includes questions about both housing status and
LGBTQ identity. While this data is important, it only examines LGBTQ identity as an aggregate
group, and there is no option to examine for within-group differences among the many
identities which make up the LGBTQ community.
Advocates
in
the
LGBTQ
community
have
worked
for
decades
to
address
this
overrepresentation and to increase LGBTQ youths’ access to safe and secure housing. In
particular, True Colors United has done powerful and impactful work to raise awareness,
advocate for policy change, and elevate the voices of LGBTQ young people experiencing
homelessness. This report seeks to build upon this important work by sharing insights on
LGBTQ youth who have experienced homelessness or housing instability based on data from
The Trevor Project’s 2021 National Survey on LGBTQ Youth Mental Health. Additionally, most
studies specifically on LGBTQ youth experiencing homelessness recruit small samples of
participants from housing services and therefore do not include housed LGBTQ youth for
| 7


comparison. The data in this report are unique in that they include both housed and
unhoused LGBTQ youth for comparison. Furthermore, the sample size also includes youths’
specific LGBTQ identities and therefore allows us to look at differences among subgroups
(e.g. bisexual youth, transgender youth).
Impacts of the COVID-19 Pandemic and Housing
It is important to note that the data in this report were collected between October and
December 2020 and were therefore influenced by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and
associated economic upheavals. Data from our 2021 National Survey on LGBTQ Youth Mental
Health show that more than 80% of LGBTQ youth reported that COVID-19 had made their
living situation more stressful, indicating that the pandemic has had an impact on LGBTQ
youths’ access to safe and secure housing.
The economic disruption of the COVID-19 pandemic has threatened the housing stability of
thousands of Americans. A recent report from the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
found that over 2 million homeowners and 8 million renters were behind on their mortgage or
rent payments (Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, 2021). They further report that Black
and Hispanic households were more than twice as likely to report being behind on housing
payments, highlighting the disproportionate risk faced by households of color (Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau, 2021). While the long-term economic impacts of the pandemic
cannot yet be observed, a study on the mental health impacts of the Great Recession found
that housing instability accounted for a significant amount of the accelerated suicide deaths
in the US during that time(Fowler et al., 2015).
Economic stress impacts LGBTQ youth homelessness in two central ways. Firstly, LGBTQ
youth are at risk of homelessness if their families lose their housing. History of family
homelessness increases young people’s individual risk of homelessness or housing
instability (Samuels et al., 2019). LGBTQ youth of color are at particular risk of family
homelessness due to the COVID-19 pandemic, given that Black and Hispanic households are
more likely to be behind on housing payments due to pandemic-related economic
disruptions (Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, 2021). Secondly, LGBTQ youth already
living away from their families are also vulnerable to the economic upheaval of the pandemic.
Job losses due to the pandemic were concentrated among low-paid industries, eliminating
many of the entry-level jobs that young adults rely on to start their careers and maintain
stable housing (Center for Budget and Policy Priorities, 2021). Decreased access to jobs that
pay a living wage may place LGBTQ youth at increased risk of homelessness.
As the nation’s largest provider of crisis services for LGBTQ youth, the Trevor Project is
dedicated to understanding how homelessness and housing instability impact the
well-being and safety of LGBTQ young people. This report examines experiences of
homelessness and housing instability among respondents to our 2021 National Survey on
LGBTQ Youth Mental Health and their impact on LGBTQ youths’ mental health. Notably, our
large and diverse sample allows us to explore experiences across age, sexual orientation,
gender identity, and race/ethnicity.
| 8


Methods
Sample and Procedures
Data were collected from an online survey platform between October and December 2020.
LGBTQ youth between the ages of 13 and 24 were recruited via targeted ads on social media.
The final analytical sample included 34,759 LGBTQ youth from across the United States. The
overall survey included a maximum of 142 questions. Chi-square and logistic regression
analyses were used to examine differences in groups and to determine the adjusted odds of
mental health indicators. Adjusted odds ratios predicting mental health indicators controlled
for sex assigned at birth, gender identity, sexual orientation, age, and Census Region.
Measures of Housing Instability
Survey respondents were asked a number of questions about their current and previous
housing. The question about current housing asked, “What best describes where you
currently live?” and provided twelve response options including, “a shelter, car, campground,
or other transitional or temporary housing.” Respondents were also asked, “Are you currently
or have you ever been homeless (even if only for a short period of time)?” with response
options including: 1) No, 2) Yes, I have been in the past but am currently not, or 3) Yes, I am
currently homeless. To assess housing instability due to running away or being abandoned,
respondents were asked, “Have you ever had to sleep away from your parent(s) or
caregiver(s) because you were kicked out or were abandoned?” and “Have you ever slept
away from your parent(s) or caregiver(s) because you ran away?”, both with response
options of 1) No and 2) Yes.
From four questions, three groups were created to examine housing instability and
homelessness among LGBTQ youth. Respondents who reported that they were currently
homeless or currently living in a shelter, car, campground, or other transitional or temporary
housing were grouped together as Currently Homeless (n = 219). Respondents who reported
that they had either been homeless in the past, had run away, or had been kicked out or been
abandoned at any point were grouped together as Past Housing Instability (n = 9,666). And
finally, respondents who reported none of these experiences were grouped together as
Neither Past Nor Current Housing Instability (n = 24,874).
Measures of Mental Health and Suicide Risk
Other outcomes related to homelessness and housing instability were measured using a
variety of survey items. Current symptoms of generalized anxiety disorder were measured
using the GAD-2 (Plummer et al., 2016). Currently, major depressive disorder symptoms were
measured using the PHQ-2 (Richardson et al., 2010). Questions on self-harm, considering
suicide, and attempting suicide in the past 12 months were taken from the CDC’s YRBS
(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2021).
| 9


Measures of Factors Associated with Homelessness and Housing
Instability
Barriers to mental health care were measured by asking, “In the past 12 months, have you
wanted psychological or emotional counseling from a mental health professional?” Response
options included 1) No, 2) Yes, but I didn’t get it, 3) Yes, and I got it. Experiences of
victimization due to youths’ LGBTQ identity were measured by asking, “Have you ever felt
physically threatened or been physically abused because of your sexual orientation?”, “In the
past 12 months, have you felt physically threatened or been physically abused because of
your sexual orientation?”, “Have you ever felt physically threatened or been physically abused
because of your gender identity?”, and “In the past 12 months, have you felt physically
threatened or been physically abused because of your gender identity?” Response options
included 1) No, and 2) Yes. To ensure accuracy, questions about victimization due to gender
identity were only examined among respondents who identified as transgender, nonbinary,
or questioning their gender identity. Youth’s experiences with the foster care system were
measured by asking, “Have you ever been in foster care (even if only for a short period of
time)?” Response options included: 1) No, and 2) Yes. Experiences of food insecurity were
measured by asking, “During the last month, did you worry that food at home would run out
before you or your family got money to buy more?” and “During the last month, were you
hungry but didn’t eat because you or your family didn’t have enough food?” Response
options included: 1) Never, 2) Sometimes, and 3) A lot. A new dichotomous variable was
created, grouping respondents who answered Sometimes or A lot to either question,
compared to respondents who answered Never for both questions.
Findings
Homelessness and Housing Instability Among LGBTQ Youth
Youth
respondents
reported a wide variety of scenarios that could contribute to
homelessness and housing instability. Over a quarter of respondents (28%) reported that
they were currently homeless or had experienced homelessness or housing instability in the
past. Two hundred and nineteen respondents (0.6%) reported that they were currently
homeless. Of those who were currently homeless, 89 (41%) reported that they were living in
a shelter, car, campground, or other transitional or temporary housing at the time of the
survey.
Twenty-eight
percent of respondents reported having experienced housing
instability in the past. Among those who had experienced housing instability, 5,259 (54%)
reported that they had been homeless in the past, 4,573 (47%) reported that they had been
kicked out, and 5,388 (56%) reported that they had run away or been abandoned. This
indicates overlap among these three experiences, with a number of youth experiencing two
or three of the circumstances (e.g., both kicked out and run away). Family conflict about
youths’ LGBTQ identities was a factor in this housing instability, with 40% of youth who said
they had been kicked out and 55% of youth who said they had run away or been abandoned
reporting that it had been due to mistreatment or fear of mistreatment related to their LGBTQ
identity.
| 10


Demographics of LGBTQ Youth Experiencing Homelessness and
Housing Instability
The demographic information for respondents in each of the groups is included in Table 1.
These data show that while experiences of homelessness and housing instability impact
LGBTQ young people from a variety of backgrounds and identities, LGBTQ youth of color,
pansexual youth, and transgender and nonbinary youth, in particular, are placed at especially
elevated risk of homelessness and housing instability.
Race
LGBTQ youth of color are overrepresented among LGBTQ youth experiencing homelessness
and housing instability. Compared to White LGBTQ youth, those who were Native/Indigenous
had more than double the odds (aOR = 2.20) of experiencing housing instability or
homelessness, with Black (aOR = 1.13), Latinx (aOR = 1.24) and multiracial LGBTQ (aOR = 1.58)
youth
also
having
significantly
greater
odds.
Specifically,
Native/Indigenous
youth
represented 1% of youth who had not experienced housing instability, but represented 3% of
youth who reported past housing instability and 7% of youth who were currently homeless.
Multiracial youth are similarly overrepresented, as they represented 16% of youth who had
not experienced housing instability, 22% of youth who reported past housing instability, and
24% of youth who reported being currently homeless.
| 11


Gender Identity
Homelessness and housing instability were reported at higher rates among transgender and
nonbinary youth. There were no significant differences in the odds of experiencing
homelessness or housing instability between cisgender LGBQ boys/men and cisgender LGBQ
girls/women. However, transgender girls/women (aOR = 1.93), transgender boys/men (aOR =
2.18), and nonbinary youth (aOR = 1.68) all had significantly greater odds of experiencing
homelessness or housing instability compared to cisgender LGBQ boys/men. Transgender
women and girls represent 2% of youth who had not experienced housing instability but 4%
of youth who reported past housing instability and 6% of youth who reported being currently
homeless. Transgender boys and men comprise 9% of youth who had not experienced
housing instability but 14% of youth who reported past housing instability, and 17% of youth
who reported being currently homeless. Nonbinary youth were also overrepresented among
youth who reported past housing instability or current homelessness. Nonbinary youth
represented 23% of youth who had not experienced housing instability but 32% of youth
who reported past housing instability and 31% of youth who reported being currently
homeless.
Sexual Identity
Fewer disparities were observed in the data about sexual identity, but pansexual youth were
overrepresented in each group. Pansexual youth had nearly 50% greater odds (aOR = 1.46)
compared to gay/lesbian youth. Pansexual youth made up 16% of youth who had not
experienced housing instability but 24% of youth who reported past housing instability,
229% of youth who reported being currently homeless.
Census Region
| 12


Data about the census region where youth were located showed one significant disparity in
the group of youth who reported being currently homeless. Compared to LGBTQ youth who
lived in the Northeast region of the U.S., those who lived in the South (aOR = 1.21), Midwest
(aOR = 1.18), and West (aOR = 1.22) all had significantly greater odds of experiencing
homelessness or housing instability. Youth in the West made up 26% of youth who had not
experienced housing instability but 36% of youth who reported being currently homeless.
Mental Health and Suicide Risk among LGBTQ Youth Experiencing
Homelessness and Housing Instability
Data about mental health and suicide risk among LGBTQ youth experiencing homelessness
or housing instability can be found in Table 2. LGBTQ youth who reported past housing
instability or current homelessness had greater odds of reporting anxiety, depression,
self-harm, considering suicide, and attempting suicide.
Anxiety, Depression, and Self-Harm
LGBTQ youth who reported experiences of homelessness and housing instability reported
high rates of anxiety, depression, and self-harm. In adjusted logistic regression models,
LGBTQ youth who reported housing instability or homelessness had nearly two times the
odds of reporting depression (aOR = 2.07), anxiety (aOR = 1.96), and self-harm (aOR = 2.30).
Compared to 68% of youth who had not experienced housing instability, 81% of youth who
reported past housing instability and 84% of youth who reported being currently homeless
reported symptoms of generalized anxiety disorder. LGBTQ youth who reported housing
instability also reported higher rates of depression. Fifty-eight percent of youth who had not
experienced housing instability reported symptoms of depression, compared to 75% of
youth who reported past housing instability and 82% of youth who reported being currently
homeless. Rates of self-harm in the last year were very high among youth who reported past
housing instability or current homelessness. Compared to 49% of youth who had not
experienced housing instability, 69% of youth who reported past housing instability and 68%
of youth who were currently homeless reported that they had engaged in self-harm in the
last year.
| 13


Seriously Considered or Attempted Suicide
LGBTQ youth who reported experiences of homelessness and housing instability were also
more likely to report seriously considering or attempting suicide in the past year. In adjusted
logistic regression models, LGBTQ youth in our sample who reported housing instability or
homelessness had two to three times the odds of considering suicide (aOR = 2.62, or
attempting suicide (aOR = 3.70) compared to those who did not report any housing
instability. Compared to 35% of youth who had not experienced housing instability, 58% of
youth who reported past housing instability and 62% of youth who were currently homeless
reported having seriously considered suicide in the last year. Among LGBTQ youth who
reported housing instability, rates of attempting suicide in the past year were more than
twice that of their peers who had not experienced housing instability. Ten percent of youth
who had not experienced housing instability reported an attempt in the last year, compared
to 28% of youth who reported past housing instability and 35% of youth who reported being
currently homeless.
| 14


Barriers to Mental Health Care
Homelessness and housing instability can make it very difficult to access consistent, quality
mental health care. Compared to 47% of youth who had not experienced housing instability,
51% of youth who reported past housing instability and 53%of youth who were currently
homeless reported that they wanted mental health care but were unable to access it. Youth
who reported past housing instability or current homelessness were more likely to report a
number of structural barriers (cost, lack of transportation, lack of parental permission) and
uncertainties about accessing mental health care (fears that a provider would only focus on
their LGBTQ identity, previous negative experiences with mental health professionals, and
fears that mental health treatment wouldn’t work) than their peers who had not reported
housing instability.
The majority (61%) of LGBTQ youth who reported housing instability or homelessness
reported that they had not accessed mental health care because they could not afford it,
compared to 39% of youth who had not experienced housing instability. One in three (33%)
LGBTQ youth who reported housing instability or homelessness reported that they had not
accessed mental health care because they could not get to the location, compared to one in
five (20%) youth who had not experienced housing instability. One in four (25%) LGBTQ
youth who reported housing instability or homelessness reported that they had not
accessed mental health care because their parent/caregiver did not allow them to, compared
to one in six (16%) LGBTQ youth who had not experienced housing instability.
| 15


Fears about the process of accessing mental health care were also more prevalent among
youth who reported housing instability or homelessness. More than one in five (22%) LGBTQ
youth who reported housing instability or homelessness reported that they had not
accessed mental health care because they thought the provider would only focus on their
LGBTQ identity, compared to less than one in six (14%) LGBTQ youth who had not
experienced housing instability. More than a quarter (27%) of LGBTQ youth who reported
housing instability or homelessness reported that they had not accessed mental health care
because they had a negative experience with a previous mental health professional and did
not want to have another one, compared to 15% of youth who had not experienced housing
instability. Finally, 42% of youth who reported housing instability or homelessness reported
that they had not received mental health care because they were worried it wouldn't work,
compared to 37% of youth who had not experienced housing instability.
Experiences Associated with Homelessness and Housing Instability
Living on the streets or bouncing from shelter to couch-surfing can leave LGBTQ youth
vulnerable to various forms of violence and victimization. Data about experiences frequently
associated with homelessness or housing instability (victimization, history of foster care,
and food insecurity) can be found in Table 3. Youth who reported past housing instability or
current homelessness had greater odds of being threatened or abused due to their sexual
orientation or gender identity, having a history of foster care, and having experienced food
insecurity in the last month.
| 16


Victimization
Youth who reported experiencing homelessness or housing instability reported high rates of
being threatened or abused due to their LGBTQ identity. LGBTQ youth who reported past
housing instability or current homelessness had more than three times greater odds (aOR =
3.16) of being physically threatened or abused due to their sexual orientation in the last year
compared to LGBTQ youth with no reported housing instability. Compared to 10% of youth
who had not experienced housing instability, 26% of youth who reported past housing
instability and 30% of youth who were currently homeless reported being threatened or
abused
due
to
their
sexual
identity
in
the
last
year. Transgender, nonbinary, or
gender-questioning respondents also reported high rates of being threatened or abused
due to their gender identity. Transgender and nonbinary youth who reported past housing
instability or current homelessness had more than three times greater odds (aOR = 3.07)of
being physically threatened or abused due to their gender identity in the last year compared
to youth with no reported housing instability. Fourteen percent of transgender and nonbinary
respondents who had never experienced housing instability reported being threatened or
abused due to their gender identity in the last year, compared to 34% of transgender and
nonbinary youth who reported past housing instability and 39% of transgender and
nonbinary youth who were currently homeless.
Foster Care
Rates of a history of foster care were very high among LGBTQ youth experiencing
homelessness, especially among youth who reported current homelessness. LGBTQ youth
who reported past housing instability or current homelessness had nearly six times greater
odds (aOR = 5.81) of reporting that they had been in foster care at any point in their life,
compared to LGBTQ youth who did not report any housing instability. While only 2% of youth
who had not experienced housing instability reported having been in foster care, 10% of
youth who reported past housing instability and 19% of youth who were currently homeless
reported that they had been in foster care.
| 17


Food Insecurity
Experiences of food insecurity were high among LGBTQ youth who reported housing
instability or homelessness. LGBTQ youth who reported past housing instability or current
homelessness also had more than three times greater odds (aOR = 3.53) of reporting food
insecurity in the last month, compared to their peers who did not report any housing
instability. Compared to 22% of youth who had not experienced housing instability, 51% of
youth who reported past housing instability and 72% of youth who were currently homeless
reported that they had experienced food insecurity (worrying about food running out or not
having enough to eat) in the last month.
| 18


Recommendations
Based on the data shared in this report and the perspectives of those in the field of housing
advocacy, we offer the following recommendations for preventing and addressing LGBTQ
youth homelessness.
Preventing LGBTQ Youth Homelessness
It is important to consider ways that LGBTQ youth homelessness can be prevented. Strong
anti-discrimination policies in the workplace and strong anti-bullying and harassment
policies in schools can be effective in helping LGBTQ youth stay connected to school and
employment, increasing their skills and future earnings, and making it easier for them to
maintain stable housing. Additionally, since family conflict around youths’ LGBTQ identities is
a driving factor in LGBTQ youth homelessness, developing family counseling or mediation
programs may be effective at decreasing conflict and keeping LGBTQ youth in their homes
and connected to their families. Such programs should be mindful of youths’ safety as some
families are not open to changing their ideas about LGBTQ people and are not safe to engage
in counseling or mediation. However, research from the Family Acceptance Project shows
that many parents reject their child’s LGBTQ identity because they fear the homophobia and
transphobia their child may experience in society (Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration, 2014). Reaching out to these families to educate them about LGBTQ
identities and the safe, fulfilling lives that their children can lead as openly LGBTQ people may
help them become more understanding and accepting. Preserving connections with family
networks can help LGBTQ youth maintain stable housing, as they can have more adults to
rely on for emotional, logistical, and economic support.
| 19


Specific attention should be paid to preventing housing instability among LGBTQ youth in
foster care. Previous scholarship has established that youth exiting the foster care system
are at elevated risk of homelessness (Dworsky et al., 2013), in part due to lack of a social and
economic support network after they leave the child welfare system. LGBTQ youth are
disproportionately more likely to be in foster care (Wilson et al., 2014) and therefore at
greater risk of experiencing housing instability after exiting care. The findings in this report
align with existing literature and show that LGBTQ youth who have been in foster care are
indeed at elevated risk of homelessness and housing instability. This highlights the need for
child welfare agencies to provide more structured housing support for young adults exiting
care. Examples of such support include amending policies to allow youth to stay in care and
receive services up to the age of 21 – which several states currently allow – and expanding
programs like the Chaffee Grants, which offer economic assistance to youth exiting foster
care. There is also a need for establishing LGBTQ-affirming foster homes within the child
welfare system. Providing homes where LGBTQ youth feel affirmed and supported can help
LGBTQ youth stay connected to the system longer (e.g., not run away from placements and
experience housing instability) and build their social network of support as they transition
out of foster care. Further, this speaks to the need for anti-discrimination protections for
prospective LGBTQ parents, who may be more equipped to understand and care for the
unique needs of LGBTQ youth.
Increasing Funding for Low-Barrier Housing Programs
Unlike other deeply entrenched social problems such as racism, homophobia, biphobia, or
transphobia, homelessness has a concrete, evidence-based solution: housing. More funding
should be allocated for safe, low-barrier housing programs which can have an immediate
positive impact on LGBTQ youth experiencing housing instability. “Low barrier” refers to
decreasing or eliminating the bureaucratic challenges that a young person must go through
to access services. For example, removing age requirements that arbitrarily force young
adults out of youth-focused services at age 21 would allow young people to stay in programs
designed for their needs for longer, building relationships and stability with peers and staff.
Another barrier is the requirement that housing clients must be sober to stay in a shelter or
move into a transitional housing apartment. While substance use services should be
available to all clients accessing housing services, it is unrealistic to expect youth to achieve
and maintain sobriety before having access to safe and secure housing. A harm-reduction
approach to substance use should be implemented in housing services to ensure client
safety and support youth in reducing unhealthy substance use. Funding should also be
increased for programs such as Section 8, which provides vouchers that can be used to
subsidize clients’ rent. Section 8 vouchers are in high demand with long waitlists in many
American metropolitan areas. Increasing the funding and availability of this program, as well
as limiting bureaucratic barriers to accessing these vouchers and incentivizing landlords to
accept them, would increase the effectiveness of this popular housing service.
Reimagining Shelter Services
One immediate action that housing providers can take to support LGBTQ youth experiencing
homelessness is to make sure that all shelter and housing facilities provide culturally
| 20


competent services to LGBTQ youth. The high rates of victimization among youth who have
experienced housing instability highlight LGBTQ youths’ vulnerability to violence and
harassment when living on the streets, staying with friends or acquaintances, or even
staying in a shelter. The Equal Access Rule is a regulation mandated by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development(HUD) which prohibits discrimination against
LGBTQ people in HUD-funded shelter services and specifically requires that transgender
individuals be allowed to use the dorm and bathroom facilities that align with their gender
identity. While this rule provides strong regulatory protection, HUD is not well-equipped to
enforce this rule at the many shelters and housing facilities that accept their funding each
year, leaving transgender adults and youth experiencing homelessness vulnerable to
discrimination and harassment. Stricter enforcement mechanisms would provide more
robust protection for LGBTQ youth and, specifically, transgender youth who may be at
highest risk when accessing shelter services.
Additionally, shelter and housing facilities should provide LGBTQ cultural competency
training to all staff to ensure that LGBTQ clients are treated with dignity and respect. Several
advocates and organizations have argued that in order for LGBTQ people to truly be safe, the
entire concept of congregate care settings (e.g., dorms that house multiple clients, usually
divided by gender) needs to be reimagined or eliminated. Advocates argue that even the
most culturally competent shelter does not provide adequate privacy, safety, and dignity to
transgender and nonbinary residents. In fact, even at shelters where transgender residents
are allowed to select the dorm they would like to stay in, there are few gender-neutral or
third-gender dorms or bathrooms available for nonbinary residents. LGBTQ shelter residents
are also vulnerable to discrimination and harassment from other shelter residents and it is
nearly impossible for shelter staff to supervise and protect LGBTQ residents at all times.
These concerns raise important questions about the safety and dignity of all residents
(regardless of sexual or gender identity) in large congregate care settings. More research is
needed to determine appropriate alternatives, such as individual rooms, or dorms organized
by social connections rather than gender.
The high rates of self-harm, suicidal ideation, and suicide attempts among youth who are
currently homeless and living in a shelter highlight the need for more robust connections
between housing services and mental health care providers. Providing in-house mental
health services at emergency shelters, offering transportation vouchers to young people to
get to mental health appointments, and providing low-cost or free mental health care would
decrease these barriers and allow more LGBTQ youth experiencing homelessness to benefit
from the mental health care that they want. Providers should also ensure that all mental
health services that they offer or refer youth to are LGBTQ culturally competent to ensure
that youth will feel comfortable using the services.
Improving Data Collection on LGBTQ Youth Homelessness
Better data is needed to understand the full scope and impact of LGBTQ youth
homelessness in the United States. Questions about both LGBTQ identity and housing
status should be added to population surveys of youth and young adults, such as the YRBS.
Fortunately, starting in 2021, the CDC will add a question about homelessness to its standard
YRBS questionnaire, improving nationwide data about homelessness and housing instability
| 21


among students (School House Connection, 2020). However, questions about gender
identity that can accurately capture transgender students and their experiences are still
lacking in most YRBS jurisdictions. Because homelessness and housing instability create
risky environments for young people, any survey seeking to measure the risks that youth
encounter in adolescence and young adulthood should ask about respondents’ access to
safe and secure housing. Similarly, LGBTQ identity should be measured with nuance so that
homelessness and housing instability trends within the LGBTQ community can be observed
and measured over time. For more information about measuring LGBTQ among youth in
survey data, please refer to The Trevor Project’s previous report, “Measuring Youth Sexual
Orientation and Gender Identity.”
Additionally, current techniques used to identify and count individuals experiencing
homelessness, such as the Point In Time Count (PITC) sponsored by the HUD each year,
should be reassessed. Existing PITC protocols call for counting individuals in emergency
shelters and street canvassing to count individuals living outdoors or in public spaces. These
protocols, however, are likely to miss young people experiencing homelessness who are
couch surfing or staying in informal, non-permanent housing arrangements. Adding
questions about LGBTQ identity to PITC protocols would also allow for more accurate
measuring of housing instability among LGBTQ youth and adults, although any questions
about LGBTQ identity should be optional to protect participants’ privacy and safety.
Collecting more accurate data about LGBTQ youth homelessness and housing instability will
allow researchers, policymakers, and housing service providers to make more informed
decisions about how to prevent and confront LGBTQ youth homelessness.
Enacting Anti-Poverty Economic Policies
LGBTQ youth homelessness does not exist in a vacuum. LGBTQ youth are impacted by their
families’ and communities’ economic stability and policies that combat poverty at the
societal level will have a positive impact on LGBTQ youths’ access to safe and secure
housing. In the area of employment law, beneficial policies can include: requiring employers
to pay a living wage, provide health insurance, and offer paid sick leave. Quality jobs with
adequate pay and benefits allow people to maintain stable housing and promote better
physical and mental health. Entry-level jobs that pay a living wage are particularly important
for LGBTQ youth who are more likely to begin their careers without the support of their
families. Local, state, and national authorities should also institute policies to increase the
stock of affordable housing in their communities and subsidize the construction of new
housing or renovation of existing housing properties. The economic upheaval of the
COVID-19 pandemic has increased economic pressure on low-income households and made
it even more urgent for legislators to tackle the root causes of poverty in the United States
for the benefit of LGBTQ youth, their families, and their communities.
Conclusion
LGBTQ young people do not deserve to struggle with housing as they transition from children
to young adults. These data indicate that Native/Indigenous, Multiracial, and Black youth are
disproportionately at risk of homelessness and housing instability, likely due to the combined
impacts of racism and LGBTQ stigma in housing, school, and the workplace. Solutions to
| 22


housing instability, therefore, must account for intersectional barriers that LGBTQ youth
encounter. The high rates of food insecurity among LGBTQ youth experiencing housing
instability highlight the role of economic instability in homelessness and the importance of
making sure that LGBTQ youth have access to nutrition programs such as free and reduced
lunch at school. It is imperative that researchers and policymakers continue to examine this
ongoing issue and implement strategies to get LGBTQ youth into safe and secure housing.
Access to housing is a human right, and The Trevor Project will continue to support LGBTQ
youth in crisis through our high-quality crisis services, our research on LGBTQ youth mental
health, and our training for organizations and housing providers who want to support and
affirm LGBTQ youth.
| 23


About The Trevor Project
The Trevor Project is the world's largest suicide prevention and crisis intervention
organization for lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, & questioning (LGBTQ) young
people. The Trevor Project offers a suite of 24/7 crisis intervention and suicide prevention
programs, including TrevorLifeline, TrevorText, and TrevorChat as well as the world’s largest
safe space social networking site for LGBTQ youth, TrevorSpace. Trevor also operates an
education program with resources for youth-serving adults and organizations, an advocacy
department fighting for pro-LGBTQ legislation and against anti-LGBTQ policies, and a
research team to examine the most effective means to help young LGBTQ people in crisis and
end suicide. If you or someone you know is feeling hopeless or suicidal, our trained crisis
counselors
are
available
24/7
at
1-866-488-7386,
via
chat
www.TheTrevorProject.org/Get-Help, or by texting 678-678.
This report is a collaborative effort from the following individuals at The Trevor Project:
Jonah DeChants, PhD
Research Scientist
Amy E. Green, PhD
Vice President of Research
Myeshia N. Price, PhD
Senior Research Scientist
Carrie Davis, MSW
Chief Community Officer
Recommended Citation: DeChants, J.P., Green, A.E., Price, M.N, & Davis, C.K. (2021).
Homelessness and Housing Instability Among LGBTQ Youth. West Hollywood, CA: The Trevor
Project.
Media inquiries:
Press@TheTrevorProject.org
Research-related inquiries:
Research@TheTrevorProject.org
| 24


References
Baams, L., Wilson, B. D., & Russell, S. T. (2019). LGBTQ youth in unstable housing and foster care.
Pediatrics, 143(3).
Bauermeister, J. A., Eaton, L., Meanley, S., Pingel, E. S., & UHIP Partnership (2017). Transactional sex
with regular and casual partners among young men who have sex with men in the Detroit
Metro Area. American Journal of Men’s Health, 11(3), 498-507.
Center for Budget and Policy Priorities. (2021). Tracking the COVID-19 Economy’s Effects on Food,
Housing, and Employment Hardships (p. 19). Washington DC: Center for Budget and Policy
Priorities.
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. (2021). Housing insecurity and the COVID-19 pandemic (p. 21).
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.
https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb_Housing_insecurity_and_the_COVID-1
9_pandemic.pdf
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2021). YRBSS. Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance System
(YRBSS). Retrieved October 1, 2021, from
https://www.cdc.gov/healthyyouth/data/yrbs/index.htm.
Choi, S.K., Wilson, B.D.M., Shelton, J., & Gates, G. (2015). Serving our youth 2015: The needs and
experiences of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and questioning youth experiencing
homelessness. Los Angeles, CA: The Williams Institute with True Colors Fund.
Durso, L. E., & Gates, G. J. (2012). Serving our youth: Findings from a national survey of service
providers working with lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender youth who are homeless or at
risk of becoming homeless. Los Angeles, CA: The Williams Institute with True Colors Fund and
The Palette Fund. Retrieved from
http://williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/research/safe-schools-and-youth/serving-our-youth-jul
y-2012/.
Dworsky, A., Napolitano, L., & Courtney, M. (2013). Homelessness During the Transition From Foster
Care to Adulthood. American Journal of Public Health, 103(S2), S318–S323.
https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2013.301455
Ecker, J. (2016). Queer, young, and homeless: A review of the literature. Child & Youth Services, 37(4),
325-361.
​Fowler, K. A., Gladden, R. M., Vagi, K. J., Barnes, J., & Frazier, L. (2015). Increase in Suicides Associated
With Home Eviction and Foreclosure During the US Housing Crisis: Findings From 16 National
Violent Death Reporting System States, 2005–2010. American Journal of Public Health, 105(2),
311–316. https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2014.301945
Gattis, M. N. (2013). An ecological systems comparison between homeless sexual minority
youths and homeless heterosexual youths. Journal of Social Service Research, 39(1), 38-49.
Gattis, M. N., & Larson, A. (2017). Perceived microaggressions and mental health in a sample of
black youths experiencing homelessness. Social Work Research, 41(1), 7-17.
Kattari, S.K., Barman-Adhikari, A., DeChants, J., & Rice, E. (2017). Social networks and sexual risk factor
differences between cisgender heterosexual and cisgender LGBQ homeless youths. Journal of
Gay & Lesbian Social Services, 29(2), 182-200.
Morton, M. H., Dworsky, A., Matjasko, J. L., Curry, S. R., Schlueter, D., Chávez, R., & Farrell, A. F. (2018).
Prevalence and correlates of youth homelessness in the United States. Journal of Adolescent
Health, 62(1), 14-21.
Moskowitz, A., Stein, J.A., & Lightfoot, M. (2012). The mediating roles of stress and maladaptive
behaviors on self-harm and suicide attempts among runaway and homeless youth. Journal of
Youth and Adolescence, 41(7), 1015-1027. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10964-012-9793-4.
O’Neill, K., Wilson, B. D. M.,&  Herman, J.L. (2020). Homeless Shelter Acces Among Transgender Adults:
Findings from the 2015 US Transgender Survey. The Williams Institute. Los Angeles, CA.
Retrieved from:
https://williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/wp-content/uploads/Trans-Homeless-Shelter-Nov-2011.
pdf
| 25


Plummer, F., Manea, L., Trepel, D., & McMillan, D. (2016). Screening for anxiety disorders with the GAD-7
and GAD-2: A systematic review and diagnostic metaanalysis. General Hospital Psychiatry, 39,
24–31.
Rice, E., Barman-Adhikari, A., Rhoades, H., Winetrobe, H., Fulginiti, A., Astor, R., Montoya, J., Plant, A., &
Kordic, T. (2013). Homelessness experiences, sexual orientation, and sexual risk taking among
high school students in Los Angeles. Journal of Adolescent Health, 52(6), 773-778.
Richardson, L. P., Rockhill, C., Russo, J. E., Grossman, D. C., Richards, J., McCarty, C., McCauley, E., &
Katon, W. (2010). Evaluation of the PHQ-2 as a brief screen for detecting major depression
among adolescents. Pediatrics, 125(5), e1097–e1103.
Samuels, G. M., Cerven, C., Currey, S., Robinson, S. R., & Patel, S. (2019). Missed Opportunities in Youth
Pathways Through Homelessness. Chicago, IL: Chapin Hall at the University of Chicago.
Saewyc, E., Mounsey, B., Tourand, J., Brunanski, D., Kirk, D., McNeil-Seymour, J., Shaughnessy, K.,
Tsuruda, S., & Clark, N. (2017). Homeless & street-involved indigenous LGBTQ2S youth in
British Columbia: Intersectionality. In A. Abramovich, & J. Shelton J. (Eds.), Where am I going to
go? Intersectional approaches to ending LGBTQ2S youth homelessness in Canada and the US
(pp. 13-40). Toronto, Ontario, CA: Canadian Observatory on Homelessness.
School House Connection. (2020, May 19). New nationwide data on youth homelessness is on the
way: Questions on homelessness to be added to CDC's 2021 youth risk behavior survey
standard questionnaire. New Nationwide Data on Youth Homelessness is on the Way:
Questions on Homelessness to be added to CDC’s 2021 Youth Risk Behavior Survey Standard
Questionnaire. Retrieved October 18, 2021, from
https://schoolhouseconnection.org/questions-on-homelessness-to-be-added-to-cdcs-yrbs
-questionnaire/
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2014). A Practitioner’s Resource Guide:
Helping Families to Support Their LGBT Children (HHS Publication No. PEP14-LGBTKIDS; p. 18).
Washington DC: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.
The Trevor Project. (2019). Unstable Housing and LGBTQ Youth Suicidality. West Hollywood, CA: The
Trevor Project.
Tyler, K. A. (2013). Homeless youths’ HIV risk behaviors with strangers: Investigating the importance of
social networks. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 42(8), 1583-1591.
Wilson, B. D. M., Cooper, K., Kastanis, A., & Nezhad, S. (2014). Sexual and gender minority youth in
foster care: Assessing disproportionality and disparities in Los Angeles. Los Angeles: The
Williams Institute, UCLA School of Law.
| 26


Table 1: Demographic Characteristics by Subgroup
No Past nor Current
Housing Instability
n = 24,874 (%)
Past Housing
Instability
n = 9,666 (%)
Currently Homeless
n = 219 (%)
Race / Ethnicity
AI/AN
328 (1)
244 (3)
14 (7)
AAPI
1,605 (7)
297 (3)
3 (1)
Black
1,235 (5)
469 (5)
18 (8)
Latinx
3,550 (15)
1,304 (14)
23 (11)
Multiracial
3,855 (16)
2,078 (22)
49 (24)
White
13,430 (56)
4,850 (52)
99 (48)
Sexual Identity
Straight /
Heterosexual
273 (1)
92 (1)
4 (2)
Gay or Lesbian
7,172 (29)
2,517 (26)
42 (19)
Bisexual
9,402 (38)
3,123 (32)
77(36)
Queer
2,966 (12)
1,237 (13)
25 (12)
Pansexual
4,000 (16)
2,335 (24)
62 (29)
Questioning
886 (4)
303(3)
6 (3)
Gender Identity
Cisgender boy
3,500 (14)
1,025 (11)
21 (10)
Cisgender girl
10,161 (41)
2,973 (31)
63 (30)
Transgender girl
571 (2)
339(4)
13 (6)
Transgender boy
2,112 (9)
1,331 (14)
36 (17)
Nonbinary
5,737 (23)
3,028 (32)
65 (31)
Gender Questioning
2,429 (10)
769(8)
14 (7)
Census Region
Northeast
4,073 (16)
1,312 (14)
27 (12)
South
8,732 (35)
3,517 (36)
72 (33)
| 27


Midwest
5,709 (23)
2,258 (23)
40 (18)
West
6,360 (26)
2,579 (27)
80 (36)
Age
13 - 18
14,716 (59)
4,882 (50)
73 (33)
18 - 24
10,158 (41)
4,784 (49)
146 (67)
| 28


Table 2: Mental Health and Suicide Risk among LGBTQ Youth
Experiencing Homelessness and Housing Instability
No Past nor Current
Housing Instability
n = 24,874 (%)
Past Housing
Instability
n = 9,666 (%)
Currently Homeless
n = 219 (%)
Self harm
11,868 (49)
6,414 (69)
146 (68)
Seriously considered
suicide in past year
8,088 (35)
5,321 (58)
128 (62)
Suicide attempt
2,266 (10)
2,491 (28)
70 (35)
Anxiety
16,732 (68)
7,793 (81)
183 (84)
Depression
14,236 (58)
7,159 (75)
179 (82)
Wanted MH care but
didn’t get it
11,471 (47)
4,843 (51)
114 (53)
| 29


Table 3: Experiences Associated with Homelessness and Housing
Instability
No Past nor Current
Housing Instability
n = 24,874 (%)
Past Housing
Instability
n = 9,666 (%)
Currently Homeless
n = 219 (%)
Victimization
Threatened or abused
last 12 months due to
SO
2,227 (10)
2,154 (26)
56 (30)
Threatened or
abused last 12
months due to GI2
1,465 (14)
1,725 (34)
50 (39)
History of Foster Care
459 (2)
919 (10)
42 (19)
Food Insecurity
5,336 (22)
4,795 (51)
152 (72)
2 Only among transgender, nonbinary, and gender-questioning respondents.
| 30