1
Information Resource
Sexual Harassment by Peers in Schools
Here is a sample of experiences reported on the internet:
 I was called a whore because I have many friends that are boys. 
                 
-9th-grade girl
Someone had lewd photos on their phone-they asked if I wanted to see them and 
even though I said no, they showed them to me anyway.
- 12-grade girl
A friend of a friend said I was known to give oral sex to any male who wanted or 
needed it because everyone knows and suspects I am gay. 
- 10th-grade boy
A
 great deal has been written about sexual harassment and other forms of bullying (see the
sample of citations at the end of this resource). Sexual harassment and bullying are part of
what shapes a negative institutional climate and negative outcomes. At too many schools,
such acts begin as early as elementary school, increase in frequency as students enter puberty, and
contribute to creating a hostile environment not only for the victims but for most students and staff.
Gender, appearance, and peer associations often play a significant role. For example, female students
are usually the target of sexual jokes, comments, gestures, or looks, while male students are more
likely to experience homophobic slurs (Hill & Silva, 2005). At the same time, the intersection of
several factors (e.g., race, sexuality, nationality, immigrant status, religion) may influence and
compound the tendency to victimize. And, as social and political theories recognize, a school’s
actions often reflect institutionalized biases that privilege some and put others at risk (DeFrancisco
et al., 2013; Elliot, 2014). However, almost at any time and any place, anyone can be a direct target
or an indirect victim. And there is no profile that fits all perpetrators.
Forms and Impact of Harassment
Harassing behavior is exhibited in verbal, nonverbal, and physical forms. Below are examples:
•
Verbal – lewd or suggestive remarks, name calling, jokes, rumors or gestures; pressuring
someone for a date or sexual relations; whistles or rude noises 
        •
Nonverbal – written communications such as letters, notes, emails, graffiti; displaying or
distributing sexual explicit drawings, pictures; making sexually suggestive gestures;
starring at someone's body or looking a person up and down; maintaining unwanted
flirtatious eye contact, leering, winking, throwing kisses or licking lips; a person touching
or exposing him or herself in view of another person; threatening gestures
        •
Physical – unwanted physical contact; blocking or otherwise hindering a person's
movements; standing closer than appropriate or necessary; displaying pornography
The negative impact is experienced by the victims, perpetrators, and the school environment.
Reactions are emotional, physiological, and behavioral. Emotions include anxiety, fear, anger. Some
individuals feel ill (e.g., stomach and head aches, problems with sleeping). Some victims fight back;
most try to avoid repeat encounters (e.g., quitting an activity, changing the way they travel to and
from school, not wanting to go to school; changing schools). These all are significant barriers to
learning and teaching.
          
*The material in this document reflects work done by Fabiola Ortiz as part of her involvement 
with the national Center for Mental Health in Schools at UCLA.                                                
The center is co-directed by Howard Adelman and Linda Taylor in the Dept. of Psychology, UCLA, 
Website: http://smhp.psych.ucla.edu  Send comments to ltaylor@ucla.edu 


2
Some Data on the Frequency of Sexual Harassment 
in Middle Schools and High School
From, Crossing the Line: Sexual Harassment at School
(http://www.aauw.org/resource/crossing-the-line-sexual-harassment-at-school/  ). 
Based on findings from their nationally representative survey of 1,965 students in grades
7-12, Hill and Kearl (2011) report and comment that:
Nearly half (48 percent) of the students surveyed experienced some form of sexual
harassment in the 2010–11 school year, and the majority of those students (87 percent)
said it had a negative effect on them. Verbal harassment (unwelcome sexual comments,
jokes, or gestures) made up the bulk of the incidents, but physical harassment was far
too common. Sexual harassment by text, e-mail, Facebook, or other electronic means
affected nearly one-third (30 percent) of students. Interestingly, many of the students who
were sexually harassed through cyberspace were also sexually harassed in person. 
Girls were more likely than boys to be sexually harassed, by a significant margin (56
percent versus 40 percent). Girls were more likely than boys to be sexually harassed
both in person (52 percent versus 35 percent) and via text, e-mail, Facebook, or other
electronic means (36 percent versus 24 percent). This finding confirms previous research
showing that girls are sexually harassed more frequently than boys (Sagrestano, 2009;
Ormerod et al., 2008; AAUW, 2001) and that girls’ experiences tend to be more physical
and intrusive than boys’ experiences (Hand & Sanchez, 2000). Being called gay or
lesbian in a negative way is sexual harassment that girls and boys reported in equal
numbers (18 percent of students). 
Witnessing sexual harassment at school was also common. One-third of girls (33
percent) and about one-quarter (24 percent) of boys said that they observed sexual
harassment  at their school in the 2010–11 school year. More than one-half (56 percent)
of these students witnessed sexual  harassment more than once during the school year.
While seeing sexual harassment is unlikely to be as devastating as being the target of
sexual harassment, it can have negative effects, such as reducing students’ sense of
safety. Witnessing sexual harassment at school may also “normalize” the behavior for
bystanders.
Among students who were sexually harassed, about 9 percent reported the incident to a
teacher, guidance counselor, or other adult at school (12 percent of girls and 5 percent of
boys). Just one-quarter (27 percent) of students said they talked about it with parents or
family members (including siblings), and only about one-quarter (23 percent) spoke with
friends. Girls were more likely than boys to talk with parents and other family members
(32 percent versus 20 percent) and more likely than boys to talk with friends (29 percent
versus 15 percent). Still, one-half of students who were sexually harassed in the
2010–11 school year said they did nothing afterward in response to sexual harassment.


3
While perpetrators tend not to admit that sexually harassing others is a serious matter (e.g., some
just say they are joking around), the underlying motivation for the behavior may be proactive or
reactive.  In all instances, the behavior raises concerns about the perpetrators’ social, emotional, and
moral development with respect not only to knowledge and skills, but fundamental interpersonal and
societal values and attitudes.  
The negative impact on a school is reflected in decreases in attendance, academic performance, and
participation in school activities and increased concerns about safety and morale.
Title IX Calls for Protecting Students from Sexual Harassment
Title IX protects students from continuous and offensive behavior  affecting performance
in school and holds schools responsible to protect students from such behavior. (Hill &
Kearl, 2011). This includes sexual harassment such as aggressive sexual remarks, behavior
or threats, abusive touching, chasing, etc.. A school violates Title IX when: (1) school
officials have actual knowledge about the issue; (2) officials with the authority to take
remedial action show "deliberate indifference," making the students vulnerable to
harassment; (3) the harassment that occurred was severe, pervasive, and objectively
offensive; (4) the harassment denied the victim's participation in educational programs or
activities. (Occasional name-calling, pushing and shoving, and physical fights are not
protected under Title IX because they are seen as other forms of bullying, not sexual
harassment.)
Why Do Students Harass their Peers
What causes sexual harassment and hurtful behavior toward others in general is unclear. When
asked, some perpetrators even claim that their actions are not hurtful. 
As with bullying in general, many underlying factors may lead to sexual harassment. Certainly, such
behavior may be "modeled" and/or encouraged by significant others (e.g., imitating family members
or peers). Some perpetrators come from homes where caretaking lacks warmth and empathy and is
even hostile. Over time, harassing behavior probably is maintained because the perpetrator (1) finds
the behavior meets psychological needs (e.g., enhances feelings of competence, self-determination,
or connection with valued others) and (2) perceives the costs as less than the "benefits." Some
individuals seem to use the behavior as a reactive defense; others seem to find so much satisfaction
in the behavior that it becomes a proactive way of life. 
Some students may well lack social awareness and skills and end up harassing others because they
lack the ability to establish positive peer relationships. This problem often is compounded by
frustration and anger over this problem. 
A few perpetrators fall into the proactive category. These are students whose behavior is not
motivated by peer pressure and psychological needs. They are unmoved by efforts to create a caring
community. Instead, they proactively, persistently, and chronically seek ways to harass others,
apparently motivated by the "pleasure" they derive from their actions.
What Schools Do and Can Do
It is clear that schools differ in how they handle sexual harassment. Some tend to downplay events
that are not seen as severe and pervasive, even though the reality is that the negative impact on
individuals and even some subgroups may be significant. For example, derogatory name calling (fag,
lesbo, retardo, and various racial and ethnic  terms) produces significant disruptive emotional and
behavior reactions that can have lasting effects around a school. And, when schools take no action,
it sends the wrong signals to current and potential perpetrators and victims.


4
When schools do respond, they often pursue what amounts to a laundry list of interventions that
mainly react to events. Relatedly, solutions usually emphasize knowledge and skill development,
rather than incorporating a focus on underlying causes and motivational considerations, and
relatively little attention is paid to prevention.
Furthermore, with the increasing political attention to sexual harassment, efforts to address the
problem often become another project-of-the-year for schools. When project thinking prevails, a
golden opportunity to improve student support systems is lost. It is essential to resist "project
mentality." Projects exacerbate the marginalization, fragmentation, counterproductive competition,
and overspecialization that characterizes the student support enterprise. 
Rather than pursuing one more discrete intervention, it is essential to use specific problem-focused
initiatives (e.g., addressing sexual harassment and other forms of bullying) as an opportunity to
catalyze and leverage systemic change. The aim should be to take another step toward transforming
how schools go about ensuring that all students have an equal opportunity to succeed at school and
beyond. This means proceeding in ways that embed separate initiatives into a unified,
comprehensive, and equitable system of student and learning supports so that each school can
address a broad range barriers to student learning effectively. This will help counter the tendency
for schools to downplay events that are not seen as severe and pervasive. It is time to embed
advocacy for discrete programs into advocacy for unifying and developing a comprehensive and
equitable system.*
Developing a unified, comprehensive, and equitable system for addressing barriers to learning and
teaching and re-engaging disconnected students is fundamental to enhancing a caring and socially
supportive climate throughout the school and in every classroom, as well as providing assistance to
individual students and families. And it involves some outreach to families and community
networks. Embedded are human relations programs that use strategies to enhance motivation to
resist inappropriate peer pressure and pursue social justice and environment-oriented approaches
intended to create a sense of community and caring culture in schools. The essence of the work is
to maximize inclusion of all students in the social support fabric of the school and, in the process,
minimize scapegoating and alienation.
The solution is not to create another stand-alone program for addressing problems
such as peer-on-peer harassment. Just adding another program worsens the
marginalized and fragmented status of efforts to help all students. 
Addressing barriers to learning and teaching and re-engaging disconnected students is a school
improvement imperative. Developing and implementing a unified, comprehensive, and equitable
system of student and learning supports is the next evolutionary stage in meeting this imperative.
It is the missing component in efforts to enhance safe schools, close the achievement gap, enhance
social, emotional, and moral development and improve interpersonal relationships, reduce dropout
rates, shut down the pipeline from schools to prisons, and promote well-being and social justice.
 *For details about a Unified, Comprehensive, and Equitable System of Learning Supports, see
                    
>ESSA, Equity of Opportunity, and Addressing Barriers to Learning – 
http://smhp.psych.ucla.edu/pdfdocs/essaanal.pdf 
              
>Piecemeal Policy Advocacy for Improving Schools Amounts to Tinkering and Works
  Against Fundamental System Transformation –  http://smhp.psych.ucla.edu/pdfdocs/tinkering.pdf 
           
>All this is discussed in detail in a new book that is in press entitled: Transforming Student
and Learning Supports: Developing a Unified, Comprehensive, and Equitable System. For
a preview look, send an email to Ltaylor@ucla.edu  


5
Addressing the Problem as Part of a Student and Learning Supports System
             
In developing the learning supports system, include plans for
                
• enhancing awareness and understanding of the problem with staff, students, and families
• making institutional/environmental changes that can reduce the problem
• embedding social and emotional learning and moral development (e.g., knowledge, skills, and
attitudes) into appropriate facets of curricula
• using natural opportunities to enhance social-emotional learning and moral development
• effectively explaining behavior expectations and consequences
• calling on and enabling all school personnel to take a stand against inappropriate name-calling,
sexual comments, physical contacts, and all other forms of bullying and to monitor and enforce
behavior expectations and consequences
• persuading students not to be bystanders and to take action when events occur
• informing parents of victims and perpetrators when events occur and including them in problem-
solving
• accounting for legalities (e.g., investigating and reporting incidents)
• providing counseling to victims and perpetrators when needed
From an assistant principal: Teach students how to deal with harassment. Ignoring the situation
can often lead to a cycle of ongoing harassment and victimization. A perpetrator gets an emotional
payoff from seeing others afraid and upset. Students must learn to be assertive and establish strong
personal boundaries. They must tell their classmates to stop when their behavior is offensive and
inappropriate. Bystanders, too, must speak out against harassment when it occurs. If students
become moral spectators, there is little hope for change.
http://www.ascd.org/publications/educational-leadership/nov93/vol51/num03/What-to-Do-To-Stop-Sexual-Harassment-at-School.aspx
         
A parent takes action:
Dear Principal Jordan,
                 
My 6th grade daughter has experienced sexual harassment at school from a student in her class.
She tells me he has sent her sexually obscene notes, chased her, threatened to rape her, told
friends he want’s to "bang" her. She has repeatedly asked him to stop and has reported him to
her teacher. But nothing has changed.
The problem has affected my daughter emotionally and academically (she was on the honor
roll but her grades have seriously dropped). She has become extremely sad and moody and no
longer wants to go to school. 
I need to meet with you quickly to fix all this.
Sincerely,
Distraught Parent
Concluding comments
Despite increasing awareness of the prevalence of sexual harassment and other forms of
bullying, the behavior remains prevalent in schools. Societal and legal considerations aside,
the potential impact of sexual harassment on a student academic success and mental health
is significant and should not be underestimated. Ultimately, the actions a school takes toward
addressing all problems that interfere with teaching and learning determines equity of
opportunity for success at school and beyond.


6
References and Resources Used in Preparing this Information Resource
Adelman, H.S., & Taylor, L. (2010). Mental health in schools: Engaging learners, preventingProblems,
and improving schools. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.
Adelman, H.S., & Taylor, L. (in press). Transforming student and learning supports: Developing a
unified, comprehensive, and equitable system. San Diego: Cognella.
American Association of University Women (2001). Hostile hallways: Bullying, teasing and sexual
harassment in school. Washington, D.C.: Author.
http://www.aauw.org/research/girls_education/hostile.cfm 
Bishop, H.N, & Casida, H. (2011). Preventing bullying and harassment of sexual minority students in
schools. Clearing House: A Journal of Educational Strategies, Issues and Ideas, 84, 134-138.
Boivin, S., Lavoie, F., Hebert, M., & Gagne, M. (2012). Past victimizations and dating violence
perpetration in adolescence: the mediating role of emotional distress and hostility. Journal of
Interpersonal Violence, 27, 662-684.
Connolly, J., Josephson, W., Schnoll, J.. Et al., (2015). Evaluation of a youth-led program for preventing
bullying, sexual harassment, and dating aggression in middle schools. Journal of Early Adolescence,
35, 403-434.
Center for Mental Health in School (2016). Preventing teen dating violence. Los Angeles: Author at
UCLA. http://smhp.psych.ucla.edu/pdfdocs/dating.pdf 
Charmaraman, L., Jones, A., Stein, N., & Espelage, D.L. (2013). Is it bullying or sexual harassment?
Knowledge, attitudes, and professional development experiences of middle school staff. Journal of
School Health, 83, 438-444.
DeFrancisco, V.L., Palczewski, C.H., & McGeough, D.D. (2013). Gender in communication: A
criticalintroduction. Thousand Oaks: SAGE.
Dragowski, E.A., McCabe, P.C., & Rubinson, F. (2016). Educators' reports on incidence of harassment
and advocacy toward LGBTQ students. Psychology in the Schools, 53, 127-142.
Elliott, A. (2014). Contemporary social theory: An introduction. London: Routledge
Finkelhor, D., Vanderminden, J., Turner, H. et al., (2016). At-school victimization and violence exposure
assessed in a national household survey of children and youth. Journal of School Violence, 15, 67-90.
Gadin, K.G. (2012). Sexual harassment of girls in elementary school: a concealed phenomenon within a
heterosexual romantic discourse. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 27, 1762-1779.
Hill, C.A., & Kearl, H. (2011). Crossing the line: Sexual harassment at school. Washington, D.C.:
American Association of University Women Educational Foundation. 
Hill, C., & Silva, E. M. (2005). Drawing the line: Sexual harassment on campus. Washington, D.C.: . 
Hillard, P., Love, L., Franks, H.M., Laris, B.A.; Coyle, K.K. (2014). "They were only joking": efforts to
decrease LGBTQ bullying and harassment in seattle public schools. Journal of School Health, 84, 1-9.
Leaper, C., Brown, C.S., & Ayres, M.M. (2013). Adolescent girls' cognitive appraisals of coping
responses to sexual harassment. Psychology in the Schools, 50, 969-986.
Lichty, L.F., Torres, J.M.C., Valenti, M.T, & Buchanan, N.T. (2008). Sexual harassment policies in k-12
schools: examining accessibility to students and content. Journal of School Health, 78, 607-614.
Meyer, E.J. (2009). Gender, bullying, and harassment: strategies to end sexism and homophobia in
schools. New York: Teachers College Press.
National Women’s Law Center (2007). How to protect students from sexual harassment: Aprimer for
schools. Washington, DC: Author.
http://www.nwlc.org/sites/default/files/pdfs/Final%20SH%20Fact%20Sheet-Schools.pdf 
Rahimi, R., & Liston, D.D. (2012). Pervasive vulnerabilities: sexual harassment in school. Adolescent
cultures, school, and society. Volume 54 New York: Peter Lang.


7
Rogers, F.E. (2011). Student-on-student sexual harassment. Education Digest: Essential Readings
Condensed for Quick Review, 76, 35-38.
Sanchez, E., Robertson, T.R., Lewis, C.M., et al., (2001). Preventing bullying and sexual harassment in
elementary schools: The expect respect model. Journal of Emotional Abuse, 2, 157-180.
Strauss, S. (2011). Sexual harassment and bullying: A guide to keeping kids safe and holding schools
accountable.  Blue Ridge Summit, PA: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc.
Swearer Napolitano, S.M., (2011). Risk factors for and outcomes of bullying and victimization. Paper
132, Educational Psychology Papers and Publications,
http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/edpsychpapers/132?utm_source=digitalcommons.unl.edu%2Fedpsych
papers%2F132&utm_medium=PDF&utm_campaign=PDFCoverPages
Taylor, B.G., Stein, N.D. Mumford, E.A. & Woods, D. (2013). Shifting boundaries: An experimental
evaluation of a dating violence prevention program in middle schools. Prevention Science 14, 64-76.
U.S. Department of Education (2008). Sexual harassment: It's not academic. Washington, D.C.: Office
for Civil Rights.
U.S. Department of Education (2016). FAQs Sexual Discrimination. Washington, D.C.: Office for Civil
Rights.
U.S. Department of Education (1999). Protecting students from harassment and hate crime: A guide for
schools. Washington, D.C.: Office for Civil Rights.
http://www2.ed.gov/offices/OCR/archives/Harassment/harassment.pdf 
Various other references were drawn from those included in the Center’s Online Clearinghouse Quick
Find on Bullying – http://smhp.psych.ucla.edu/qf/bully.htm 
For information on what the U.S. Department of Education recommends to schools
related to sexual harassment, see
http://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/docs/ocrshpam.html 
For information on prevention strategies from the Centers for Diseases Prevention and
Control, see
http://www.cdc.gov/ViolencePrevention/sexualviolence/prevention.html 
For the World Health Organization strategies for ending violence against children, see
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/207717/1/9789241565356-eng.pdf?ua=1 
For an example of a school prevention curriculum, see
http://www.ccasa.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/01/Sexual-Harassment-Prevention-in-Sch
ools-Curriculum-Manual.pdf