The 10 barriers to women’s career progression
While women have gained many legal rights over the past 100-150 years, true equality remains a work in progress worldwide. According to the Global Gender Gap 2024 by the World Economic Forum, it will take an estimated 132 years to close the global economic gender gap.
The journey towards full gender equality varies across countries. Some have made significant strides, while others still have a long way to go. Yet, no nation has fully achieved equal access to opportunities, leadership, and justice for both women and men.
In this article, we’ll explore ten major barriers that continue to hinder women’s progression, shedding light on the challenges that must be addressed to create a more inclusive and equitable future.
Women’s role in leadership
Before delving into the obstacles that women face on the career ladder, it is important to be aware of the vital role they are playing in leadership. When women are empowered to lead, there are benefits for them as well as the organisation. Despite the common belief that men make better leaders, research suggests otherwise. A study by Dr Alice Eagly found that, compared to their male counterparts, female leaders are more likely to adopt the so-called transformational leadership, acting as inspirational role models, fostering good human relationships, developing their team’s skills, and motivating others to exceed expectations. On top of that, according to BBC News, companies with more female executives perform 10 times better than the ones without them.
Moreover, even though many men score highly on the most important leadership traits, women leaders frequently perform better than men in areas like empathy, communication, organisation, intelligence, compassion, honesty, and ethics, and women are 9% more likely to score higher when it comes to leadership effectiveness.
The most significant barriers to female progression and how to cope with them
Women face numerous barriers and challenges that hinder their career progression across various fields. From the broken rung at the start of their careers to the glass ceiling that limits advancement into leadership, obstacles exist at every stage. There are three main barriers – societal, personal and organisational – some of the most common ones include:
Societal barriers
Societal barriers stem from deeply ingrained cultural norms and biases that shape perceptions of women’s roles in society and the workplace.
1. Unconscious biases & stereotypes
Gender-based discrimination and unconscious gender bias are two of the many obstacles that women face when trying to advance into corporate leadership roles. Women are often perceived as less competent leaders compared to men, leading to biases in hiring, promotion and decision-making. Stereotypes about women being ‘too emotional’ or ‘less authoritative’ can negatively impact their career advancements.
There are many ways to address gender biases and stereotypes, simply by actively challenging them and educating people about gender bias and its impact on women’s progression. As per IMD, an independent academic institute, gender quotas are a tool that organisations can use to guarantee that women hold leadership roles. Also, blind recruitment initiatives, which guarantee that candidates are assessed only on their qualifications and abilities, can aid in the elimination of bias in the hiring process.
2. Gender role expectations
Progress toward gender equality has been made, but societal norms still often push women into primary caregiving and household responsibilities, limiting their career progression. Women hold just 9% of CEO positions in both the S&P 100 and FTSE 100 companies, according to a report by S&P Global. This stark underrepresentation at the highest levels of corporate leadership shows just how far we still have to go.
Many women face pressure to prioritise family over career, while men are often encouraged to pursue leadership roles without the same expectations. It’s time to challenge the norms. Raising awareness and educating colleagues about women’s roles in society and the workplace is crucial to real progress.
3. Gender pay gap
In terms of pay, globally, women earn about 20% less than men, meaning they receive only 80% of a male counterpart’s salary. This pay disparity varies across regions, industries, and job levels, making financial equality an ongoing challenge. It is key then to regularly review and address any gender pay gaps within the organisation by ensuring that the salary and benefits are equitable.
Organisational barriers
As per the International Labour Organisation, in corporations around the world, women are under-represented, and their percentage declines as they move up the corporate ladder. They have to face a lot of organisational barriers within workplace structures, policies, and cultures that create unequal opportunities for women.
4. Elusive critical experiences
Many leadership roles require high-visibility projects, strategic decision-making opportunities, and networking access. However, women are often overlooked for these career-defining experiences, making it harder to build the credentials needed for advancements. To create an environment that fosters inclusivity and cultivates female leadership roles, it is important to establish and regularly report on goals for women’s representation at various leadership levels.
5. Workplace harassment & discrimination
Microaggressions, workplace harassment and sexism can discourage career growth and leadership aspirations. According to McKinsey & Company research, microaggressions are much more common among women than among men. Additionally, based on the most recent Women in the Workplace research, the authors found that women with traditionally marginalised identities, such as women of colour and women with disabilities experience more frequent insults.
Three out of five women, especially those between the ages of 25 and 34, report having been the victim of workplace harassment, according to a poll of over 1,000 women by TUC (Trades Union Congress). To prevent harassment and discrimination at work, it is important to implement policies to address discrimination and hold employees accountable for violations.
6. Unequal of mentorship & sponsorship
According to Sharon Peake’s whitepaper, Three Barriers to Women’s Progression: What organisations can do, men are 25% more likely than women to have a sponsor, and senior men are 50% more likely than women to receive a sponsorship. Since sponsorship plays a critical role in career development, this disparity limits women’s leadership progress. As mentioned in the whitepaper, men receive a greater sponsorship from their mentors than women. It’s key to implement structured sponsorship and mentorship programs because such initiatives can equip women with the skills and confidence needed to advance in their careers.
7. Lack of role models
As per data from last year, despite holding roughly 33.5% of senior management positions worldwide, women continue to be under-represented in leadership roles. Therefore, there is an absence of female role models as well. As per Women in Tech: Time to close the gender gap research report by PwC, just 22% of respondents could name a well-known woman who works in technology, compared to 66% of respondents who could name a well-known man. Only 3% of women say that a career in technology is their first choice.
If there is an overall underrepresentation of women in the workplace, it is no surprise that there is also a lack of role models. As per HR Review, a lack of female role models is setting back women’s career progression, and 57% of respondents think that having a relatable role model is essential to succeeding in their careers. Giving female employees mentors and role models boosts women’s self-esteem, empowers them to voice their opinions, pushes them to advance, and supports them in confronting unjust practices.
8. Intersectionality
Intersectionality highlights how overlapping forms of discrimination (like sexism, racism, and ageism) shape people’s experiences, especially for women of colour. Originally coined to address the unique oppression faced by African American women, the concept now helps explain why career barriers impact all women but hit marginalised groups harder. Research shows that gender and ethnicity together compound obstacles to advancement.
To address this, companies can prioritise diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) initiatives, offering mentorship and sponsorship programs for underrepresented groups, and ensuring fair access to opportunities at every level.
Personal barriers
The last category of barriers refers to internal challenges that can affect confidence, ambition, and career growth.
9. Imposter syndrome
A lot of women struggle with confidence. They tend to understate their performance, while men more often overstate theirs. 1 in 5 women severely lack confidence, according to the UK’s Confidence Index. Many women experience imposter syndrome, a feeling that underserves their success. Combined with a confidence gap, where women underestimate their abilities compared to men, this hinders self-advocacy in salary negotiations, promotions, and leadership aspirations.
For women to overcome imposter syndrome and self-doubt, it’s essential to build a supportive network, recognise their achievements, seek mentorship, and embrace imperfections.
10. Struggle for work-life balance & remote work
Women often face a “double burden” of balancing professional responsibilities with family obligations. Especially in times of flexible working, as per Business Insider, evidence indicates that remote work frequently results in lower pay than in-person positions, impedes professional progression, and can cause burnout, especially for women who simultaneously handle family duties while working.
However, there is also data proving the opposite. “Hybrid working helps women into senior management roles” is the recent article published by Neil Franklin that indicates that over half (53%) of women, and 61% of women from minority backgrounds, report that flexible working has allowed them to pursue promotions or apply for more senior roles. Along with 67% of women believing that hybrid working has helped them level the playing field for career progression.
Helping women to progress
There are many ways to support women in the workplace, including the promotion of gender diversity, equal pay, transparency, safe and inclusive environment, and mentorship and sponsorship programs.
Breaking the barriers pointed out in this article requires systematic change, including policy reforms, cultural shifts, and proactive efforts from organisations to ensure equal opportunities for women. Addressing these challenges will not only empower women but also drive economic growth and innovation in workplaces worldwide.