Women rely more on Social Security for income in retirement compared to men, according to new research from the AARP Public Policy Institute.
Yet on average, women receive about $4,800 less in Social Security retirement benefits annually than men, according to the provider of public policy research at AARP, a nonprofit, nonpartisan organization representing individuals 50 and over.
The research pointed out a couple of factors that leave women at a financial disadvantage in retirement.
First, women still tend to earn less than men. In the first quarter of 2026, women had $1,098 in median weekly earnings, or 80.6% of the $1,362 median for men, according to Bureau of Labor Statistics data.
Second, 61% of caregivers are women, according to AARP's research. Consequently, they are more likely to take time out of the workforce or reduce their working hours to make time for those caregiving responsibilities.
Both drivers tend to leave women with less retirement savings, making them more reliant on Social Security, according to AARP's research.
Women also tend to live around five years longer than men on average, according to the National Center for Health Statistics.
Research shows women are also more likely to need care. When paid care is used, the average lifetime cost for women age 65 and over is $350,000 versus $250,000 for men, according to JPMorgan Asset Management.
These factors make claiming Social Security retirement benefits a high-stakes decision for women, financial advisors say.
More than 63 million Americans are receiving Social Security retirement benefits, including workers, their dependents and survivors, according to Social Security Administration data as of the end of May.
Women represent about 28 million retired worker beneficiaries and almost 2 million spousal beneficiaries, according to the data. More than 3.3 million older widows are also receiving benefits.
Weigh the tradeoffs of claiming
For both men and women, the age when they decide to start Social Security retirement benefits can come with big trade-offs.
Claim at 62 — the earliest retirement eligibility age — and receive a permanently reduced benefit. That may be just 70% of your full benefit, assuming your full retirement age is 67, according to the Social Security Administration.
At age 67, beneficiaries stand to receive 100% of the benefits due to them, provided they were born in 1960 or later. Others may have an earlier full retirement age if they were born before 1960.
For every year individuals wait to claim from full retirement age up to age 70, they stand to receive an 8% benefit boost.
Experts generally encourage beneficiaries to wait to claim.
Holding off on claiming may be especially beneficial for women, who would benefit from higher monthly checks if they live longer.
Social Security benefits receive an annual cost-of-living adjustments to keep up with inflation.
Because the Social Security Administration uses the 35 years with the highest earnings to calculate benefits, it may help women to work longer if they can to help boost their earnings record.
Individuals who claim Social Security retirement benefits before full retirement age and who continue to work will be subject to a retirement earnings test, which means their benefits may be reduced if their income exceeds certain thresholds. However, after they reach full retirement age, this test no longer applies and their benefits will be recalculated to credit them for the months their benefits were reduced or withheld, according to the Social Security Administration.
Health status and longevity are also factors to consider as would-be retirees decide when to claim, according to Niv Persaud, a certified financial planner and managing director at Transition Planning & Guidance in Atlanta. One of Persaud's clients who was recovering from cancer decided to claim Social Security early because she was worried that she didn't have the longevity to justify waiting, she said.
It also helps to consider what other sources of retirement income you expect to have and how much you expect to spend in retirement, Persaud said.
Factor in marital status
Nearly 60% of women receive Social Security benefits based on their own work records, according to AARP's research.
Women with spouses who earn more than them may be able to receive higher Social Security payments.
About 5 million women receive benefits either solely based on their spouse's work record or in combination with their own retirement benefit amount, according to the AARP. Those benefits average $1,110 per month, according to the research.
Divorced women who were married to their ex-spouse for at least 10 years may be able to receive benefits based on their ex's record.
Moreover, when a spouse dies, women may claim survivor benefits based on that individual's work record — even if that person is an ex.
About 3.3 million women age 60 and over receive survivor benefits, according to the AARP.
Couples with higher-earning spouses may want to coordinate their claiming decisions.
"A spouse's claiming decision is not just their problem," said Jeff Judge, a certified financial planner and managing director at Chesapeake Financial Planners in Forest Hill, Maryland.
When the partner with the higher benefit dies, the surviving spouse may inherit that amount, he said.
The size of the payments surviving spouses receive depends on their age and the amount the decedent was entitled to at the time of their death, according to the Social Security Administration. If the deceased spouse was receiving reduced benefits, the survivor benefits will also be lowered, according to the agency.
"Women should care deeply about that coordination," Judge said.
Consider looping in a professional for help
The Social Security Administration provides estimated monthly benefits based on when an individual decides to claim from age 62 to age 70.
The agency may also track eligibility for spousal and survivor benefits.
Still, it's helpful to keep a record of your earnings history and marriages to troubleshoot for errors.
When it comes to deciding when to claim, the Social Security Administration cannot give personalized advice.
Experts say it's worthwhile to talk to a professional — preferably a fiduciary who will prioritize your best interests — who can run the numbers.
Judge said he typically carves out an entire meeting to go over Social Security with clients. After educating clients and answering their questions, he said he lets them make their claiming decision on their own.
"The difference between a good decision and a bad decision on Social Security probably pays for a financial planner," Judge said.