Abstract
Research Summary:
This study examines the extent to which citywide racial and ethnic disparities in arrests are driven by a subset of places within cities. Data are drawn from six U.S. cities from 2014 to 2019. Results indicate that arrests are strongly concentrated within a few block groups, for all race and ethnicities in all cities. Coupled with higher rates of arrests for Blacks and (in some cities) Hispanics compared to Whites and other racial groups, this means that a few places in every city are responsible for driving citywide racial and ethnic disparities in arrests. These arrest hot spots demonstrate very high year-to-year stability. There is a strong relationship between crime and arrest hot spots, making crime hot spots key drivers of citywide racial and ethnic disparities in arrests.
Policy Implications:
Our results indicate that changes to arrest patterns in most parts of a city will have little impact on citywide racial and ethnic disparities in arrests. At the same time, an intense focus on reducing arrests in hot spots may yield outsized reductions in population-level racial and ethnic disparities, while being especially feasible due to their limited scope. Place-based and group-based interventions at these locations may entail the dual benefit of reduced racial disparities in arrests along with enhanced public safety.
Keywords: arrests, place-based interventions, policing, problem solving, racial disparities
Understanding racial and ethnic disparities in arrests is a pivotal topic given widespread societal concern over inequalities in policing and the criminal justice system. Arrests are a consequential form of police contact, serving as the gateway to the criminal justice process. The experience of being arrested may be harmful even if it does not lead to criminal court actions. Arrest patterns across the United States are characterized by large and persistent racial and ethnic disparities (Federal Bureau of Investigation, 2020). Across decades of changes in crime and various police reforms, racial and ethnic disparities in arrests have persisted. An improved understanding of the sources of disparities in arrests may provide clues about policies that help reduce them.
An extensive body of research has established that citywide crime is highly concentrated within a few microplaces. Across various contexts, 50% of crime occurs in about 5% of a city’s street segments, what has been termed the “law of crime concentration” (Weisburd, 2015). Scholars have often commented on possible connections between hot spots of crime and racial disparities in policing (Braga & Weisburd, 2010; Briggs & Keimig, 2017; Wheeler, 2020), but research on the criminology of place has to date focused almost exclusively on the spatial concentration of crime and not arrest patterns or how their concentration explains population-level racial disparities.1
There are, however, several reasons to expect that extending the criminology of place to confront the spatial concentration of police enforcement and racial disparities therein may yield important insights. For one, research on the concentration of crime shows that a city’s crime rate can be largely driven by a small set of places. This is not only of theoretical interest, as focusing on targeted solutions for those few places can yield effective crime reduction practices (Braga & Weisburd, 2010; Braga et al., 1999, 2014). This suggests value in examining whether similar insights may follow from applying this lens to racial disparities in arrests. But the connections run deeper; most obviously, police responding to the spatial concentration of crime can be expected to produce some degree of concentration of arrests. Given the persistence of racial residential segregation and concentrated disadvantage (Massey & Denton, 1993; Wilson, 1987, 1996), ultimately making certain racial minority groups more likely to be living in higher crime places (Sampson & Wilson, 1995; Sampson et al., 2018), it stands to reason that arrests in response to crime hot spots would produce racial disparities. Beyond crime, there are other reasons that police may concentrate their enforcement in small parts of the city, such as commercial corridors or downtown business districts, and these areas too may be especially responsible for producing racial disparities in arrests.
To be sure, an extensive literature confronts the nexus of race, place, and policing (Braga et al., 2019). Quantitative work in this tradition typically examines the conditional association between predictors, such as racial composition, and the level of some police behaviors at relatively large geographic scales, such as neighborhoods (e.g., Fagan et al., 2010, 2016; Smith, 1986; Terrill & Reisig, 2003). Although valuable and complementary to our focus, such work has not directly modeled the extent to which citywide racial disparities reflect the concentration of arrests in specific places. Similarly, although there is over half a century of research on the causes of arrests more generally (Engel et al., 2019; Riksheim & Chermak, 1993; Sherman, 1980), this tradition has yet to document the spatial concentration of arrests that results from the variety of factors that shape police behavior.
In this article, we thus extend research on race, place, and policing by examining the extent to which a few places within cities are responsible for producing citywide racial and ethnic disparities in arrest rates. To do so, we draw on data from six geographically divergent U.S. cities—New York City, Los Angeles, Chicago, Washington, D.C., Tucson, and Colorado Springs—over the years 2014–2019. With data sets for these six cities, we establish how concentrated arrests are by place, how the concentration of arrests varies by racial and ethnic group, the extent to which a few places drive citywide racial and ethnic disparities in arrest rates, the temporal stability of arrest hot spots, and the extent to which these arrest patterns overlap with the more established phenomenon of crime hot spots. In so doing, we also extend the criminology of place by shifting the focus from crime to enforcement patterns and by moving beyond race neutral scholarship to put racial disparities front and center.
Our analyses reveal several consistent patterns across the cities, coupled with some city-level variability. First, in all six cities arrests are highly concentrated within a few block groups, and this is true for all racial and ethnic groups. It is common for about 5% of block groups to account for about 40% of arrests; the exact figure varies by about 10 percentage points depending on the city and racial/ethnic group. Second, when coupled with higher overall rates of arrests for Blacks and (in some cities) Hispanics compared to Whites and other racial groups, this spatial concentration means that a few places in every city are especially responsible for driving most citywide racial disparities in arrest. For example, in Los Angeles nearly half of the disparately high rates of Black arrests, compared to White and Asian arrests, originate in 5% of the city’s places and almost all of it comes from a quarter of the city. Third, the places with the most arrests exhibit very high levels of year-to-year stability, in all cities and for all racial and ethnic groups. Fourth, there is a close association between crime hot spots and arrest hot spots, an association that persists largely unaltered after conditioning on several plausible confounding factors. Finally, the spatial crime–arrest association means that a few high crime places generate a good deal of citywide racial disparities in arrest rates. For instance, it is common for about 30% of Black–White disparities in arrests rates to stem from the arrests that happen in the top 5% highest crime block groups.
Together, our results indicate that citywide racial and ethnic disparities in arrest rates are primarily generated in relatively few places within cities, and that these are often though not exclusively crime hot spots. These descriptive patterns carry theoretical implications, as theories of race and policing must be able to account for them if they are to substantively explain what drives racial disparities in police enforcement. Ultimately, our analyses yield more questions than answers about which places generate racial disparities in arrest rates and why, including what exactly it means for crime and arrest hot spots to be associated. Answers to these questions are not only of academic interest but also carry practical value. Our findings imply that changes to policing arrest practices in most places in a city will have little consequence for addressing overall racial and ethnic disparities in arrest rates. This suggests real limits of the effectiveness of popular policing reforms in reducing disparities, such as implicit bias training or body-worn cameras. Conversely, our findings mean that policies and practices that lower arrest rates in a handful of places could produce large reductions in citywide racial disparities. Given the limited geographic scale of such interventions, they may be effective and feasible. Yet, the effectiveness of different interventions—for example, whether place-based or group-based—fundamentally depends on why arrests are as concentrated as they are. After presenting our results, these theoretical and policy implications are discussed in detail.
1 |. EXTENDING THE CRIMINOLOGY OF PLACE TOWARD RACE AND POLICING
Since the 1980s, a growing body of research has focused on the concentration of crime by place (Sherman et al., 1989; Weisburd, 2015; Weisburd et al., 2012). In city after city studied, research has revealed that crime tends to concentrate in a few places (Weisburd, 2015). Typically, about 5% of street segments or small geographies account for 50% of crime, though there is variability around this, including variability from examining different spatial resolutions and types of crimes (Andresen et al., 2017; Bernasco & Steenbeek, 2017; O’Brien, 2019). Further, the locations of these hot spots of crime exhibit a high degree of stability over time (Weisburd et al., 2004). These findings form the core of the criminology of place, characterized by an emphasis on the criminogenic nature of microplaces, or areas smaller than neighborhoods (Sherman et al., 1989; Weisburd et al., 2012).
The observed concentration of crime within cities suggests important insights for theories of crime and policy responses. From a policy standpoint, the hyperconcentration of crime suggests that precisely targeted interventions to the places with the most crime may yield outsized crime reduction benefits (e.g., Chalfin, LaForest, et al., 2021). It is no coincidence that the criminology of place literature emerged in tandem with hot spots policing, or the use of elevated, often proactive, police presence in crime hot spots (cf. Sherman & Weisburd, 1995; Sherman et al., 1989). Beyond its practical applicability, the concentration of crime also provides a deeper understanding of the theoretical mechanisms that lead some places to have chronically higher rates of crime than others (Weisburd, 2015; Wilcox & Cullen, 2018).
To date, however, the criminology of place has largely neglected enforcement patterns. There are some exceptions; for instance, Weisburd et al. (2014) show that about 80% of New York City Police Department (NYPD) stops on street segments during 2009–2010 occurred in just 5% of New York City’s street segments. In other cases, scholars have invoked the spatial concentration of enforcement without providing analogous estimates (Briggs & Keimig, 2017; Chillar, 2022; Wheeler, 2020; Wheeler et al., 2018). The descriptive question of how concentrated arrests are by place within cities has largely been unaddressed. To the extent that the police’s response to crime is proportional to its concentration, the spatial concentration of arrests will closely resemble the concentration of crime. The police responses generating such concentration could stem from responding to calls for service, but also deliberately place-based strategies such as hot spots policing. The extra allocation of police to high crime areas is particularly evident in cities like New York that adopted the “new policing model” of linking officer assignments to crime analytics (MacDonald et al., 2016). It need not be only crime that police respond to; responding to any sort or combination of spatially concentrated social problems would suffice to similarly concentrate arrests in a subset of places. Importantly, microplaces with high levels of law enforcement activity may generate an outsized share of the racial disparities in arrests. Although the criminology of place has mostly concerned itself with overall patterns of spatial concentration of crime, extending this tradition to confront race-specific patterns in police enforcement stands to reveal the concentrated sources of racial disparities in arrest rates.
1.1 |. Segregation and concentrated disadvantages: The roots of concentrated disparities
Crime hot spots are often located in highly disadvantaged, segregated communities of racial and ethnic minorities (Braga & Weisburd, 2010; Wheeler, 2020). Given that various forms of social problems tend to cluster (Sampson, 2012), this is likely true of other types of hot spots as well. The resultant coupling of spatially concentrated arrests with almost exclusively racial/ethnic minority populations means that what appears to be a citywide phenomenon—differences in rates of arrest by race or ethnicity—could stem disproportionately from relatively few microplaces within the city.
There are historical and structural reasons for the spatial overlap between certain racial/ethnic groups and concentrated poverty and other disadvantages within U.S. cities. In the case of African Americans, this reflects the legacy and persistence of segregation, which concentrates disadvantages, thereby perpetuating various social problems (Massey & Denton, 1993; Wilson, 1987, 1996). African Americans are on average more likely than Whites and other groups to live in neighborhoods with high spatial concentrations of poverty, unemployment, joblessness, and family disruption. Such structural differences between predominately Black and White neighborhoods, including the ways in which they impact social processes such as informal social control and certain cultural adaptations, explain differences in crime rates between them (Krivo et al., 2009; Sampson et al., 2018; Sampson & Wilson, 1995).
The problems generated by these processes of urban spatial inequality extend beyond crime, as do the problems to which the police respond. In contrast to arrests for gun violence, enforcement patterns may have less connection to public safety when they involve arrests for drug possession, municipal violations of public order, and other nonviolent offenses (Harcourt & Ludwig, 2007; Stuart, 2016). Regardless of the legitimacy of the “problems” police are responding to, if they are spatially concentrated, they will likely be in places disproportionately populated by poor African Americans. By implication, citywide Black arrest rates may be mostly generated in a few places.
Complicating this picture somewhat, central business districts with low Black residential populations often have especially high rates of property crime and certain forms of disorder. Spatially concentrated arrests may thus extend beyond racially segregated residential neighborhoods to downtown cores where the ambient population is racially diverse. Yet, it is likely the case that the legacy and persistence of segregation and concentrated disadvantage still shape arrest patterns in these areas, insofar as they influence the rates of offending by race in downtown cores as well as the way that police perceive people of different races as they use these spaces (Gelman et al., 2007). We do not set out to test these various mechanisms, but raise these issues to make it clear that the concentration of arrests for African Americans may extend beyond segregated spaces because of the same historical legacy and social processes of disadvantage.
The category Hispanic encompasses an exceptionally wide array of nationalities and socioeconomic backgrounds, among other differences, making it hard to provide a meaningful summary of the “Hispanic experience” in the United States (Massey & Denton, 1987; Portes & Rumbaut, 2006; South et al., 2005). For instance, although many populations of Dominicans and Puerto Ricans in the mainland United States live in areas characterized by high levels of concentrated disadvantage, many Mexican communities in the United States are cohesive, immigrant-filled ethnic enclaves with a substantial middle class. Also, many Hispanic people do not live in segregated areas, though their segregation levels vary by period, place, and country of origin (Logan et al., 2002, 2004; Massey & Denton, 1987). The specific ethnic composition of Hispanic populations varies substantially across U.S. regions and cities. As a result, whether Hispanics face disparately high arrest rates relative to Whites and other non-Black minority populations, and the extent to which there are hot spots that generate high rates of Hispanic arrests, likely depends on the context of the city being examined.
2 |. PRIOR SCHOLARSHIP ON RACE, PLACE, AND POLICING
Prior research has documented substantial neighborhood variability in police behaviors—including arrests, stops, searches and frisks, the use of force, and misconduct—and examined the neighborhood-level correlates (e.g., Fagan et al., 2010, 2016; Kane, 2002; Lautenschlager & Omori, 2019; Levchak, 2017; MacDonald & Braga, 2019; Smith, 1986; Terrill & Reisig, 2003). Many of these studies find a relationship between neighborhood racial composition and levels of police enforcement or deployment. Such studies often invoke racial threat theory (Blalock, 1967), which maintains that heavy-handed policing is used disparately on minority populations because of their perceived threat to the dominant social order. Other research has found levels of poverty and disadvantage (Fagan & Davies, 2000; Kirk, 2008; Sampson, 1986) and crime (Petrocelli et al., 2003; Roh & Robinson, 2009) to be associated with levels of policing, among other factors (e.g., Beck, 2020; Fagan et al., 2012; Laniyonu, 2018). Scholars working in this tradition have recognized that elevated deployment to hot spots may produce racial disparities by increasing the exposure of minorities to enforcement activities (Tomaskovic-Devey et al., 2004; Warren & Tomaskovic-Devey, 2009). Together, this body of research indicates that policing varies across neighborhoods, that this variation is socially patterned, including by neighborhood-level processes, and that place is essential in assessing racial disparities in policing.
A long tradition of research seeks to establish the more general causes of arrests (for reviews, see Engel et al., 2019; Riksheim & Chermak, 1993; Sherman, 1980). Perhaps the most common finding of this research is the importance of legal considerations and factors such as suspects’ behaviors in influencing the decision to arrest. This literature has also documented other, extra-legal factors that shape police behavior, including the importance of where encounters occur. Thus, this research tradition has been primarily concerned with establishing the causes of police arrest decisions, and place has emerged as a salient consideration.
This article builds on prior work in several ways. First, we add to the criminology of place by focusing on the extent to which racial disparities in arrests are also hyperconcentrated by place. Second, although existing quantitative studies on race, place, and policing typically test for conditional associations between neighborhood-level policing and covariates such as racial composition (e.g., Fagan et al., 2010), we focus instead on the extent to which spatially concentrated arrests drive citywide racial disparities in arrest rates. This empirical approach involves not only a smaller spatial resolution than is typical, but also a shift in focus toward answering the question of how responsible a subset of places are in producing population-level racial and ethnic disparities in arrest rates, a topic that is distinct yet complementary to prior research on race, place, and policing. Third, unlike most previous quantitative studies with arrests as their outcome, we do not seek to explain police arrest decision making. Rather, we build on the criminology of place literature to study the spatial concentration of arrests, thereby expanding upon arrest scholarship by asking a different set of questions and utilizing different analytical techniques than is typical.
Importantly, there are two primary ways of measuring racial disparities in police arrests (Manski & Nagin, 2017).2 The first is the difference in arrest rates. For example, if one racial group has an arrest rate of 0.6 per person and another group has one of 0.06, this measure of disparity would be 0.6 – 0.06 = 0.54. The second is a disparity ratio, which divides rather than subtracts the rates: this measure of disparity would be 0.6 – 0.06 = 10. The choice of which metric is used to assess disparities is consequential. If the first group’s rate of arrests collapsed to 0.3 and the second group’s rate changed slightly to 0.03, the disparity ratio would remain 10, even though the first group experienced half as many arrests as before. In contrast, the difference in rates would shrink from 0.54 to 0.27 using the second approach, a 50% reduction, reflecting the more similar arrest rates by race. We focus on differences in arrest rates by race as our measure of disparities, as it more clearly captures the benefit of reduced arrests of minority individuals.
Our focus on estimating the contribution of places to citywide racial and ethnic disparities in arrest rates contrasts with the more typical approach of attempting to identify racially discriminatory policing by parsing out the extent to which disparities do not reflect legally justified reasons for arrests (for reviews, see Kochel et al., 2011; National Academy of Sciences, 2018; Neil & Winship, 2019; Ridgeway & MacDonald, 2010). Similar research exists on a range of police behaviors, such as traffic stops and shootings (Alpert et al., 2004; Engel et al., 2002; Smith et al., 2021; Tregle et al., 2019). A racial disparity is an observed difference between groups’ rates of police contact, whereas the term discrimination is generally reserved for reasons that racial disparities are deemed unwarranted, as when caused by racial animus or racial profiling. Although research on these topics is valuable, our stance is that even racial disparities in arrest rates that are legally justifiable would be better off lowered when possible. Legally justified racial disparities in arrests do not negate the importance of reducing population-level disparities. It is for this reason that we compare arrests rates per person (i.e., population) by race, rather than adjust the arrest rates by a benchmark such as race-specific crime rates, a strategy more common for those assessing whether disparities are legally unwarranted. A focus on places that generate a disproportionate share of arrests can help identify ways in which population-level racial disparities can be reduced, regardless of their legality.
3 |. METHODS
3.1 |. Data
Our analysis centers on data from six U.S. cities during the years 2014–2019. These cities—New York City, Los Angeles, Chicago, Washington, D.C., Tucson, and Colorado Springs—were chosen because they reflect a diverse array of cities in the United States and have publicly available geocoded arrest and crime data. The cities range from medium sized to very large (New York, Los Angeles, and Chicago are the three largest U.S. cities) and span multiple geographic regions. In addition, they vary in other notable ways, such as in population density and their racial and ethnic composition, including many different types of Hispanic populations. Thus, although our sample does not give a representative estimate of the concentration of arrests across all U.S. cities, it does allow for an examination of whether recurrent patterns exist across cities that have different physical, demographic, sociopolitical, and economic contexts.
For each city, geocoded arrest and crime data were drawn from the city’s open data portals. These data were aggregated to the block-group level using 2010 Census shapefiles, and additional covariates were taken from the 2015–2019 American Community Survey (ACS) block-group-level estimates. Both the shapefiles and ACS data were obtained from Social Explorer. We focus on block groups because this is the smallest geographic level of population enumeration for the ACS, and to account for the fact that not every city reports the exact spot where arrests/crimes occur (e.g., NYPD data geocode arrests to the nearest intersection or middle of the nearest street segment).
The same variables are used and analyzed in the same way for all six cities. The key outcome of interest is the number of arrest incidents in each block group, which is measured separately for three racial/ethnic groupings: Black, Hispanic, and White/other. These groupings are used given the predominant concern with racial disparities in arrests against Black and Hispanic individuals. Although non-Hispanic Whites make up the majority of the third grouping in every city, the “other” category (in most cities this is predominately Asian individuals) has similar, often slightly lower, arrest rates. All arrests reported by each city are included in this analysis. Arrests are measured monthly, yearly, and across the entire 6-year study period in various analyses, depending on what is most appropriate to answer specific research questions.
The amount of crime in each block group is measured as the number of crime incidents reported to the respective police departments. Although reported crime is a subset of actual crimes, itis the crime that the police are aware of and thus capable of responding to.3 In some models, we include additional covariates. These include month and year fixed effects to account for temporal trends common to all areas of a city. We also include an index of concentrated disadvantage, constructed with principal components analysis (PCA). Specifically, the first component of a PCA is extracted from a combination of unemployment rates, female-headed household rates, family poverty rates, vacancy rates, and the fraction of adults without college degrees. In every city, the first component accounted for a good deal of variation (ranging from 42% to 61%). Block group’s land area is measured in case larger areas experience more enforcement as a function of their geographic size. Similarly, the block group’s total population is measured in case more populated areas experience more enforcement. Demographic information on the youth population, Black population, and Hispanic population of each block group is also measured as those may impact enforcement levels.
Block groups with missing ACS data are omitted from analysis.4 The omitted block groups do not account for many of each city’s arrests (ranging from 0% to 2.5%). Because the first section of analyses does not require ACS data, in a supplementary check we carried out those analyses using all block groups; this did not noticeably alter results.5
Importantly, the definitions and data collection processes for the arrest and crime data are not identical across the six cities. For example, Washington, D.C. data do not contain the arrests of juveniles and only contain index crimes. Also, for Colorado Springs arrest data are only available from 2016 to 2019. There are likely other small differences stemming from varying data management systems and practices across cities. As such, we caution against comparing the specific arrest rates between cities. Though, care was taken to clean the data to include only valid arrest incidents in every city (for instance, removing the citations, summons, and field releases that are included in Tucson’s raw arrest data set), allowing for an assessment of whether the same general patterns of the spatial concentration of arrests by race and ethnicity exist across cities.
Table 1 shows summary statistics for each city and racial/ethnic group on the average monthly count of arrests per block group, their share of the population, and the arrest rate per population of residents. Although the number of arrests per block group-month varies considerably, this partially reflects the differing shares of the population of the various racial and ethnic groups. As the arrest rate column indicates, however, relative to their population there are disparities in arrests of African Americans. In New York City, for example, the Black arrest rate is the highest among all groups, and at 0.46 per person is nearly six times higher than the arrest rate of Whites/others (0.08). This disparity is not exceptionally large compared to other cities; the equivalent figure is 11 times higher in Chicago and over 3.5 times higher in Colorado Spring, the city where Black arrest rates are proportionately most similar to those of Whites/others. The degree of disparities in Hispanic arrests is considerably more variable, though always lower than disparities in Black arrest rates. For instance, in Colorado Springs, Hispanic individuals are arrested at the same rate as Whites/others, whereas in Washington, D.C. and New York City—the cities with the highest Hispanic arrest rates relative to Whites/others—their arrest rates are about three times higher. There are thus clear disparities in the arrest rates of African Americans and in some cities Hispanic individuals. These citywide statistics, however, do not convey the extent to which racial and ethnic arrest disparities are concentrated by place.
Table 1:
|  | Arrests per Block Group-Month |  | % of Population | Arrest Rate | 
|---|---|---|---|---|
|  | Mean | S.D. |  |  | 
| New York City |  |  |  |  | 
| Black | 1.88 | 6.03 | 21.80 | 0.46 | 
| Hispanic | 1.33 | 4.18 | 29.08 | 0.24 | 
| White/Other | 0.72 | 2.58 | 49.12 | 0.08 | 
| Los Angeles |  |  |  |  | 
| Black | 0.94 | 4.21 | 8.98 | 0.48 | 
| Hispanic | 1.55 | 3.76 | 47.67 | 0.15 | 
| White/Other | 0.81 | 2.99 | 43.35 | 0.09 | 
| Chicago |  |  |  |  | 
| Black | 1.10 | 2.67 | 28.19 | 0.22 | 
| Hispanic | 0.24 | 0.72 | 28.80 | 0.05 | 
| White/Other | 0.14 | 0.53 | 43.01 | 0.02 | 
| Washington D.C. |  |  |  |  | 
| Black | 4.62 | 7.03 | 45.67 | 0.47 | 
| Hispanic | 0.33 | 0.94 | 11.00 | 0.14 | 
| White/Other | 0.44 | 1.68 | 43.33 | 0.05 | 
| Tucson |  |  |  |  | 
| Black | 0.68 | 1.77 | 3.96 | 0.85 | 
| Hispanic | 2.25 | 4.31 | 42.67 | 0.26 | 
| White/Other | 2.25 | 4.05 | 53.37 | 0.21 | 
| Colorado Springs |  |  |  |  | 
| Black | 0.89 | 2.76 | 6.03 | 0.39 | 
| Hispanic | 0.73 | 2.00 | 17.36 | 0.11 | 
| White/Other | 3.23 | 8.89 | 76.61 | 0.11 | 
Note: Arrest rate refers to the number of arrests per resident of that race/ethnicity over the entire study period.
3.2 |. Analytic strategy and models
The first section of analysis sets out to quantify the concentration of arrests by race across the six cities by examining Lorenz curves and Gini coefficients (Steenbeek & Weisburd, 2016).
The second section of analysis adds in covariates to examine the place-based correlates of arrest concentration by race. Specifically, negative binomial models are used to estimate the number of monthly arrests in each block group for each of the three racial groups separately. Model 1 examines the association between block-group-level crime and arrests and takes the following form:
|  | (1) | 
where r indicates racial/ethnic grouping and c indicates city; the model is fit separately for each racial/ethnic group in each city, yielding 18 models in total. A negative binomial model, with overdispersion parameter α, is used due to the count outcome and because likelihood ratio tests indicated a superior fit compared to analogous Poisson models.6 For each racial group in each city, the mean number of arrests λ in block group i during month t is modeled with an intercept and 19 of the 20 quantiles of crime (the lowest quantile is omitted to be the reference group), where crime quantile is also measured monthly. We use 20 crime quantiles to allow a flexible functional form of the crime–arrest relationship.7
In Model 2, we examine the association of crime with arrest while adjusting for a series of additional covariates:
|  | (2) | 
where the terms that appear in Equation (1) have the same meaning, and in addition π indicates a vector of coefficients that corresponds to X, a vector of the control variables (concentrated disadvantage, land area, total population, youth population, Black population, and Hispanic population) for each block group i in each city c, η indicates month fixed effects, and δ indicates year fixed effects. We utilize the information contained within this model to estimate the contribution of specific crime quantiles to citywide racial disparities in arrest.
For all negative binomial models, cluster-robust standard errors are calculated using the simulation approach advanced by King et al. (2000), clustered at the block-group level to account for unmeasured dependence over time. In Model 2, we obtain expected values of monthly arrests as a function of crime by holding the other covariates at their observed levels and calculating predicted values for each neighborhood at a given quantile of crime, then averaging those predictions (Hanmer & Kalkan, 2013).
4 |. RESULTS
4.1 |. The concentration of arrests by race and place
We first examine the extent to which arrests are concentrated within afew places, by racial/ethnic group and city. Figure 1 presents the cumulative fraction of arrests (the y-axis) that occur within a given fraction of a city’s block groups (the x-axis). Each panel corresponds to a city and each colored line to a racial/ethnic grouping. Strikingly, for every grouping in all six cities, a small fraction of places account for most arrests. For example, in New York City the top 5% highest arrest block groups account for 47.8% of Black arrests, 45.9% of Hispanic arrests, and 47.6% of White/other arrests.8 In Chicago, those figures are, respectively, 35.5%, 32.4%, and 35.8%. Although there is variability across cities and race in terms of the extent of arrest concentration (ranging from a low of 26.5% for Whites/others in Tucson to a high of 52.2% for Blacks in Los Angeles), what stands out most is the recurring pattern of substantial arrest concentration in a few places.
Figure 1 also contains Gini coefficients for every racial/ethnic group for each city. Gini coefficients range between 0 (uniform distribution of arrests across block groups) and 1 (all arrests happen in one place). Gini coefficients are closely related to Figure 1; they are equivalent to the fraction of the area above the 45-degree that is below each curve. Although there is variability by race and across cities, arrests are always substantially concentrated. In the Supporting Information, simulations are presented of the expected concentration and Gini coefficients if arrests were distributed randomly throughout the city (Bernasco & Steenbeek, 2017; Chalfin, Kaplan, et al., 2021; Mohler et al., 2019). The observed quantities presented in Figure 1 are vastly more concentrated than these simulated values.
Although it is clear from Figure 1 that the concentration of arrests does not vary much by race, it is important to recognize that this concentration metric is a relative measure that is agnostic to differences in the arrest rates by race. Figure 2 shows the cumulative race-specific rate of arrests accounted for by a given fraction of block groups. The rightmost value of each curve is the observed arrest rate for a given racial/ethnic group in that city, and to the left the curves indicate what the arrest rate would be if only counting arrests that happened in a given fraction of the block groups. So, for example, the arrest rates for Blacks, Hispanics, and Whites/others in Los Angeles over the period 2014–2019 were 0.481, 0.149, and 0.086 per person, respectively. At x-values of 0.25, the lines show what the arrest rates are when only counting those arrests that happened in the highest 25% arrest places: 0.414 for Blacks, 0.109 for Hispanics, and 0.069 for Whites/others.
Again, we see that in all cities the arrest rates for Blacks tend to be much higher than the other groups, and in some cities the Hispanic arrest rate is higher than that of Whites/others. Figure 2 reveals the consistent pattern that a small fraction of block groups drives a large share of city-level racial and ethnic disparities in arrest rates. Steep slopes, as exist for Black arrests (the red lines) and in some cities Hispanic arrests (the green lines), indicate where a small fraction of places drives up that group’s arrest rate. Flat lines represent places with few arrests; that all the lines quickly flatten out therefore means that most racial and ethnic disparities in arrests come from only a small part of each city.
In Los Angeles, for example, Black arrest rates are driven by the top 25% of block groups, as they are for the other groups though they have relatively low arrest rates. This means that citywide arrest rates are driven by a subset of block groups, and that what happens in the other 75% of the city does not matter much for racial disparities in arrest rates. Approximately 87% of the citywide Black–White/other gap in arrest rates in Los Angeles (0.481 – 0.086 = 0.395) is accounted for by the top 25% highest-arrest places (0.414 – 0.069 = 0.345). Similarly, the top 5% of arrest places accounts for much of the Black–White/other gap in arrest rates (0.25 – 0.04 = 0.19), meaning nearly half of overall disparities in Black arrest rates come from this small part of the city (0.19/0.395 ≈ 48%).
The analyses described above calculate arrest concentration by combining data from 6 years. This aggregation could mask important year-to-year variation in arrest rates by places. Figure 3 shows how the average quantile of block groups that were in the top 5% (i.e., 20th quantile) of block groups by arrests in 2014 changed through to 2019 (for Colorado Springs, from 2016 to 2019). For most cities and racial groups, the top 5% of arrest block groups remain in, at, or above the top 10% every year. For example, in the New York City the top 5% of block groups for arrests in 2014 never drop below the top 10% (19th quantile), on average, for any race or ethnic group between 2015 and 2019. Thus, not only are racial and ethnic disparities in arrests powerfully driven by a few locations, these block groups are largely the same places year after year.
4.2 |. The relationship between arrest and crime hot spots
Figure 4 displays the relationship between reported crimes and arrests at the block-group level. Specifically, it shows the proportion of block groups in the top (20th) arrest quantiles that are also in the top (20th) crime quantile. The denominator is 5% of the number of block groups in a city and the numerator is the number of block groups that are in the top 5% of the distributions of both crime and race-specific arrests. Figure 4 reveals variability across cities, but that there is in general a high degree of overlap between crime and arrest hot spots, for all racial groups.9 In many cases, over half the leading arrest hot spots are also leading crime hot spots.
Figure 5 presents the results from Model 1 that estimates the association between monthly crimes and arrests, by city and racial/ethnic group (tabular regression output is reported in the Table A1 of the Supporting Information). In every city, a pattern emerges such that many lower crime quantiles—indeed most of the city’s block groups—experience relatively few arrests, whereas higher crime areas experience sharply elevated arrest levels. For example, in the bottom 50% of block groups in terms of crime in Chicago (i.e., 10th crime quantile and lower) monthly arrest rates are near zero for every racial and ethnic group. This remains largely true for Hispanics and Whites/others in the top 50% highest crime block groups, the biggest exception being for the top quantile where their arrest rates are closer to 1. In contrast, the Black arrest rate increases in the top half of the crime distribution, such that the expected arrest rate for Blacks in the highest crime block groups is nearly 8 per month. Looking at the other panels, though, the racial/ethnic group whose expected arrest rate increases most with crime varies by city.
Figure 5 reveals an association between arrests and crime at the block-group level, but two things obfuscate the extent to which higher crime block groups contribute to racial disparities in arrests. The first is that these estimates may reflect differences in other area-related factors like concentrated disadvantage, land area, or population. The second is that because the estimates are not corrected for citywide racial composition, the relative height of the different racial/ethnic curves within a given city cannot be compared to understand the role of crime in shaping arrest disparities. For example, Tucson does not have many Black residents, so it is not too surprising that Black individuals are arrested the least in block groups of any crime level. To provide a more direct answer to the question of how much a few high crime locations shape citywide racial disparities, we build on the model above in two ways.
Figure 6 shows the results estimating the relationship between arrests and crime after including the additional set of control variables outlined in Model 2 (tabular regression output is reported in Table A2 of the Supporting Information). Strikingly, the estimates are largely unchanged compared to Figure 5, the analogues of these plots without the added control variables. Thus, the descriptive relationship between arrest rates and crime does not simply reflect their correlation with other important factors—such as demographics, socioeconomics, temporal, and land size covariates—that could influence both.
Figure 7 incorporates additional information to show the extent to which citywide racial disparities in arrests are driven by block groups at a given level of crime. Specifically, the leftmost point for each line in each panel of Figure 7 corresponds to the estimated rate of arrests for a given racial/ethnic group in each city. This number is obtained by dividing the estimated number of arrests—the sum of predicted values from Model 2—by that racial/ethnic group’s population in that city. Each point represents what happens to race and ethnic-specific arrest rates citywide when removing the arrests that happened in quantiles of lower crime locations. For example, the y-values where the x-axis equals 1 indicate what the arrest rates would be if arrests in the lowest 5% of block groups in terms of crime were not counted. The x-axis is cumulative such that 2 on the x-axis does not count the bottom 10% of block groups in terms of crime, and so on until no arrests are counted at a value of 20 on the x-axis.
Despite some variability across cities, a general pattern emerges in that the lines start off less steep before dropping off precipitously. This indicates that arrest rates are not much affected by those arrests that happen in the lower crime parts of cities and are strongly impacted by the arrests that happen in the small sections of cities with the highest crime levels. Since White/other, and in most but not all cases Hispanic, arrest rates are so low to begin with, this generally means their lines gradually fall from a low level to a lower level. For Blacks—who consistently face elevated rates of arrests in each city—this pattern means that their arrest rates are strongly driven by those arrests that happen in the highest crime locations. Consider Colorado Springs as an example; ignoring the arrests that happened in the bottom 50% of block groups in terms of crime does not greatly change arrest rates, as the Hispanic and White/other lines indicate, and even for Blacks the arrest rate would fall by 0.04 (i.e., 0.34–0.3). On the other hand, as indicated by the sharp drop off in the red line at the right of the plot, ignoring the top 5% highest crime block groups drops the Black arrest rate by a further 0.12. There is some city-level variability; for example, Washington, D.C. stands out in that the arrests of Blacks that happen in lower crime places influence the overall Black arrest rate to a larger degree, as indicated by the relatively straight red line. Still, the influence of the top 5% highest crime block groups on Black arrest rates in that city is comparable in size to the influence of the bottom 40%.
Table 2 shows the share of citywide disparities accounted for by block groups of a specific crime quantile. As an example, the Black arrest rate in New York City during the study period was 0.51, but if it were not for the arrests that happened in the top 5% of block groups by crime the Black arrest rate would have been 0.30, or 41.2% lower.10 The percentage decline for Whites/others and Hispanics would have been similar, albeit in absolute terms a smaller reduction in rates. As a result, the citywide difference between Black and White/other arrest rates shrinks from 0.4 to 0.23 when removing the top 5% of crime spots, a 42.5% decline. Although this is the largest such drop of the six cities, the value for Los Angeles is 40%, the smallest two reductions (Washington, D.C. and Tucson) are about 20%, and in Chicago and Colorado Springs one third or more of the disparity is removed. Table 2 also includes results of removing the top 10% and 20% of block groups by crime. To be sure, racial and ethnic disparities in arrests exist beyond such places, but they are relatively small in an absolute sense, reflecting the extent to which it is high-crime areas driving spatially concentrated arrests and, in turn, citywide racial disparities in arrest rates.
Table 2:
| Race/Ethnicity | City |  |  |  |  |  | 
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|  | NYC | LA | Chicago | DC | Tucson | CS | 
| Arrest Rates: Observed |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
| Black | 0.51 | 0.50 | 0.18 | 0.46 | 1.02 | 0.34 | 
| Hispanic | 0.27 | 0.14 | 0.06 | 0.14 | 0.25 | 0.08 | 
| White/Other | 0.11 | 0.10 | 0.03 | 0.04 | 0.21 | 0.10 | 
| Arrest Rates: Top 5% Crime Block Groups Removed |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
| Black | 0.30 | 0.31 | 0.12 | 0.37 | 0.80 | 0.22 | 
| Hispanic | 0.17 | 0.11 | 0.05 | 0.11 | 0.19 | 0.05 | 
| White/Other | 0.07 | 0.07 | 0.02 | 0.03 | 0.16 | 0.07 | 
| Arrest Rates: Top 10% Crime Block Groups Removed |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
| Black | 0.24 | 0.25 | 0.09 | 0.32 | 0.66 | 0.17 | 
| Hispanic | 0.14 | 0.09 | 0.04 | 0.10 | 0.16 | 0.04 | 
| White/Other | 0.06 | 0.06 | 0.02 | 0.03 | 0.14 | 0.05 | 
| Arrest Rates: Top 20% Crime Block Groups Removed |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
| Black | 0.15 | 0.17 | 0.06 | 0.25 | 0.46 | 0.11 | 
| Hispanic | 0.09 | 0.07 | 0.03 | 0.08 | 0.11 | 0.03 | 
| White/Other | 0.04 | 0.04 | 0.01 | 0.02 | 0.10 | 0.03 | 
5 |. DISCUSSION
In this article, we set out to examine the extent to which the spatial concentration of arrests drives citywide racial and ethnic disparities. To do so, we drew on data from 2014 to 2019 for six cities: New York City, Los Angeles, Chicago, Washington, D.C., Tucson, and Colorado Springs. A series of analyses revealed several recurrent patterns across all six cities, despite some city-level variability.11 Arrests are concentrated within a few block groups, often with 5% of block groups accounting for roughly 40% of the arrests of any racial and ethnic group. In turn, this spatial concentration means that relatively few block groups in every city are especially responsible for driving most of the citywide racial disparities in arrest rates. These arrest hot spots exhibit high levels of year-on-year stability, in all cities and for all racial and ethnic groups. Further, there is a close association between crime hot spots and arrest hot spots, even in models that adjusted for demographic, socioeconomic, and other key features of places. A few high crime places generate a good deal of citywide racial disparities in arrest rates. Depending on the city, about 20%–40% of Black–White disparities in arrests rates are the result of what happens in the top 5% of highest crime block groups.
5.1 |. Theoretical implications and future research directions
Broadly, our results demonstrate the value of expanding the criminology of place from a focus on crime to examining police enforcement patterns and how spatial concentration shapes racial disparities in arrest rates. Although there is widespread recognition that police activities are often more aggressive in disadvantaged minority neighborhoods (Fagan et al., 2010, 2016; Lautenschlager & Omori, 2019), the extent to which citywide racial disparities in arrest rates are generated in a few places has not previously been reported. This recurrent, strong, descriptive finding—that the concentration of arrests by place drives population-level racial disparities in arrests—is a fact that theories of police behavior and discretion must account for if they are to provide substantively strong explanations of why racial disparities exist.
Although this study does not seek to provide causal explanations for why racial disparities in arrest rates are so highly influenced by a subset of any city, it is worth noting the difficulty that many predominant theoretical frameworks face in accounting for our findings. For example, the fact that adjusting for racial composition of residential populations in each block group did not alter our estimates hints that even if racial threat theory is correct, it may not be a particularly important driver of population-level racial disparities in arrests. Likewise, it is hard to reconcile the stable concentration of arrests with theories focused on errant “bad apple” officers or more universal processes such as implicit bias (Chalfin & Kaplan, 2021; Russell-Brown, 2018). To be clear, our findings do not mean any of these theories are wrong, but they are incomplete and unlikely to be a main driver of population-level racial disparities in arrests. Arguably, this situation stems from the focus of scholarship to date on identifying particularly egregious patterns of racial discrimination in police actions at the expense of modeling the substantive importance of various factors in producing population-level disparities.
Addressing this disconnect may require expansions or revisions to existing theories and novel research designs that move beyond the common approach of focusing on statistical significance (especially of race coefficients) in regression models toward an examination of the substantive drivers of racial disparities in arrest rates. That is, there is academic and practical value in moving beyond a focus on whether disparities reflect racialized “inputs” toward better establishing a conceptual map of how population-level disparities in arrests are generated (National Academy of Sciences, 2018). This process entails the coming together of suspects, officers, communities, neighborhoods and microplaces, organizations, legal contexts, and other aspects of society, in ways that may not always be patently racialized, but which nonetheless bear strongly on racial disparities in police enforcement.
Ultimately, our results yield more questions than answers. One is whether our findings extend to other police behaviors. Although we found a strong arrest–crime association at the block-group level, it was an imperfect relationship and leaves unanswered what else is going on at these places of arrest concentration.12 Additionally, even though arrest hot spots are often crime hot spots, this study does not address whether police resources and enforcement actions are lawful or commensurate with citizens demands. Certainly, the police have different options in how they choose to respond to concentrated crime. For example, the concentration of arrests could be driven by the police reacting to more calls to service (e.g., from 911), proactive strategies such as hot spots policing, or some mixture of both. Relatedly, it is unclear the extent to which the people being arrested are those who committed the crimes driving the police response, or if higher crime areas that have a greater police presence result in officers detecting more low-level offenses for which they choose to make arrests (Black & Reiss, 1970). Although it is unlikely racial bias is the sole or primary driver of disparities, our findings are consistent with the possibility that biased enforcement occurs at arrest hot spots (and elsewhere), helping to drive observed disparities. This possibility ought to be taken seriously given prior research documenting racial bias in several different contexts (Kochel et al., 2011; National Academy of Sciences, 2018).
There are four important ways to further unpack the spatial crime–arrest association. First, the place-based association between arrests and crime does not necessarily mean it is purely a place-based process, as it could reflect the aggregation of police targeting certain people or groups found in those places. Therefore, it is important to understand the extent to which spatially concentrated arrests reflect subgroups being arrested in these places, such as chronic offenders or street gangs. Prior research shows that police contact is highly skewed toward such subgroups, and within certain subunits of police organizations such as gang units (Fagan et al., 2016; Wolfgang et al., 1972). Second, our analyses examined all arrests and crimes, but the extent to which arrest types and crime types do or do not correspond within places would be informative. For instance, high rates of drug possession arrests in high violence areas could indicate arrests that result from pretextual reasons (Geller & Fagan, 2010). Relatedly, an examination of the composition of arrest types in areas where they are most concentrated, by race, would shed further light on what drives racial disparities in arrest rates. Third, our focus on block groups, while pragmatic, raises the question of whether our patterns would hold up at smaller microplaces such as street segments. The criminology of place has conclusively shown that there is value in studying finer resolutions (Weisburd et al., 2012). Hypothetically, if “problem” addresses (O’Brien & Winship, 2017) drove much of the block-group-level concentration this would provide greater insight as to what processes our findings represent. Although we have shown arrests to be quite concentrated, 5% of block groups encompasses a larger portion of the city than is typical in studies on the criminology of place; it is worthwhile to assess these patterns at smaller scales where population-level enumeration is not possible. Finally, a more systematic study of variation across departments or over time is of interest insofar as it could reveal features of police departments that produce exceptionally large disparities in certain places. These are not insignificant questions: because the sources of racial disparities are so concentrated, the answers are important for understanding racial disparities in arrests and by extension inequality in the criminal justice system.
5.2 |. Implications for policy and practice
Our findings offer several insights for policy and practice. For one, changes to arrest patterns in most parts of a city will have little impact on citywide racial and ethnic disparities in arrests. To recall, what happened in 75% of Los Angeles hardly influenced citywide disparities in arrest rates between Blacks and Whites/other racial groups. This is not to say that policing reforms across much of a city are worthless, but that special efforts to reduce racial disparities in arrests should target those subsets of a city that are the main drivers of these disparities.
Importantly, the findings from this study suggest that an intense focus on reducing arrest hot spots may yield outsized reductions in population-level racial disparities. In Los Angeles, we found that about half of citywide disparities in the arrest rates of African Americans came from just 5% of block groups. Targeted interventions in these arrest hot spots may be especially feasible and effective, and they are not mutually exclusive with other, departmentwide reform efforts. The police, and other relevant policy makers, thus ought to prioritize identifying arrest hot spots within their jurisdictions and thinking of how they could stem the flow of arrests from them. Of course, major social programs to break segregation or its links to concentrated disadvantage would go a long way. This is hardly a novel observation, yet they are often largely out of reach in the United States, especially to city-level political organizations. Still, there are different approaches that could hypothetically make a difference and fall within the scope and capacities of police departments and local politics. The effectiveness of these various approaches, some of which we detail below, depends on what exactly is causing arrests at these hot spots. It is thus also important for policy purposes to move beyond the limitations of the current study, by taking up the directions for future research detailed above, to better understand what drives concentrated disparities.
Place-based interventions are one type of approach to address hot spots of arrests, of which there are police and nonpolice components. It is important that police reflect on whether all arrests are necessary in places where their arrests are most concentrated. Although segregation and concentrated disadvantage serves to spatially concentrate various social problems (Massey & Denton, 1993; Sampson, 2012; Wilson, 1987), thereby acting as distal sources of racial disparities, they do not on their own determine how often arrests are used in response to crime and other social problems, or who is arrested for what in those places. If people in arrest hot spots are being arrested on mostly trivial charges, one potential reform is to simply move away from high-arrest strategies, such as street sweeps and zero-tolerance dragnet approaches. The criminology of place helped give rise to hot spots policing, advocating for a diversity of responses (Braga & Weisburd, 2010), but in practice the strategy can result in elevated rates of low-level enforcement (MacDonald et al., 2016; Rinehart Kochel, 2011). By contrast, proactive police stops and arrests that are based on actual suspicion of criminal behavior instead of loose heuristics of suspicion help reduce crime and minimize racial disparities in who is stopped by the police (MacDonald et al., 2016). Treating everyone in an area with suspicion will yield little public safety benefit and exacerbate racial disparities in police contact.
The police should consider alternative approaches to maintain and improve public safety in arrest hot spots. For example, a problem-oriented policing approach (Braga & Bond, 2008; Goldstein, 1979, 1990) would advocate for a police response that identifies the sources of crime in places and a diversity of responses that do not rely on the use of police arrest powers.13 In this way, the police may reduce crime and other problems by addressing their key drivers, rather than simply react to them in a seemingly endless cycle of disparity-generating arrests.
Place-based anticrime initiatives are not the domain of police alone, and the police should not work in isolation from other public agencies (Goldstein, 1979, 1990). Evidence from experiments suggests that when police and other municipal agencies work with community members to address problems in places that generate the disproportionate share of serious crime on blocks—such as a problematic bar or poorly managed apartment building—crime drops without the collateral consequences of additional arrests (Braga & Weisburd, 2010). Situational crime prevention strategies that focus on changing the structural aspects of places that generate crime could reduce serious crime in areas without displacing it nearby (Braga & Bond, 2008; Branas et al., 2018; Chalfin et al., 2022; MacDonald et al., 2022). Changing streetlights, cleaning up vacant lots, and remediating abandoned housing are all examples of place-based interventions that can be scaled up to high-crime areas to benefit many people living in these spaces (MacDonald et al., 2019). Directing more public safety resources to improving the small percentages of places that generate most arrests could substantially reduce population-level racial disparities in arrests.14
To the extent to which the concentration of arrests in certain places reflects the aggregation of lower-level processes, such as gangs, homelessness, addiction, or mental health problems, then group-based approaches may especially help reduce racial disparities.15 Many of the people that police arrest frequently are likely known to them and in many cases the police are making accurate assessments about that person’s engagement with the problem or crime to which they are responding. For police, there is great value in thinking about non-arrest responses and other interventions that may help break the revolving door of arrests. Partnerships with other agencies to address what is driving higher arrest populations in particular places may be particularly beneficial. A problem-oriented policing model that focuses on a diversity of approaches and moves beyond the “standard model of policing” of using arrests as the principle response to crime in places may be particularly beneficial (Weisburd & Eck, 2004). What is important to remember with these potential responses is that focused attention on the places where arrests most concentrate stands to improve population-level racial disparities the most.
These various responses contain two different pathways to reducing racial disparities in arrests. The first is by reducing the degree of crime in arrest hot spots, police could also reduce disparities in arrests for these offenses. The second is that given problems occur and spatially concentrate, non-arrest responses could be prioritized more. Several of the interventions above work simultaneously through both pathways. Of course, reducing racial disparities in arrests is not the only desirable criminal justice outcome and requires careful consideration with the goals of maintaining public safety (Manski & Nagin, 2017). That is, since not enacting an arrest can be harmful—for instance, in failing to apprehend gun violence perpetrators—trade-offs can exist between reducing arrests (and disparities therein) and enhancing public safety. This suggests value in police agencies considering an “arrest budget,” where alternatives to arrests are sought for trivial offenses, averting some arrests while freeing up resources to focus on severe crimes (Sherman, 1990).16 However, because crime can be prevented from problem-solving approaches, there is not necessarily a trade-off between public safety and reduced arrests. For example, if effective problem-oriented policing reduced the degree of gun violence, fewer gun violence incidents would mean that fewer arrests in response to them would be necessary. The same holds true of crimes that are less severe but more common. Indeed, many of the proposed responses could create such an alignment of benefits: reduced racial disparities in arrests coupled with improved public safety.
6 |. CONCLUSION
Without figuring out ways to reduce arrests in the places where they are most concentrated, racial disparities in arrests will persist. Since racial disparities in arrests are the key source of racial disparities in the wider criminal justice system (Beck & Blumstein, 2018), inequality in the criminal justice system will also persist without a focus on how to reduce the spatially concentrated, high arrest rates of certain racial and ethnic groups. Understanding why arrests are so concentrated in a few places thus carries great academic and practical value for those seeking to make sense of and redress racial inequalities in the criminal justice system. We have provided a roadmap by which such an understanding might be advanced. But a key insight is already clear: by giving special attention to reducing arrests in a few key places, large improvements to racial disparities may be within reach.
Supplementary Material
Additional supporting information can be found online in the Supporting Information section at the end of this article.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Larry Sherman, Dave Kirk, the anonymous reviewers, and participants in the NBER Summer Institute 2022, the Penn Injury Science Center incubator, and Penn’s Population Studies Center colloquium for insightful feedback. This study was funded in part by grants 5R01AA024941-05 from the National Institutes of Health and R49-CE003083 from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Funding information
National Center for Injury Prevention and Control, Grant/Award Number: R49-CE003083; National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, Grant/Award Number: 5R01AA024941-05
Biographies
Roland Neil is a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of Criminology at the University of Pennsylvania. His recent research focuses on racial disparities in policing and life course criminology, and has appeared in the American Journal of Sociology, the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, and the Annual Review of Criminology. He received his Ph.D. in sociology from Harvard University.
John MacDonald is a professor of criminology and sociology at the University of Pennsylvania. He is a fellow of the Academy of Experimental Criminology. His recent research appears in Criminology, the Journal of Experimental Criminology, JAMA Open Network, and the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. He received his Ph.D. in criminology from the University of Maryland.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors confirm that they have no conflcit of interest to declare.
ENDNOTES
In this article, we use racial disparities as shorthand for racial and ethnic disparities, while being specific about which racial or ethnic groups are being compared when appropriate.
A minor variation of these, to which the same comments apply, is to compare the percentage of total arrests to the percentage of total population for each race.
Some offenses may only be recorded if the police set out to enforce laws against them, as is often the case with drug crimes. We repeated our analyses limiting offenses to FBI index crimes (excluding arson and sexual assault), felonies for which there is a direct victim. This yielded similar findings to the main analysis and all substantive conclusions are left intact (see the Supporting Information for results).
They are uncommon: 98 of 6291 block groups in New York City (1.6%); 19 of 2825 in Los Angeles (0.7%); 13 of 2331 in Chicago (0.6%); two of 450 in Washington, D.C. (0.4%); 15 of 422 in Tucson (3.6%); and one of Colorado Spring’s 296 block groups (0.3%) are missing data. Further, missing data indicate that a block group is a place like a jail, large park, or airport.
In the main analysis, we count block groups as part of the city even if they are only partially within city limits, counting only the crimes and arrests that happen within city limits for those block groups. In supplementary analyses, we only included block groups that were at least 90% within city limits; doing so does not meaningfully change the results.
The Poisson versions of these models revealed very similar coefficients for the focal crime covariates.
See the Supporting Information for an analogue of Figure 7—the figure that contains the key results for the crime-focused analyses—that avoids parametric distributional or functional form assumptions but yields the same findings as this quantile-based approach.
Within each city, block groups are separately ordered to calculate the line for each racial/ethnic group. As such, it is not necessarily the same small set of block groups explaining the large fraction of arrests across races. In practice, there is substantial though imperfect overlap in the highest arrest block groups across race.
The overlap would likely be even larger if race-specific measures of crime were used. For example, many of the highest crime spots in Chicago are in parts of South Chicago that have few Hispanic people in them, which limits the possible overlap between Chicago’s top crime spots and the spots that drive Hispanic arrests.
These values, as with all estimates shown in Figure 7, are based on the crime–arrest association obtained from Model 2, which is the model with added control variables.
A notable difference across cities was whether Hispanic disparities in arrest rates relative to Whites/others even existed. We did not examine why, but—prima facie—cities where such disparities were small or nonexistent tended to be those where the Hispanic population has many immigrants, particularly from Mexico.
Arrest warrants served away from the spot where the corresponding crimes occurred are one reason the association is imperfect, but there are likely many factors besides crime that influence the degree of enforcement.
As Eck (2006, p. 119) notes, problem-oriented policing contains a “normative principle” that “police are supposed to reduce problems rather than simply respond to incidents and apply the relevant criminal law.”
Sherman (2007, p. 299) has similarly noted that the biggest benefits for interventions to reduce crime and show efficacy in experimental trials would be those that focus on the “power few” or “the small percentage of places, victims, offenders, police officers or other units in any distribution of crime or injustice which produces the greatest amount of harm.”
The place-based versus person/group-based distinction is somewhat artificial, made for expository reasons, and in any case is not mutually exclusive.
If the racial disparity in commission of serious crimes was greater than the overall racial disparity in crimes, reserving arrests for more serious offenses would increase disparity ratios, while simultaneously shrinking the difference in arrest rates by race. We do not view this hypothetical situation as an objectionable situation. If anything, it highlights that policy makers and academics ought to pay more attention to differences in rates of police contact by race, rather than the more typical focus on the ratios of rates (i.e., disparity ratios).
REFERENCES
- Alpert GP, Smith MR, & Dunham RG (2004). Toward a better benchmark: Assessing the utility of not-at-fault traffic crash data in racial profiling research. Justice Research and Policy, 6(1), 43–69. 10.3818/JRP.6.1.2004.43 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Andresen MA, Curman AS, & Linning SJ (2017). The trajectories of crime at places: Understanding the patterns of disaggregated crime types. Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 33(3), 427–449. 10.1007/s10940-016-9301-1 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Beck AJ, & Blumstein A (2018). Racial disproportionality in U.S. state prisons: Accounting for the effects of racial and ethnic differences in criminal involvement, arrests, sentencing, and time served. Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 34(3), 853–883. 10.1007/s10940-017-9357-6 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Beck B (2020). Policing gentrification: Stops and low-level arrests during demographic change and real estate reinvestment. City & Community, 19(1), 245–272. 10.1111/cico.12473 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Bernasco W, & Steenbeek W (2017). More places than crimes: Implications for evaluating the law of crime concentration at place. Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 33(3), 451–467. 10.1007/s10940-016-93247 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Black DJ, & Reiss AJ (1970). Police control of juveniles. American Sociological Review, 35(1), 63–77. 10.2307/2093853 [DOI] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
- Blalock HM (1967). Toward a theory of minority-group relations. Wiley. [Google Scholar]
- Braga AA, & Bond BJ (2008). Policing crime and disorder hot spots: A randomized controlled trial. Criminology, 46(3), 577–607. 10.1111/j.1745-9125.2008.00124.x [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Braga AA, Brunson RK, & Drakulich KM (2019). Race, place, and effective policing. Annual Review of Sociology, 45(1), 535–555. 10.1146/annurev-soc-073018-022541 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Braga AA, Papachristos AV, & Hureau DM (2014). The effects of hot spots policing on crime: An updated systematic review and meta-analysis. Justice Quarterly, 31(4), 633–663. 10.1080/07418825.2012.673632. [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Braga AA, & Weisburd D (2010). Policing problem places: Crime hot spots and effective prevention. Oxford University Press. [Google Scholar]
- Braga AA, Weisburd DL, Waring EJ, Mazerolle LG, Spelman W, & Gajewski F (1999). Problem-oriented policing in violent crime places: A randomized controlled experiment. Criminology, 37(3), 541–580. 10.1111/j.1745-9125.1999.tb00496.x [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Branas CC, South E, Kondo MC, Hohl BC, Bourgois P, Wiebe DJ, & MacDonald JM (2018). Citywide cluster randomized trial to restore blighted vacant land and its effects on violence, crime, and fear. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 115(12), 2946–2951. 10.1073/pnas.1718503115 [DOI] [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
- Briggs SJ, & Keimig KA (2017). The impact of police deployment on racial disparities in discretionary searches. Race and Justice, 7(3), 256–275. 10.1177/2153368716646163 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Chalfin A, Hansen B, Lerner J, & Parker L (2022). Reducing crime through environmental design: Evidence from a randomized experiment of street lighting in New York City. Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 38(1), 127–157. 10.1007/s10940-020-09490-6 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Chalfin A, & Kaplan J (2021). How many complaints against police officers can be abated by incapacitating afew “bad apples?” Criminology & Public Policy, 20(2), 351–370. 10.1111/1745-9133.12542 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Chalfin A, Kaplan J, & Cuellar M (2021). Measuring marginal crime concentration: A new solution to an old problem. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 58(4), 467–504. 10.1177/0022427820984213 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Chalfin A, LaForest M, & Kaplan J (2021). Can precision policing reduce gun violence? Evidence from “gang takedowns” in New York City. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 40(4), 1047–1082. 10.1002/pam.22323 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Chillar VF (2022). The racial divide at micro places: A pre/post analysis of the effects of the Newark Consent Decree on field inquiries (2015–2017). Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 59(2), 240–276. 10.1177/00224278211030964 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Eck JE (2006). Advocate science, values, and problem-oriented policing: Why problem-oriented policing? In Weisburd D & Braga AA (Eds.), Police innovation: Contrasting perspectives (pp. 117–132). Cambridge University Press. 10.1017/CBO9780511489334.006 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Engel RS, Calnon JM, & Bernard TJ (2002). Theory and racial profiling: Shortcomings and future directions in research. Justice Quarterly, 19(2), 249–273. 10.1080/07418820200095231 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Engel RS, Worden RE, Corsaro N, McManus HD, Reynolds D, Cochran H, Isaza GT, & Calnon Cherkauskas J (2019). Explaining the decision to arrest. In Engel RS, Worden RE, Corsaro N, McManus HD, Reynolds D, Cochran H, Isaza GT, & Calnon Cherkauskas J (Eds.), The power to arrest: Lessons from research (pp. 29–74). Springer International Publishing. 10.1007/978-3-030-17054-7_3 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Fagan J, Braga AA, Brunson RK, & Pattavina A (2016). Stops and stares: Street stops, surveillance, and race in the new policing. Fordham Urban Law Journal, 43, 539–614. [Google Scholar]
- Fagan J, & Davies G (2000). Street stops and broken windows: Terry, race, and disorder in New York City. Fordham Urban Law Journal, 28, 457–504. [Google Scholar]
- Fagan J, Davies G, & Carlis A (2012). Race and selective enforcement in public housing. Journal of Empirical Legal Studies, 9(4), 697–728. 10.1111/j.1740-1461.2012.01272.x [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Fagan J, Geller A, Davies G, & West V (2010). Street stops and broken windows revisited: The demography and logic of proactive policing in a safe and changing city. In Rice SK & White MD (Eds.), Race, ethnicity, and policing: New and essential readings (pp. 309–348). New York University Press. [Google Scholar]
- Federal Bureau of Investigation. (2020). Crime in the United States, 2019. Author. [Google Scholar]
- Geller A, & Fagan J (2010). Pot as pretext: Marijuana, race, and the new disorder in New York City Street policing. Journal of Empirical Legal Studies, 7(4), 591–633. 10.1111/j.1740-1461.2010.01190.x [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Gelman A, Fagan J, & Kiss A (2007). An analysis of the New York City Police Department’s “stop-and-frisk” policy in the context of claims of racial bias. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 102(479), 813–823. 10.1198/016214506000001040 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Goldstein H (1979). Improving policing: A problem-oriented approach. Crime & Delinquency, 25(2), 236–258. 10.1177/001112877902500207 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Goldstein H (1990). Problem-oriented policing. McGraw-Hill. [Google Scholar]
- Hanmer MJ, & Kalkan KO (2013). Behind the curve: Clarifying the best approach to calculating predicted probabilities and marginal effects from limited dependent variable models. American Journal of Political Science, 57(1), 263–277. 10.1111/j.1540-5907.2012.00602.x [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Harcourt BE, & Ludwig J (2007). Reefer madness: Broken windows policing and misdemeanor marijuana arrests in New York City, 1989–2000. Criminology and Public Policy, 6, 165–182. [DOI] [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
- Kane RJ (2002). The social ecology of police misconduct. Criminology, 40(4), 867–896. [Google Scholar]
- King G, Tomz M, & Wittenberg J (2000). Making the most of statistical analyses: Improving interpretation and presentation. American Journal of Political Science, 44(2), 347–361. 10.2307/2669316 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Kirk DS (2008). The neighborhood context of racial and ethnic disparities in arrest. Demography, 45(1), 55–77. 10.1353/dem.2008.0011 [DOI] [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
- Kochel TR, Wilson DB, & Mastrofski SD (2011). Effect of suspect race on officers’ arrest decisions. Criminology, 49(2), 473–512. 10.1111/j.1745-9125.2011.00230.x [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Krivo LJ, Peterson RD, & Kuhl DC (2009). Segregation, racial structure, and neighborhood violent crime. American Journal of Sociology, 114(6), 1765–1802. 10.1086/597285 [DOI] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
- Laniyonu A (2018). Coffee shops and street stops: Policing practices in gentrifying neighborhoods. Urban Affairs Review, 54(5), 898–930. 10.1177/1078087416689728 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Lautenschlager R, & Omori M (2019). Racial threat, social (dis)organization, and the ecology of police: Towards a macro-level understanding of police use-of-force in communities of color. Justice Quarterly, 36(6), 1050–1071. 10.1080/07418825.2018.1480792 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Levchak PJ (2017). Do precinct characteristics influence stop-and-frisk in New York City? A multi-level analysis of post-stop outcomes. Justice Quarterly, 34(3), 377–406. 10.1080/07418825.2016.1162320 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Logan JR, Stults BJ, & Farley R (2004). Segregation of minorities in the metropolis: Two decades of change. Demography, 41(1), 1–22. 10.1353/dem.2004.0007 [DOI] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
- Logan JR, Zhang W, & Alba RD (2002). Immigrant enclaves and ethnic communities in New York and Los Angeles. American Sociological Review, 67(2), 299–322. 10.2307/3088897 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- MacDonald J, & Braga AA (2019). Did post-Floyd et al. reforms reduce racial disparities in NYPD stop, question, and frisk practices? An exploratory analysis using external and internal benchmarks. Justice Quarterly, 36(5), 954–983. [Google Scholar]
- MacDonald J, Branas C, & Stokes R (2019). Changing places: The science and art of new urban planning. Princeton University Press. 10.1515/9780691197791 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- MacDonald J, Fagan J, & Geller A (2016). The effects of local police surges on crime and arrests in New York City. PLoS ONE, 11(6), e0157223. 10.1371/journal.pone.0157223 [DOI] [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
- MacDonald J, Nguyen V, Jensen ST, & Branas CC (2022). Reducing crime by remediating vacant lots: The moderating effect of nearby land uses. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 18, 639–664. 10.1007/s11292-020-09452-9 [DOI] [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
- Manski CF, & Nagin DS (2017). Assessing benefits, costs, and disparate racial impacts of confrontational proactive policing. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 114(35), 9308–9313. 10.1073/pnas.1707215114 [DOI] [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
- Massey DS, & Denton NA (1987). Trends in the residential segregation of blacks, Hispanics, and Asians: 1970–1980. American Sociological Review, 52(6), 802–825. 10.2307/2095836 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Massey DS, & Denton NA (1993). American apartheid: Segregation and the making of the underclass. Harvard University Press. [Google Scholar]
- Mohler G, Brantingham PJ, Carter J, & Short MB (2019). Reducing bias in estimates for the law of crime concentration. Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 35(4), 747–765. 10.1007/s10940-019-09404-1 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- National Academy of Sciences. (2018). Proactive policing: Effects on crime and communities. The National Academies Press. 10.17226/24928 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Neil R, & Winship C (2019). Methodological challenges and opportunities in testing for racial discrimination in policing. Annual Review of Criminology, 2, 73–98. [Google Scholar]
- O’Brien DT (2019). The action is everywhere, but greater at more localized spatial scales: Comparing concentrations of crime across addresses, streets, and neighborhoods. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 56(3), 339–377. 10.1177/0022427818806040 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- O’Brien DT, & Winship C (2017). The gains of greater granularity: The presence and persistence of problem properties in urban neighborhoods. Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 33(3), 649–674. 10.1007/s10940-016-9330-9 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Petrocelli M, Piquero AR, & Smith MR (2003). Conflict theory and racial profiling: An empirical analysis of police traffic stop data. Journal of Criminal Justice, 31(1), 1–11. 10.1016/S0047-2352(02)00195-2 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Portes A, & Rumbaut RG (2006). Immigrant America: A portrait. University of California Press. [Google Scholar]
- Ridgeway G, & MacDonald JM (2010). Methods for assessing racially biased policing. In Rice SK & White MD (Eds.), Race, ethnicity, and policing (pp. 180–204). New York University Press. 10.18574/nyu/9780814776155.003.0007 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Riksheim EC, & Chermak SM (1993). Causes of police behavior revisited. Journal of Criminal Justice, 21(4), 353–382. 10.1016/0047-2352(93)90019-J [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Rinehart Kochel T (2011). Constructing hot spots policing: Unexamined consequences for disadvantaged populations and for police legitimacy. Criminal Justice Policy Review, 22(3), 350–374. 10.1177/0887403410376233 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Roh S, & Robinson M (2009). A geographic approach to racial profiling: The microanalysis and macroanalysis of racial disparity in traffic stops. Police Quarterly, 12(2), 137–169. 10.1177/1098611109332422 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Russell-Brown K (2018). The academic swoon over implicit racial bias: Costs, benefits, and other considerations. Du Bois Review: Social Science Research on Race, 15(1), 185–193. 10.1017/S1742058x18000073 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Sampson RJ (1986). Effects of socioeconomic context on official reaction to juvenile delinquency. American Sociological Review, 51(6), 876–885. 10.2307/2095373 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Sampson RJ (2012). Great American city: Chicago and the enduring neighborhood effect. University of Chicago Press. [Google Scholar]
- Sampson RJ, & Wilson WJ (1995). Toward a theory of race, crime, and urban inequality. In Karp DR (Ed.), Community justice: An emerging field (pp. 97–118). Rowman & Littlefield. [Google Scholar]
- Sampson RJ, Wilson WJ, & Katz H (2018). Reassessing “toward a theory of race, crime, and urban inequality”: Enduring and new challenges in 21st century America. Du Bois Review: Social Science Research on Race, 15(1), 13–34. 10.1017/S1742058x18000140 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Sherman LW (1980). Causes of police behavior: The current state of quantitative research. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 17(1), 69–100. 10.1177/002242788001700106 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Sherman LW (1990). How best to use 5,000 more police; patrols are better than arrests. The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/1990/09/22/opinion/how-best-to-use-5000-more-police-patrols-are-better-than-arrests.html [Google Scholar]
- Sherman LW (2007). The power few: Experimental criminology and the reduction of harm. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 3(4), 299–321. 10.1007/s11292-007-9044-y [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Sherman LW, Gartin PR, & Buerger ME (1989). Hot spots of predatory crime: Routine activities and the criminology of place. Criminology, 27(1), 27–56. 10.1111/j.1745-9125.1989.tb00862.x [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Sherman LW, & Weisburd D (1995). General deterrent effects of police patrol in crime “hot spots”: A randomized, controlled trial. Justice Quarterly, 12(4), 625–648. 10.1080/07418829500096221 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Smith DA (1986). The neighborhood context of police behavior. Crime and Justice, 8, 313–341. [Google Scholar]
- Smith MR, Tillyer R, Lloyd C, & Petrocelli M (2021). Benchmarking disparities in police stops: A comparative application of 2nd and 3rd generation techniques. Justice Quarterly, 38(3), 513–536. 10.1080/07418825.2019.1660395 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- South SJ, Crowder K, & Chavez E (2005). Migration and spatial assimilation among U.S. Latinos: Classical versus segmented trajectories. Demography, 42(3), 497–521. 10.1353/dem.2005.0025 [DOI] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
- Steenbeek W, & Weisburd D (2016). Where the action is in crime? An examination of variability of crime across different spatial units in the Hague, 2001–2009. Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 32(3), 449–469. 10.1007/s10940-015-9276-3 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Stuart F (2016). Down, out, and under arrest: Policing and everyday life in skid row. University of Chicago Press. [Google Scholar]
- Terrill W, & Reisig MD (2003). Neighborhood context and police use of force. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 40(3), 291–321. 10.1177/0022427803253800 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Tomaskovic-Devey D, Mason M, & Zingraff M (2004). Looking for the driving while black phenomena: Conceptualizing racial bias processes and their associated distributions. Police Quarterly, 7(1), 3–29. 10.1177/1098611103259858 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Tregle B, Nix J, & Alpert GP (2019). Disparity does not mean bias: Making sense of observed racial disparities in fatal officer-involved shootings with multiple benchmarks. Journal of Crime and Justice, 42(1), 18–31. 10.1080/0735648X.2018.1547269 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Warren PY, & Tomaskovic-Devey D (2009). Racial profiling and searches: Did the politics of racial profiling change police behavior? Criminology & Public Policy, 8(2), 343–369. 10.1111/j.1745-9133.2009.00556.x [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Weisburd D (2015). The law of crime concentration and the criminology of place. Criminology, 53(2), 133–157. 10.1111/1745-9125.12070 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Weisburd D, Bushway S, Lum C, & Yang S-M (2004). Trajectories of crime at places: A longitudinal study of street segments in the city of Seattle. Criminology, 42(2), 283–322. 10.1111/j.1745-9125.2004.tb00521.x [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Weisburd D, & Eck JE (2004). What can police do to reduce crime, disorder, and fear? The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 593(1), 42–65. 10.1177/0002716203262548 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Weisburd D, Groff ER, & Yang S-M (2012). The criminology of place: Street segments and our understanding of the crime problem. Oxford University Press. [Google Scholar]
- Weisburd D, Telep CW, & Lawton BA (2014). Could innovations in policing have contributed to the New York City crime drop even in a period of declining police strength?: The case of stop, question and frisk as a hot spots policing strategy. Justice Quarterly, 31(1), 129–153. 10.1080/07418825.2012.754920 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Wheeler AP (2020). Allocating police resources while limiting racial inequality. Justice Quarterly, 37(5), 842–868. 10.1080/07418825.2019.1630471 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Wheeler AP, Steenbeek W, & Andresen MA (2018). Testing for similarity in area-based spatial patterns: Alternative methods to Andresen’s spatial point pattern test. Transactions in GIS, 22(3), 760–774. 10.1111/tgis.12341 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Wilcox P, & Cullen FT (2018). Situational opportunity theories of crime. Annual Review of Criminology, 1(1), 123–148. 10.1146/annurev-criminol-032317-092421 [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- Wilson WJ (1987). The truly disadvantaged: The inner city, the underclass, and public policy. University of Chicago Press. [Google Scholar]
- Wilson WJ (1996). When work disappears: The world of the new urban poor. Vintage Books. [Google Scholar]
- Wolfgang ME, Figlio RM, & Sellin T (1972). Delinquency in a birth cohort. University of Chicago Press. [Google Scholar]
Associated Data
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.