http://www.stopbullying.gov
Bullying Among Children and Youth 
with Disabilities and Special Health Needs
Bullying is unwanted, aggressive behavior 
among school aged children that involves 
a real or perceived power imbalance. The 
behavior is repeated, or has the potential 
to be repeated, over time. Both kids who 
are bullied and who bully others may have 
serious, lasting problems. 
In order to be considered bullying, the 
behavior must be aggressive and include:
• An Imbalance of Power: Kids who 
bully use their power—such as physical 
strength, access to embarrassing 
information, or popularity—to control 
or harm others. Power imbalances 
can change over time and in different 
situations, even if they involve the same 
people.
• Repetition: Bullying behaviors happen 
more than once or have the potential to 
happen more than once.
What is known about 
bullying among children 
with disabilities and 
special needs?
Children with disabilities—such as physical, 
developmental, intellectual, emotional, and 
sensory disabilities—are at an increased 
risk of being bullied. Any number of 
factors— physical vulnerability, social skill 
challenges, or intolerant environments—
may increase the risk. Research suggests 
that some children with disabilities may 
bully others as well.
Kids with special health needs, such as 
epilepsy or food allergies, also may be at 
higher risk of being bullied. Bullying can 
include making fun of kids because of their 
allergies or exposing them to the things 
they are allergic to. In these cases, bullying 
is not just serious, it can mean life or death.
Through a small but growing amount of 
research, we have learned that: 
• Although little research has been 
conducted on the relation between 
learning disabilities (LD) and bullying, 
available information indicates that 
children with LD are at greater risk of 
being bullied (Martlew & Hodson, 1991; 
Mishna, 2003; Nabuzoka & Smith, 1993; 
Thompson, Whitney, & Smith, 1994; 
Twyman, Saylor, Saia, Macias, Taylor, & 
Spratt, 2010).  At least one study also has 
found that children with LD may also be 
more likely than other children to bullying 
their peers (Twyman et al., 2010).
1


http://www.stopbullying.gov
• Children with attention deficit or 
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) are more 
likely than other children to be bullied. 
They also are somewhat more likely than 
others to bully their peers (Twyman et al., 
2010; Unnever & Cornell, 2003; Weiner & 
Mak, 2009). 
• Children with autism spectrum disorder 
(ASD) are at increased risk of being 
bullied and ostracized by peers (Twyman 
et al., 2010). In a study of 8-17-year-olds, 
researchers found that children with ASD 
had bully victimization scores that were 
more than three times as high as students 
in a control group with no special needs.   
• Children with epilepsy are more likely 
to be bullied by peers (Hamiwka, Yu, 
Hamiwka, Sherman, Anderson, & Wirrell, 
2009), as are children with medical 
conditions that affect their appearance 
(e.g., cerebral palsy, muscular dystrophy, 
and spina bifida). Frequently, these 
children report being called names related 
to their disability (Dawkins, 1996). 
• Children with hemiplagia (paralysis of one 
side of their body) are more likely than 
other children their age to be victimized 
by peers, to be rated as less popular than 
their peers, and to have fewer friends 
than other children (Yude, Goodman, & 
McConachie, 1998). 
• Children who have diabetes and who are 
dependent on insulin may be especially 
vulnerable to peer bullying (Storch et al., 
2004).
• Children who stutter may be more likely 
than their peers to be bullied. In one 
study, 83 percent of adults who had 
problems with stammering as children 
said that they had been teased or bullied; 
71 percent of those who had been bullied 
said it happened at least once a week 
(Hugh-Jones & Smith, 1999).
How does bullying 
affect children?
Kids who are bullied can experience 
negative physical, school, and mental 
health issues. Kids who are bullied are 
more likely to experience:
• Depression and anxiety, increased 
feelings of sadness and loneliness, 
changes in sleep and eating patterns, 
and loss of interest in activities they used 
to enjoy. These issues may persist into 
adulthood.
• Health complaints
• Decreased academic achievement—GPA 
and standardized test scores—and school 
participation. They are more likely to miss, 
skip, or drop out of school.
Is bullying of kids with 
disabilities covered by 
federal law?
Yes. Bullying behavior may cross the line 
to become “disability harassment,” which 
is prohibited under Section 504 of the 
Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and Title II 
Bullying Among Children and Youth with Disabilities and Special Health Needs
2


http://www.stopbullying.gov
of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 
1990. According to the U.S. Department 
of Education, disability harassment is 
“intimidation or abusive behavior toward 
a student based on disability that creates 
a hostile environment by interfering 
with or denying a student’s participation 
in or receipt of benefits, services, or 
opportunities in the institution’s program” 
(U.S. Department of Education, 2000). 
This behavior can take different forms 
including verbal harassment, physical 
threats, or threatening written statements. 
When a school finds out that harassment 
may have occurred, staff must investigate 
the incident(s) promptly and respond 
appropriately.
Disability harassment can occur in any 
location that is connected with school: in 
classrooms, in the cafeteria, in hallways, 
on the playground or athletic fields, or on a 
school bus. It also can occur during school-
sponsored events (Education Law Center, 
2002).
What can I do if I think my 
child is being bullied or 
is the victim of disability 
harassment?
• Be supportive of your child and encourage 
him or her to describe who was involved 
and how and where the bullying or 
harassment happened. Be sure to tell 
your child that it is not his or her fault 
and that nobody deserves to be bullied 
or harassed. Do not encourage your child 
to fight back. This may make the problem 
much worse. 
• Usually children are able to identify when 
they are being bullied by their peers. 
Sometimes, however, children with 
disabilities do not realize they are being 
targeted. (They may, for example, believe 
that they have a new friend, when in fact, 
this “friend” is making fun of them.) Ask 
your child specific questions about his or 
her friendships and be alert to possible 
signs of bullying–even if your child doesn’t 
label the behaviors as bullying. 
• Talk with your child’s teacher immediately 
to see whether he or she can help to 
resolve the problem quickly. 
• If the bullying or harassment is severe, 
or if the teacher doesn’t fix the problem 
quickly, contact the principal and put 
your concerns in writing. Explain what 
happened in detail and ask for a prompt 
response. Keep a written record of all 
conversations and communications with 
the school. 
• Ask the school district to convene a 
meeting of the Individualized Education 
Program (IEP) team or the Section 504 
team, a group convened to ensure that 
the school district is meeting the needs of 
its students with disabilities. This meeting 
will allow you to explain what has been 
happening and will let the team review 
your child’s IEP or 504 plan and make 
sure that the school is taking steps to 
stop the harassment. If your child needs 
counseling or other supportive services 
because of the harassment, discuss this 
with the team. 
Bullying Among Children and Youth with Disabilities and Special Health Needs
3


http://www.stopbullying.gov
• As the U.S. Department of Education 
(2000) recognizes, “creating a supportive 
school climate is the most important step 
in preventing harassment.”Work with the 
school to help establish a system-wide 
bullying prevention program that includes 
support systems for bullied children. 
• Sometimes children and youth who are 
bullied also bully others. Explore whether 
your child may also be bullying other 
younger, weaker students at school. If so, 
his or her IEP may need to be modified 
to include help to change the aggressive 
behavior. 
• Be persistent. Talk regularly with your 
child and with school staff to see whether 
the behavior has stopped.
What if the bullying or 
harassment does not stop? 
If your school district does not take 
reasonable, appropriate steps to end the 
bullying or harassment of your child, the 
district may be violating federal, state, and 
local laws. For more information about your 
legal rights, you may want to contact: 
The U.S. Department of Education 
Office for Civil Rights 
Phone: (800)-421-3481; 
or Web: http://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/
list/ocr/complaintintro.html
The U.S. Department of Education 
Office of Special Education Programs 
Phone: (202) 245-7468; 
or Web: http://www.ed.gov/about/offices/list/
osers/osep/index.html
The U.S. Department of Justice
Civil Rights Division
Phone: 1-877-292-3804; 
or Web:http://www.justice.gov/crt/
complaint/#three
Bullying Among Children and Youth with Disabilities and Special Health Needs
4


http://www.stopbullying.gov
References and Resources
Dawkins, J. L. (1996). Bullying, physical disability and the paediatric patient. Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology, 
38, 603-612.
Education Law Center (2002). What can you do if your child with a disability is being harassed by other students? (fact sheet). 
Retrieved August 10, 2005, from www.elc-pa.org. 
Gray, W. N., Kahhan, N. A., & Janicke, D. M. (2009).  Peer victimization and pediatric obesity: A review of the literature. Psychology 
in the Schools, 46, 720-727.
Hamiwka, L. D., Yu, C. G., Hamiwka, L. A., Sherman, E. M. S., Anderson, B., & Wirrell, E. (2009). Are children with epilepsy at 
greater risk for bullying than their peers? Epilepsy & Behavior, 15, 500-505.
Hugh-Jones, S. & Smith, P. K. (1999). Self-reports of short and long term effects of bullying on children who stammer. British 
Journal of Educational Psychology, 69, 141-158.
Janssen, I., Craig, W. M., Boyce, W. F., & Pickett, W. (2004). Associations between overweight and obesity within bullying 
behaviors in school-aged children. Pediatrics, 113, 1187-1194.
Lieberman, J., Weiss, C., Furlong, J., Sicherer, M., & Sicherer, S. (2010). Bullying among pediatric patients with food allergy, 
Annals of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology, 105, 282-286.
Martlew, M., & Hodson, J. (1991). Children with mild learning difficulties in an integrated and in a special school: comparisons of 
behaviour, teasing and teachers’ attitudes. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 61, 355-372.
Mishna, F. (2003). Learning disabilities and bullying: Double jeopardy. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 36, 1-15.
Nabuzoka, D. & Smith, P. K. (1993). Sociometric status and social behaviour of children with and without learning difficulties. 
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 34, 1435-1448.
Storch, E. A., Lewin, A. B., Silverstein, J. H., Heidgerken, A. D., Strawser, M. S., Baumeister, A., & Geffken, G. R. (2004a). 
Peer victimization and psychosocial adjustment in children with type 1 diabetes. Clinicial Pediatrics, 43, 467-471.
Storch, E. A., Lewin, A. B., Silverstein, J. H., Heidgerken, A. D., Strawser, M. S., Baumeister, A., & Geffken, G. R. (2004b). 
Social-psychological correlates of peer victimization in children with endocrine disorders. Journal of Pediatrics, 145, 784-784.
Thompson, D., Whitney, I., & Smith, P. (1994). Bullying of children with special needs in mainstream schools. Support for Learning, 
9, 103-106.
Twyman, K. A., Saylor, C. F., Saia, D., Macias, M. M., Taylor, L. A., & Spratt, E. (2010). Bullying and ostracism experiences in 
children with special health care needs. Journal of Developmental Behavioral Pediatrics, 31, 1-8. 
Unnever, J. D., & Cornell, D. G. (2003). Bullying, self-control, and ADHD. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 18, 129-147. 
U.S. Department of Education (2000). Prohibited disability harassment: Reminder of responsibilities under Section 504 of the 
Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act. Retrieved August 10, 2005, from www.ed.gov/about/
offices/list/ocr/docs/disabharassltr.html. 
Wang, J., Iannotti, R. J., & Luk, J. W. (2010). Bullying victimization among underweight and overweight U.S. youth: Differential 
associations for boys and girls. Journal of Adolescent Health, 47, 99-101.
Weiner, J. & Mak, M. (2009). Peer victimization in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Psychology in the Schools, 
46, 116-131.
Yude, C., Goodman, R., & McConachie, H. (1998). Peer problems of children with hemiplegia in mainstream primary schools. 
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 39, 533-541.   
Bullying Among Children and Youth with Disabilities and Special Health Needs
5