1 
 
 
 
by Joy Moses  
 
Race and ethnicity are dominant organizing factors in America.  They impact where a person 
lives when they are born, how they die, and practically everything in between.  Homelessness is 
no exception.  This brief uses state and Continuum of Care (CoC) level data to gain greater 
insights into the intersections of race, ethnicity, and homelessness.   
 
African Americans, Native Americans, and Hispanics/Latinxs are overrepresented among people 
experiencing homelessness at the national level and in various locations throughout the 
country.  In other words, the percentage of each racial/ethnic group that is homeless is greater 
than its percentage of the overall population.  These groups also have high rates of 
homelessness:  that is, within each group, a high percentage of people is homeless.   
 
The story is different for White and Asian Americans.  Those groups are under-represented 
among people experiencing homelessness (the percentage of each that is homeless is smaller 
than its percentage of the overall population).  And they both have relatively low rates of 
homelessness.  Whites, however, are more likely to be unsheltered than other groups.   
 
Representation  
 
Federal measures related to poverty and 
hardship began to be collected in the 1950s 
and 1960s.  Despite periods of progress, 
there are well-established patterns of racial 
disparity that can be seen across them.     
Black and Native Americans have 
disproportionately high adverse outcomes, 
and White Americans have 
disproportionately low ones.  This pattern is 
reflected in the homelessness world.   
 
Overrepresentation/Underrepresentation.  
Although a relatively small percentage of the 
This brief is the third installment of the Alliance’s Demographic Data Project.  It analyzes 
2018 Point-in-Time demographic data provided by HUD.  
Demographic Data Project: Race, 
Ethnicity, and Homelessness 
49%
40%
22%
3%
1%
0%
20%
40%
60%
White
Black
Hispanic
Native American
Asian
Race/Ethnicity of People Experiencing 
Homelessness (National-Level)
Population Share


2 
 
national population (13 percent), Black people are homeless in all but two Continuums of Care 
(CoC).  They are overrepresented in every state.  There are only eight CoCs in which Black 
people are under- or equally represented, most of which have very small Black populations.    
The most significant exception is the Florence/Northwest Alabama CoC, where Black people are 
nine percent of both the general and homeless populations. 
 
Although a small slice of the national population (1.3 percent), there are places in the country 
where Native Americans are a significant portion of the homeless population.  In South Dakota, 
Alaska, New Mexico, Montana, North Dakota, Oklahoma, and Minnesota, Native Americans 
make up at least 10 percent of people experiencing homelessness.  Certain CoCs within those 
states also have Native Americans significantly represented within their homeless counts. 
 
White people experience homelessness in every CoC, and they are underrepresented in 93 
percent of them.  White Americans are underrepresented in the homeless counts of every 
state.  They make up 76 percent of the general population but only 49 percent of the homeless 
population, nationally.   
 
Asian Americans are generally underrepresented in the homeless population and are over-
represented in only five CoCs.  Hispanics/Latinxs are overrepresented nationally and across 40 
percent of CoCs.  However, the degree to which they are overrepresented tends to be dwarfed 
by African Americans. 
 
Majority Representation.  In some jurisdictions, a racial/ethnic group’s representation is large, 
so large that its members are the lion’s share of people experiencing homelessness.  We 
examined states and CoCs where a singular group makes up more than 50 percent of the 
people experiencing homelessness. 
 
Black people have majority status in 12 states and roughly a quarter of all CoCs.  Although this is 
a relatively small number of places, the CoCs encompass the nation’s capital and other major 
cities such as Detroit, Atlanta, Memphis, Charlotte, St. Louis, Philadelphia, New York City, 
Chicago, Baltimore, Cleveland, Montgomery, Raleigh, New Orleans, Dallas, and Minneapolis.   
 
Meanwhile, most people experiencing homelessness are White, and Whites are the majority of 
people experiencing homelessness in 32 states and a little over 60 percent of CoCs.  However, 
in contrast to African Americans, these CoCs tend to be rural and suburban.   
 
Other groups are rarely the majority of people experiencing homelessness within a jurisdiction.  
Native Americans are the majority in the state of South Dakota, which is also a singular CoC.  
Hispanics/Latinxs are the majority in only 4 CoCs outside of Puerto Rico. 
 


3 
 
Rates of Homelessness 
 
Rates of homelessness offer another view of racial and ethnic disparities.  This brief examines 
how many of each group is homeless per 10,000 people in the general population in a 
jurisdiction.   
 
African Americans.  Among the nation’s racial and ethnic groups, Black Americans have the 
highest rate of homelessness.  Fifty-four out of every 10,000 Black people in the United States 
were homeless during the 2018 point-in-time count.   
 
Although this number is large, there are states and CoCs with much higher rates.    The highest 
rates are found in the northeast and west.  For instance, New York is the state that is number 
one in Black homelessness (208 people per 10,000).  Among CoCs, a subset in California have 
the highest Black homeless rates in the country: 
 
CoC 
Black Homeless Rate per 
10,000 People in the 
General Population 
Watsonville/Santa 
Cruz City & County 
710 people  
San Francisco 
591 people 
Marin County 
346 people 
Santa Rosa 
305 people 
Salinas/Monterey, 
San Benito Counties 
286 people 
Los Angeles City & 
County 
284 people 
 
These areas, like other parts of the northeast and west, have housing costs that are significantly 
higher than those in other parts of the country.  Various researchers have found a link between 
increased housing costs and increased homelessness (See Glynn and Casey 2018; Quigley and 
Raphael 2001).   
 
Massachusetts reflects a typical pattern of high housing costs, high homeless rates, and 
disproportionate racial and ethnic minority homelessness.    According to the National Low 
Income Housing Coalition, the state has the third-highest housing wage (income level required 
to comfortably afford housing) in the country.  Homelessness is elevated among all racial 
groups in the state, which has the 7th highest homeless rate in the country (29 per 10,000 
people).   Massachusetts is number one in the country in its rate of Hispanic/Latinx 


4 
 
homelessness (107 per 10,000 people).  Black people have the highest rate, however, with 125 
people experiencing homelessness per 10,000 people in the general population.   
 
Southern and midwestern states have lower rates of Black homelessness than other regions.  
Mississippi (6 per 10,000 people) has the lowest Black homelessness rate in the country.  
However, fitting a common pattern, other racial/ethnic groups within the state have even lower 
rates of homelessness—White Americans (4 per 10,000), Hispanics/Latinxs (5 per 10,000), and 
Asian Americans (4 per 10,000).   
 
Hispanics/Latinxs.  At the national 
level, 20 Hispanics/Latinxs 
experience homelessness out of 
every 10,000 people in the general 
population.  This is higher than both 
the rate for Whites and the national 
overall average rate of 
homelessness.  Hispanic/Latinx 
homelessness rates are particularly 
high in northeastern and western 
regions with high housing costs—
fitting patterns that exist for all the 
racial groups discussed in this brief.  
And the rate of Hispanic/Latinx 
homelessness is particularly high.  
Outside of the northeast and western regions, Hispanic/Latinx homeless rates are unusually 
high in North Dakota (39 out of 10,000 people) and South Dakota (28 out of 10,000 people). 
 
It should be noted that Hispanic and Latinx are ethnic categories which describe the places 
where an individual or the individuals’ parents or ancestors were born—either a Spanish-
speaking nation or a nation in Latin America.   People within these categories can be of any race 
(53 percent of Hispanics/Latinxs identify as White and 37 percent identify as “some other 
race”)(Humes, 2011).  There is not information available on geographic origin or other 
subgroups within the Hispanic/Latinx population, which limits our understanding of 
homelessness among Hispanics/Latinxs. 
 
54
20
11
4
0
20
40
60
Black
Hispanic/Latinx
White
Asian
Homeless Rates 
(National-Level)
Homeless Rate


5 
 
Native Americans.  There is not consistent general population data on Native Americans, and 
therefore this analysis was not able to examine rates of homelessness among that group at the 
state and CoC levels1.    
 
National-level data from the American Community Survey (ACS) and the decennial Census 
differ, but both instruments point to Native Americans having high rates of homelessness.  ACS 
numbers place the group as having the highest rates in the country while the decennial Census 
suggest their rates are second only to Black Americans. 
 
Other data also indicate challenges for Native Americans.  In a recent survey of tribal housing 
officials, 88 percent said households in their areas experience homelessness—sleeping in 
emergency shelters, on the streets, or in other places not fit for human habitation (Biess, 2017).  
Although not all Native Americans live in tribal areas, for those that do, doubling up is also 
common.  Between 3.6 and 7.2 percent are in such situations (HUD, Tribal Areas, 2017).  Those 
living in urban areas are also at high risk of homelessness and doubling up (HUD, Urban Areas, 
2017). 
 
White Americans.  White Americans have lower rates of homelessness.  A national-level view 
reveals that 11 White people experience homelessness out of every 10,000 people in the 
general population.  As with other groups, this figure masks variations at the local level.   
 
Some CoCs have high rates of White homelessness.  A handful has White rates that are even 
higher than 54, the concerning national-level rate for Black Americans (the entire list follows): 
 
CoC 
White Homeless Rate 
per 10,000 People in the 
General Population 
MA-502—Lynn 
177 people 
FL-604—Monroe County 
128 people 
CA-613—Imperial 
County 
111 people 
CA-529—Lake County 
  96 people 
CA-509—Mendocino 
  91 people 
MA-508—Lowell County 
  87 people 
CA-506—
Salinas/Monterey, San 
Benito counties 
  77 people 
                                                          
1 The major sources of data on the population, the Census’ American Community Survey 5 Year Estimates and the 
decennial Census, differ greatly in their methods of assessment and in the numbers they collect for Native 
Americans, making state and local rate estimates unreliable for the racial group. 
 


6 
 
MA-504--Springfield 
  69 people 
CA-508—Watsonville 
  65 people 
MA-500—Boston 
  63 people 
CA-501—San Francisco 
  56 people 
 
  
These areas with extraordinarily high rates of White homelessness typically share another 
characteristic—even higher rates of homelessness among Black, Native American, and 
Hispanic/Latinx residents.    
 
White homeless rates rarely surpass those of African Americans, Native Americans, and 
Hispanics/Latinxs.  But this is the case in four CoCs:  1) FL-604 (Monroe County), 2) MA-502 
(Lynn), 3) MI-513 (Marquette, Ager Counties), and 4) NY-520 (Franklin, Essex Counties).   
 
As noted above, most Hispanics/Latinxs identify as White and are therefore included in this 
category.  Some government instruments have a category for non-Hispanic/Latinx Whites.  
HUD’s Point-in-Time Count is not one of them.  If available, such information would provide 
greater insights into White homelessness. 
 
Asian Americans.  At the national level, Asian Americans have the lowest rate of homelessness 
(4 out of every 10,000 people in the general population).  And, compared to all other 
racial/ethnic groups, Asian Americans have the lowest rates of homelessness in 49 states and 
about 95 percent of CoCs. 
 
Like Hispanics/Latinxs, data on the many and diverse subgroups of Asian Americans is 
unavailable.  Thus, the Asian American story may be more complex with some subgroups 
having greater needs for assistance. 
 
Individuals and People in Families 
 
Among Whites, Native Americans, and Asian Americans, individual adults are clearly the 
majority of those experiencing homelessness.  Families with children are only 23 to 25 percent 
of their group counts.  For other racial and ethnic groups, the story is somewhat different.  Far 
more people in families with children are represented within their homeless populations.  
Forty-three percent of Hispanics/Latinxs and 41 percent of African Americans experiencing 
homelessness are in families.  For all groups, there are places in the country that are exceptions 
to the national picture.     
 
The balance of individuals versus people in families within a jurisdiction impacts efforts to 
prevent and end homelessness.   It influences the type of housing needed (single rooms, 
multiple bedrooms, or other) and the related costs of that housing.  It further determines the 


7 
 
kinds of services necessary and available to stabilize people experiencing homelessness.  For 
example, school transportation, childcare, child welfare, and family-targeted income supports 
may be part of the unique needs of families with children. 
 
Homeless Assistance 
 
Much of this brief focuses on who becomes homeless, implicating societal factors external to 
homeless assistance systems.  But what role, if any, do homeless service providers play in 
creating and maintaining inequality?  Since providing shelter is one of the system’s primary 
functions, examining unsheltered rates might be one way to identify whether homeless systems 
contribute to racial or ethnic disparities.   
 
Native Americans stand out.  The group has the highest percentage of people living 
unsheltered:  50 percent.  The reason(s) for this distinction should be explored. 
 
Otherwise, typical patterns of inequality don’t seem to apply to unsheltered rates.  Black 
Americans are not disproportionately harmed, being the group most likely to receive shelter 
services.  Only 23 percent are unsheltered.  And non-Hispanic/Latinx and Hispanic/Latinx 
unsheltered rates are practically equal, being 35 percent and 36 percent respectively. 
 
Clearly, data other than unsheltered rates should be examined.  Various actors are posing more 
in-depth questions to help evaluate inequities in homeless services.  For example, the Alliance’s 
Racial Equality Network created a toolkit for state and local systems that asks them to consider 
if disparities exist in areas such as who gets into permanent housing and who returns to 
homelessness. Other areas that localities can examine to determine if race, ethnicity, 
stereotypes, and biases influence how assistance is delivered include:   
 
1) Shelter rules; 
2) Availability of social services; 
3) Decisions about where to locate shelters and services; 
4) Amount of effort and investment communities/states put into ending homelessness; 
5) Investment in the workforce serving people experiencing homelessness;  
6) Willingness of more advantaged groups to seek shelter and assistance from providers 
associated with helping disadvantaged groups; 
7) Overall dignity afforded to those experiencing homelessness by employees, neighbors, 
law enforcement, and others. 
 
And, in turn, these factors can influence homeless program service delivery and individual 
outcomes.  Considerations of such issues are growing amongst providers.  However, far more 
data collection and research are needed to understand them fully. 
 


8 
 
About this Data 
 
The data in this brief comes from HUD’s 2018 Point-in-Time Count.  The information was self-
reported by the consumer or based on observational data collected by a volunteer conducting 
surveys for the Count.  The data may also have been extrapolated to estimate a total number of 
people experiencing homelessness in areas too large for a full street count.    
 
Because CoCs report the data to HUD in aggregate, there are limitations on the ability to fully 
analyze the data at the intersections of identity.  For example, the Alliance was unable to 
produce analysis that focused on White women or Native Americans over the age of 55.   
 
The rate information partially relies on the Census Bureau’s Annual Community Survey (ACS) 5-
year Estimates.  This tool relies on sampling and offers subgroup population estimates.  
Although its sample size is relatively large, its reach is smaller than the decennial Census.  It 
becomes less reliable with smaller groups and in areas with lower numbers of people.  Notable, 
there is a significant gap between the number of Native Americans counted in the decennial 
Census and ACS, perhaps reflecting an undercount within the latter. 
 
Despite these limitations, this data from HUD and the Census Bureau offer the most 
comprehensive country-wide data available on the various racial and ethnic groups 
experiencing homelessness.  It can be a starting point for communities across the country to 
discuss how to improve assistance to vulnerable populations.   
 
Works Cited 
 
Biess, Jennifer. (2017).  Homelessness in Indian Country is a Hidden, But Critical, Problem:  Urban 
Institute. 
 
DeWeaver, Norman. (2013). American Community Survey Data on the American Indian/Alaska 
Native Population: A Look Behind the Numbers:  National Congress of American Indian Policy 
Research Center. 
 
Glynn, Chris and Alexander Casey. (2018). Homelessness Rises Faster Where Rent Exceeds a 
Third of Income:  Zillow Research. 
 
Humes, Karen, Nicholas Jones, and Roberto Ramirez.  (2011).  Overview of Race and Hispanic 
Origin:  2010:  U.S. Census Bureau. 
 
National Low Income Housing Coalition. (2019). Out of Reach. 
 
Quigley, John, and Steven Raphael. (2001). The Economics of Homelessness:  The Evidence from 
North America:  European Journal of Housing Policy, 1(3).  
 


9 
 
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.  (2017).  Housing Needs of American 
Indians and Alaska Natives in Tribal Areas: A Report from the Assessment of American Indian, Alaska 
Native, and Native Hawaiian Housing Needs. 
 
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.  (2017).  Housing Needs of American Indians 
and Alaska Natives in Urban Areas: A Report from the Assessment of American Indian, Alaska Native, 
and Native Hawaiian Housing Needs