Her Home 
HOUSING FINANCE FOR WOMEN
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This report was supported by the Umbrella Facility for Gender Equality (UFGE), a multi-donor trust fund administered 
by the World Bank to advance gender equality and women’s empowerment through experimentation and knowledge 
creation to help governments and the private sector focus policy and programs on scalable solutions with sustainable 
outcomes. The UFGE is supported with generous contributions from Australia, Canada, Denmark, Finland, Germany, 
Iceland, Latvia, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom, United States, and the Bill & 
Melinda Gates Foundation.
This publication was prepared by an International Finance Corporation and World Bank team led by Henriette Kolb, 
Nathalie Hoffmann, William Britt Gwinner, Jessica Schnabel, Montserrat Ganuza, Friedemann Roy, Jose Felix Etchegoyen, 
Zahia Msuya Lolila, Carol Tejero, Roshin Mathai Joseph, Joanna Romero, Heather Mae Kipnis, Aphichoke Kotikula, Sharmila 
Hardi, Henry Pulizzi, Rob Wright, Bhattiprolu Balachandra Murti, and by the A2F Consulting team consisting of Modibo 
Camara, Kate Ivey, Rebati Mendali, Alex Proaño.
ABOUT IFC
IFC—a sister organization of the World Bank and member of the World Bank Group—is the largest global development 
institution focused on the private sector in emerging markets. We work with more than 2,000 businesses worldwide, 
using our capital, expertise, and influence to create markets and opportunities where they are needed most. In fiscal year 
2019, we delivered more than $19 billion in long-term financing for developing countries, leveraging the power of the 
private sector to end extreme poverty and boost shared prosperity. For more information, visit www.ifc.org
COPYRIGHT AND DISCLAIMER NOTICE
© International Finance Corporation 2019. All rights reserved.
2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20433
Internet: www.ifc.org 
The material in this work is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission may 
be a violation of applicable law. IFC encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce 
portions of the work promptly, and when the reproduction is for educational and non-commercial purposes, without a 
fee, subject to such attributions and notices as we may reasonably require.
IFC does not guarantee the accuracy, reliability or completeness of the content included in this work, or for the 
conclusions or judgments described herein, and accepts no responsibility or liability for any omissions or errors (including, 
without limitation, typographical errors and technical errors) in the content whatsoever or for reliance thereon. The 
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment 
on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such 
boundaries. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this volume do not necessarily reflect the views of 
the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. 
The contents of this work are intended for general informational purposes only and are not intended to constitute legal, 
securities, or investment advice, an opinion regarding the appropriateness of any investment, or a solicitation of any type. 
IFC or its affiliates may have an investment in, provide other advice or services to, or otherwise have a financial interest in, 
certain of the companies and parties (including named herein). 
All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to IFC Communications, 2121 
Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20433.
International Finance Corporation is an international organization established by Articles of Agreement among its 
member countries, and a member of the World Bank Group. All names, logos and trademarks are the property of IFC 
and you may not use any of such materials for any purpose without the express written consent of IFC. Additionally, 
“International Finance Corporation” and “IFC” are registered trademarks of IFC and are protected under international law.
All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to IFC Communications, 2121 
Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20433.
November 2019


FOREWORD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
1.	
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
	
Overall Findings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
	
Insights At-a-glance. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
2.	
INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
	
The Challenge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
	
Overall Findings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
3. 	 COLOMBIA. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
	
Key Findings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
	
Market Profile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
	
Current Access to Housing Finance and Supply. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
	
Barriers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
	
Market Opportunities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.	
INDIA. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
	
Key Findings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
	
Market Profile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
	
Current Access to Housing Finance and Supply. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
	
Barriers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
	
Market Opportunities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.	
KENYA. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
	
Key Findings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
	
Market Profile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
	
Current Access to Housing Finance and Supply. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
	
Barriers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
	
Market Opportunities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.	
THE BUSINESS CASE FOR WOMEN’S HOUSING . . . . . . . . . . . . 
	
FINANCE PROGRAMS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45.
	
Current Barriers to Women’s Housing Finance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
	
Despite Barriers, This is a Market Worth Addressing. . . . . . . . . . 47
	
Lessons Learned: The Results of Current. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
	
	
Women-Focused Banking Initiatives. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
	
Moving Forward: Addressing the Needs of. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
	
	
Women in Housing Finance. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
NOTES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
Table of Contents
i


ii


Foreword
Women represent half of the world’s population—and half of its economic potential. 
But they are far less likely than men to own a home. That’s because women too often 
work in informal jobs, are unfamiliar with formal loan application procedures, or are 
stifled by traditional cultural norms. 
The development of new public policies and financial products and services that increase 
women’s access to housing finance can yield benefits to local and national economies. 
Women who own their homes enjoy greater financial stability and independence and 
contribute more to their community’s economies. At the same time, financial institutions 
that offer housing finance services focused on women are better positioned to seize on 
opportunities in a growing market. 
IFC’s new market study, Her Home: Housing Finance for Women, sheds light on the 
women’s housing finance market in three countries: Colombia, India, and Kenya. 
These countries have implemented a variety of policies to increase women’s access to 
housing and housing finance. 
Her Home provides country-specific insights into the barriers women currently face 
in obtaining housing finance, details the size and nature of women’s housing finance 
markets, and offers recommendations for policymakers and financial institutions to 
overcome barriers, improve women’s access to finance, and ultimately improve the 
lives of millions of women and their families around the world. 
A few of the study’s more noteworthy findings:
•	 Women who are self-employed or work in the informal job sector often do not 
have income levels and income documentation that meet financial institutions’ 
lending requirements. 
•	 Women frequently lack house titles in their names, which is currently required by 
financial institutions to serve as collateral.
•	 The estimated market size for women’s housing loans is $23 billion in Colombia, 
$32.3 billion in India, and $14.8 billion in Kenya—despite the hurdles women face.
•	 Policies and financial products that address the specific needs of the women’s 
housing finance market exist, but on a very small scale.
We hope this report spearheads further innovation, collaboration, and conversation 
in the housing finance industry to better serve women customers, improve their lives, 
and support sustainable economic growth around the world.  
Paulo de Bolle
Senior Director, Financial Institutions Group, IFC 
1


1. Executive Summary
23 
BILLION US$
Estimated market 
size for women 
housing loans
16 
PERCENT
of women used 
formal loans to 
purchase housing
77 
PERCENT
of women’s housing 
loans were funded
by banks
25,927 
US$
Average cost of 
home purchase for 
women 
63 
PERCENT
loan-to-disposable-
income ratio for 
women
There is high demand for housing loans among women 
in Colombia, but they remain constrained by unstable 
income and by being unable to fulfill loan approval 
requirements. In all, 20 percent of female-headed 
households (FHH) and 44 percent of joint 
decision-making households plan to purchase 
a home in the next five years and 23 percent 
plan to make home improvements. Banks are 
the main source of housing loans preferred by 
77 percent of women, and houses are the preferred dwelling 
type (73 percent). The market for women in Colombia is 
estimated at approximately $23 billion, yet women remain 
disadvantaged in obtaining housing loans because 
of economic inequalities, including lower income 
and fewer formal employment opportunities. 
 
IFC conducted a market study of housing finance for women in three countries where cultural, 
institutional, and policy barriers to women’s access to housing finance have been identified, as 
have opportunities for financial institutions to tap this potential market. The three countries are 
Colombia (GDP per capita $14,999), India (GDP per capita $7,761), and Kenya (GDP per capita $3,461) 
(Source: World Bank International Comparison Program database, 2018).
The study’s conclusions include recommendations for lenders to develop tailored housing finance 
offerings for women customers. Also included are recommendations for policymakers to develop 
reforms geared to improve market conditions and ease women’s access to housing loans. 
The study includes interviews with 2,000 low- and middle-income households in these three 
countries. The purpose of the interviews was to assess the demand pattern for housing and 
housing finance. In addition, interviews with major financial institutions active in housing finance 
were carried out, as were meetings with government officials and policy stakeholders. 
*All denominations are in US dollars.
  COLOMBIA
2


  INDIA
32. 3 
BILLION US$
Estimated market 
size for women 
housing loans: US$ 
billion
13 
PERCENT
of women used 
formal loans to 
purchase housing
83 
PERCENT
of women’s housing 
loans were funded
by banks
11,710
US$
Average cost of 
home purchase for 
women 
50 
PERCENT
loan-to-disposable-
income ratio for 
women
The estimated demand for women housing loans in 
India totals $32. 3 billion. This demand is largely for 
apartments (84 percent), rather than houses. 
Women chiefly prefer banks (83 percent) 
to other financial institutions for housing 
finance. The main barriers to women’s 
access to housing finance are insufficient 
income and traditional gender norms. For 
instance, in the demand survey, 52 percent of 
households had no female involvement in decision-making. 
The government’s Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme provides 
a subsidized interest rate on housing loans if a 
woman will hold the title to the new property. 
The program, although bringing more women 
into the housing finance market, is only able to 
reach a small portion of the potential female 
borrowers. Thus, a gap remains.
  KENYA
14. 8 
BILLION US$
Estimated market 
size for women 
housing loans: US$ 
billion
4 
PERCENT
of women used 
formal loans to 
purchase housing
57 
PERCENT
of women’s housing 
loans were funded
by SACCOs
24,808 
US$
Average cost of home 
purchase for women: 
50 
PERCENT
loan-to-disposable-
income ratio for 
women
Kenya has a relatively untapped housing finance 
market with significant unmet demand for housing 
finance among women. There is high demand among 
women in Kenya for housing finance products. 
Thirty-three percent of female-headed 
households and 66 percent of joint-decision-
making households intend to purchase 
housing in the next five years and 25 percent 
plan to make home improvements. The 
demand for housing finance among women 
in Kenya is estimated at $14. 8 billion. The 
overwhelming majority of women want to purchase a 
house (91 percent), rather than an apartment. Yet, despite 
high demand, women remain constrained by low income 
and inability to meet bank requirements. The majority 
of women use Savings and Credit Cooperative 
Societies (SACCOs) for housing finance needs, 
primarily because they cannot meet the down 
payment or provide documents required by 
banks. Traditional roles also contribute to 
women not having equal access to housing 
finance. 
3


EXECUTIVE SUMMARY CONTINUED
Overall Findings
Lack of appropriate financial means to obtain 
adequate housing is a wide economic problem in the 
developing world. In addition to supply and demand 
issues, macroeconomic instability, insufficient regulatory 
framework, and limited capital market development affect 
the availability of adequate housing finance. Women are 
relatively disadvantaged in accessing property and quality 
housing due to socioeconomic and cultural practices, as 
well as less favorable gender policies and regulations.
Female-headed households, or those in which a woman 
is the primary income earner or decision-maker, 
represent a large, unserved market in each of the 
study countries. These households constitute 26 percent 
of households in Colombia, 25 percent in Kenya, and 9 
percent in India. In each of these countries, female-headed 
households are the most disadvantaged group in terms of 
income, income documentation, property ownership and 
titling, past experience with banks, and other factors that 
affect access to housing finance. Overall, self-employment 
is the most common source of employment for female-
headed households, though this differs by country and by 
income level. In Colombia 45 percent of women in female-
headed households are self-employed or permanent 
employees. In Kenya, that figure stands at 31 percent. In 
India, 48 percent of women do not work, while 36 percent 
are mainly permanent employees. 
Despite barriers, a relatively large number of women 
in female-headed households plan to apply for housing 
loans in the next five years. While only a small percentage 
of female-headed households have applied for housing 
loans in the past (eight percent in Colombia, six percent 
in Kenya, and five percent in India), a significantly larger 
portion expects to do so in the next five years (20 percent in 
Colombia, 33 percent in Kenya, and five percent in India). 
Facilitating women’s access to housing finance could 
potentially improve their economic and social well-
being. Higher quality housing can connect women to new 
employment opportunities, as well as increase their safety 
and security. Policies and programs that encourage housing 
finance for women can thus trigger an upward spiral of 
community development, household income, and overall 
stability.
Developing housing finance value propositions for 
women also could benefit financial institutions. 
While FIs report that internal policies and practices are 
gender neutral, these gender-neutral processes may 
themselves inherently disadvantage women. Income 
disparities, less formal income sources, less access to 
property titling documentation, and other issues rooted in 
tradition make it more difficult for women to meet loan 
approval requirements. However, if banks and financial 
institutions can tailor products, services and perhaps 
processes that consider women’s needs, they can tap 
into this large market, adding value to their bottom line. 
Evidence supporting these potential results is already in the 
marketplace. Financial institutions that have tailored value 
propositions to women-owned small- and medium-size 
businesses, for example, report business growth coupled 
with a low rate of non-performing loans (NPLs).
Financial institutions can adopt marketing strategies 
as well as new housing finance products and services 
geared to women, while public policies support 
women’s access to housing finance in general. In terms 
of products, female-headed households and joint decision-
making households display a need for home improvement 
loans, incremental construction loans, and home purchase 
loans. Credit enhancement programs, such as risk sharing 
and credit lines, could help women meet down payment 
requirements. In terms of developing their “women’s 
market” strategy, financial institutions could initiate 
gender sensitivity training and communications, as well 
as develop gender-specific marketing. Research indicates 
that women respond to “relationship” marketing, whether 
word-of-mouth endorsements from people they know or 
information offered directly by financial institutions that 
they have come to know and trust.
4


5


INSIGHTS AT-A-GLANCE 
The market for financial services to help women purchase 
and renovate their homes is large and growing in 
developing countries. It represents a significant business 
opportunity for financial institutions and policymakers 
who are willing to address patriarchal biases and pursue 
gender equity. Women comprise half of the population of 
the world but are only a fraction of home and property 
owners even as they command significant economic 
influence and are prominent household decision makers.
This report looks at the market for women’s housing 
finance in Colombia, India, and Kenya — each of which 
is valued in the tens of billions of dollars — and identifies 
specific, practical steps that can be taken to mollify 
practices that have handicapped women’s access 
to financial services. The report explores the social, 
economic, and business benefits that accrue from a 
more equitable lending environment, including self-
sufficiency and personal responsibility. Lastly, it offers 
recommendations for attracting and retaining women as 
financial services customers and as vital contributors to 
the broad economy and their local communities.
 
1 
UNEQUAL REPRESENTATION
Women comprise half of the population but only a 
small fraction of property owners. 
2 
UNDERSERVED AND 
DISADVANTAGED
Female-headed households and households where 
women are primary income earners and decision-
makers constitute 26 percent of households in 
Colombia, 25 percent in Kenya, and 9 percent in India, 
and are largely unserved by financial institutions.
3 
LOW INCOME/LOW ACCESS
Female-headed households often work in the 
informal economy and have lower household income 
levels than those headed by men or by joint-decision 
making households. As a result, women with informal 
employment often do not meet the requirements to 
borrow money and access financial services.
10 Key Insights 
About Women And 
Housing Finance
6


4 
THE DOCUMENTATION 
DISADVANTAGE
In each of the three study countries, female-headed 
households frequently lack income documentation 
and other paperwork required to access financial 
services.
5 
LACK OF COLLATERAL 
CLOSES DOORS
Access to housing finance requires collateral such as 
land title, property rights, and other large assets, which 
women lack. In addition, lower levels of education 
and limited financial literacy can restrain women from 
accessing housing finance and, in turn, quality housing. 
6 
SCARCE RESOURCES TO 
FINANCE HOUSING
In addition to supply and demand issues that 
disproportionately encumber women’s access 
to financial services, macroeconomic instability, 
insufficient regulations, and limited capital market 
maturity in developing countries affect the availability 
of adequate housing finances. 
7 
OPTIMISM IN THE FACE 
OF OBSTACLES
Though only a small percentage of female-headed 
households have applied for housing loans in the past 
(eight percent in Colombia, six percent in Kenya, and five 
percent in India), a significantly larger portion expect to 
do so in the next five years (20 percent in Colombia, 33 
percent in Kenya, and five percent in India). 
8 
AN UPWARD SPIRAL 
Initiatives that encourage housing finance for women 
can invigorate community development, encourage 
safer neighborhoods, bolster incomes, and potentially 
lead to employment opportunities and greater 
financial stability.
9 
CUSTOMIZING WORKS
Women face different obstacles and have different 
needs. If banks and financial institutions train 
staff and tailor products, services, and processes 
to consider women’s needs, they can tap into a 
large market and add value to their bottom line. 
Female-headed households show a need for home 
improvement loans, incremental construction loans, 
and home purchase loans.
10 
FEWER NPLS
Financial institutions that have tailored value 
propositions to women-owned small- and medium-
size businesses report business growth coupled with 
a low rate of non-performing loans (NPLs).
7


8


The Challenge 
Lack of affordable housing is a worldwide economic 
problem. A recent McKinsey study (2016) estimated that 
approximately 330 million urban households around the 
world lack the appropriate financial means to obtain 
adequate housing (Source: McKinsey Global Institute, 2014, 
A Blueprint for Addressing the Global Affordable Housing 
Challenge). Several factors including the high cost of 
infrastructure, low level of investment, difficulties accessing 
financial resources, and increasing costs of building materials 
make it difficult for poor and middle-income households to 
afford a house. Due to increasing population and rural-urban 
migration, an affordable housing shortage has been more 
severe in urban areas compared to rural areas. 
Women are typically disadvantaged in terms of access 
to property and quality housing. Several studies show 
that women own less than two percent of titled property 
in the developing world (Source: Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations, FAO, 2002, Women’s 
Right to Land: A Human Right). Factors contributing to the 
low ownership rate include socioeconomic circumstances, 
patriarchal attitudes, cultural practices, less favorable 
policies and regulations, and lack of political commitment 
(Source: UN Habitat, 2012, Gender Issue Guide: Housing and 
Slum Upgrading). To date, several countries have adopted 
statutory rights and constitutional equality clauses to 
challenge the disadvantages women face (Source: United 
Nations, 2012, Women and the Right to Adequate Housing). 
Yet social and cultural norms favoring male ownership and 
lack of political commitment impede the enforcement and 
practice of the new laws. 
Women’s access to housing finance is further limited in 
developing countries. Housing finance requires collateral 
such as land title, property rights, and other large assets, 
which women lack. In addition, lower levels of education, 
limited financial literacy, and lower income levels, combined 
with mobility constraints and limited access to information, 
often restrain women from accessing housing finance and, 
in turn, quality housing. What’s more, women are less able 
to access adequate financial services because of unfavorable 
legal and customary practices.
2. Introduction
Defining Female-Headed Households
There is no one standard definition of female-headed households. Following standard 
practice for survey analysis, the study defines a female-headed household as a household 
in which a woman is the primary decision-maker or income earner. The traditional 
classification of household headship is the “breadwinner” definition that defines the 
household head as the one who contributes the most to household income. Based on 
this definition, female-headed households were mainly defined by the absence of a 
man (due to divorce, death, migration, etc.). In recent years, this definition has been 
recognized as insufficient to capture the role of women within the household. It is 
estimated that, globally, women make up to 80 percent of purchasing decisions (Source: 
The Economist. A Guide to Womenomics: Women and the World Economy). Thus, survey-
based analysis typically classifies households according to both income contribution and 
decision-making authority, as is done in this study. Relevant studies cited follow a similar 
definition. For instance, the Indian Population and Household Census considers a female 
household head if “she bears the chief responsibility for managing the affairs of the 
household and takes decision on behalf of the household” (Source: Government of India 
Population and Housing Census 2011).
9


INTRODUCTION CONTINUED
PURPOSE OF THE STUDY
The study on which this report is based examines the 
housing finance market for women and provides guidance 
on specific barriers to women’s access to housing 
finance, the market size that women borrowers might 
present to the industry, and the possible need for specific 
gender-related housing finance products and services 
(e.g. mortgage, home improvement loans, incremental 
construction loans, financial literacy training etc.). These 
issues are explored in the specific contexts of Colombia, 
India, and Kenya.
OVERALL RESEARCH 
METHODOLOGY
The research methodology consists of three modules: 
an Analysis of Patterns of Demand for Housing Finance, 
a Supply-Side Constraints Analysis, and an Assessment 
of the Enabling Environment. The demand assessment 
focused on understanding the patterns of demand for 
housing and housing finance for women in the three 
countries. Data was collected on both access to housing 
ownership (construction and/or purchase) and access 
to finance for home purchase and home improvement, 
because groups of women may need housing financing 
for several reasons, including purchasing houses, home 
improvement, and construction. The purpose of the 
supply-side analysis was to better understand operational 
aspects of housing finance from the perspective of financial 
institutions (i.e., their market positioning, target clientele, 
product mix), and to obtain information on challenges in 
mortgage lending and financing women borrowers. Existing 
legislation and other enabling factors were reviewed to 
understand their effect on housing finance. In this context, 
an assessment of government programs to encourage 
housing finance for women was also conducted.
A total of 2,000 low- and middle-income households 
were surveyed to assess the demand pattern for 
housing and housing finance. Households were surveyed 
in Bogota and Cartagena in Colombia, Mumbai and Pune in 
India, and Nairobi and Nakuru in Kenya. The survey collected 
information on housing needs and housing finance needs 
and identified gender gaps in obtaining housing finance. 
The survey also collected information on challenges and 
constraints facing women in accessing housing finance. The 
Impact
Short Term 
Impact
Access to 
Housing Finance
Long Term 
Impact
Women Economic 
Empowerment
Design of 
Potential 
Product 
Concepts
DEMAND 
PATTERN 
ANALYSIS
SUPPLY SIDE 
CONSTRAINT 
ANALYSIS
ANALYSIS OF 
THE ENABLING 
ENVIRONMENT
•	 Data mining and data analysis to estimate 
market size
•	 Survey of clients and non-clients of financial 
sector institutions
•	 Market Segmentation
•	 Semi-structured interviews with financial sector 
institutions involved in housing finance
•	 Institutional Assessment: Organizational 
set-up, tools, MIS
•	 Semi-structured interviews with government 
stakeholders
•	 Assessment of the impact of legislation 
on housing finance
•	 Assessment of existing policies and strategies and 
their impact
10


collected data was used to estimate the potential market 
demand for housing and housing finance for women in the 
three countries. The study primarily focused on urban and 
peri-urban areas where there is the highest concentration 
of major financial institutions and where demand for 
housing finance is highest. 
For the supply-side research, major financial 
institutions offering housing finance were interviewed. 
The institutions included a mix of commercial banks, 
microfinance institutions, and other non-bank financial 
institutions. Semi-structured interviews were carried out 
with top management in the housing market department 
and/or the fiduciary department of these institutions. 
Unfortunately, a customer-journey analysis of loan 
processes was not possible due to confidentiality concerns 
of the financial institutions.
Meetings also were held with government and policy 
stakeholders involved in enabling housing and housing 
finance. The objective of these meetings was to understand 
whether the current market environment is conducive for 
promoting gender-housing finance and to identify housing 
initiatives that would benefit women.
Overall Findings
CHARACTERISTICS AND 
SEGMENTS WITHIN FEMALE-
HEADED HOUSEHOLDS
Female-headed households, those in which a woman 
is the primary income earner or decision-maker, 
constitute 26 percent of households in Colombia, 
nine percent in India, and 25 percent in Kenya. In each 
of these countries, male-headed households and joint 
decision-making households have more access to banks 
and other formal sources of finance than female-headed 
households. Female-headed households have lower 
household income levels than those headed by men or by 
joint-decision making households. This is particularly true 
in the lower income brackets, as in India where 90 percent 
of female-headed households earn less than $620 per 
month. In Kenya and Colombia, a quarter of female-headed 
households earn more than $900 per month. 
Overall, self-employment is the most common source 
of women’s employment, but this differs by country 
and by income level. In Colombia, for example, 45 percent 
of women in female-headed households are self-employed 
and 20 percent are permanent employees. In Kenya, 	 	
Impact of Woman-Focused Housing Finance
Goal
Access to 
Housing Finance   
Vehicles
Targeted Financial and 
Non-Financial Products 
and Services
Outcomes
Asset Ownership
Reduced Vulnerability
Enhanced Productivity
Access to Economic 
Opportunities 
11


46 percent are self-employed and 31 percent are permanent 
employees. However, in India, almost half of women in 
female-headed households do not work, and 36 percent are 
mainly permanent employees. Female-headed households 
that fall into the highest income bracket are generally 
permanent employees, while in Colombia and Kenya, those 
in the middle- and lowest-income brackets are mostly self-
employed. 
INTRODUCTION CONTINUED
Employment Status of FHHs
n  Colombia    n  India    n  Kenya
	Permanent employee
	
Self-employed
	
Part-time employee
	
Do not work
	
Other
	
0%	
20%	
40%	
60%
Percentage of FHHs that have applied for 
housing loan in previous 5 years    
n  Colombia    n  India    n  Kenya
	40%
	20%
	0%
	
USD 310	
USD 311–	
USD 621–	
USD 901
	
or less	
620	
900	
or more
Percentage of FHHs planning to purchase or 
build housing in next 5 years
n  Colombia    n  India    n  Kenya
	100%
	 50%
	
0%
	
USD 310	
USD 311–	
USD 621–	
USD 901
	
or less	
620	
900	
or more
Although a small percentage of female-headed 
households have previously taken housing loans, a 
significantly larger proportion plan to apply for a 
housing loan in the next five years. Among female-
headed households, eight percent in Colombia, six percent 
in Kenya, and five percent in India had applied for a housing 
loan in the past five years. Those with higher monthly 
incomes are most likely to have previously applied for a 
housing loan, with the highest level of previous experience 
being in the income category of $621-900 per month. When 
asked whether they are planning to purchase or build a 
home in the next five years, female-headed households 
in Colombia and Kenya largely reported they were 
planning to do so. Their demand did not differ significantly 
across different income levels. In India, where levels of 
homeownership are higher to begin with, a much smaller 
proportion reported that they intend to buy or build. In 
India, demand is most concentrated in the lowest income 
bracket (those making $310 or less per month), though 
the difference between income brackets is statistically 
insignificant.
Personal savings, followed by formal loans, are the 
preferred source of housing finance among female-
headed households. In Colombia, 62 percent of female-
headed households turn to personal savings to purchase 
12


housing; in India 37 percent; and in Kenya 22 percent. The 
highest proportion of female-headed households that plan 
to use formal loans is found in the top income brackets. 
In Colombia and India, female-headed households in the 
lowest income bracket are using the greatest variety 
of fund sources to meet their housing finance needs. In 
contrast, the upper income brackets can largely finance 
housing needs through loans and personal savings alone. In 
Kenya, the use of personal savings increases as income level 
decreases. Female-headed households in the lowest income 
bracket must save the most to finance housing purchases, 
while in the upper income brackets they are better able to 
access alternative sources of funds, including formal loans 
and informal loans. 
Median monthly savings for the purpose of housing 
increases as monthly income increases. In Colombia, the 
lowest income bracket is currently not saving, on average, 
while the highest income bracket is able to save $126 each 
month. In Kenya, where housing finance is largely not 
available to low- and middle-income households, even the 
lowest income bracket is saving $19 each month. In India, 
the highest income brackets generally already own their 
homes and are therefore not currently saving explicitly for 
Preferred Source of Funds for Housing Among FHHs by Monthly Income Bracket
n  Formal loan    n  Informal loan    n  Personal savings    n  Friends & family    n  Government subsidy
	
Colombia	
India	
Kenya
	More than USD 900	
50%	
50%	
36%	
7%	
57%
	
USD 621–900	
33%	
33%	
33%	
38%	
13%	
50%
	
USD 311–620	
22%	
34%	
22%	
22%	
30%	
20%	 20%	
30%	
39%	
6%	
56%
	
USD 311 or less	
25%	
25%	 13%	
38%	
10%	
60%	
10%	10%	10%	
26%	 9%	
66%
housing needs. Among lower income brackets, female-
headed households in India show the highest level of 
household savings. Their monthly savings for the purpose 
of housing is approximately 20 percent of their monthly 
income. This likely reflects India’s culture of saving and 
preference to use less of formal loans, which encourages 
individuals and households to save the maximum amount 
from income, particularly among older generations. 
Female-headed households savings for housing 
Median monthly household savings for the purpose of 
housing
Monthly 
Income 
Bracket
$310 
or less
$311-620
$621-900
$900 
or more
Colombia
$0
$47
$47
$126
India
$55
$69
-
-
Kenya
$19
$34
$34
$146
13


COLOMBIA Key Findings
$23 billion 
Estimated size of market for women’s housing loans
Market profile
67% of households have a woman 
involved in financial decision-making
8% of female-headed households 
applied for a housing loan in the 
previous 5 years
Female-headed households 
save 100% more, on average, than 
male-headed households 
64% of female-headed 
households use personal savings to 
acquire their housing; only 27% used 
a formal loan
The median loan amount that joint 
decision-making households expect 
to borrow is $9,462

Current access to housing finance
• Banks are the source of  77% 
of housing finance loans obtained by women 
• 18% from cooperatives 
• 5% from informal financing
Opportunity
20% of female-headed 
households plan to take a 
loan for housing finance in 
the next 5 years
23% of female-headed 
households are planning 
home improvements
Houses are preferred by 
73% of women who 
plan to purchase housing 
(27% prefer apartment)
14


There is high demand for housing loans among women 
in Colombia, but they remain constrained by unstable 
income. In all, 20 percent of female-headed households 
and 44 percent of joint decision-making households 
plan to purchase a home in the next five years, and 23 
percent plan to make home improvements. Banks are 
the main source of housing loans preferred by 77 percent 
of women, and houses are the preferred dwelling type 
(73 percent). The market for women in Colombia is 
estimated at approximately $23 billion. Yet, women remain 
disadvantaged in obtaining housing loans because of 
economic inequalities, including lower income and fewer 
formal employment opportunities.  
Market Profile
Home ownership in Colombia is among the lowest 
in Latin America. Colombia’s National Statistics Office 
defines a housing deficit as a lack of adequate housing, 
either a qualitative housing deficit or a quantitative housing 
deficit. Even though the housing deficit across Colombia has 
been steadily declining over time, home ownership remains 
low by regional standards. 
Gender does not appear to be a significant driver of 
quantitative housing deficits. When disaggregated by 
gender, Colombia’s National Statistics Office study found 
that quantitative housing deficit statistics show only a 
small variation between male-headed and female-headed 
households across Colombia’s departments. The only 
exceptions are Córdoba and Santander. In Córdoba, the 
quantitative deficit for male-headed households is estimated 
to be about nine percent compared to 5.5 percent of female-
headed households. In contrast, in Santander, the quantitative 
deficit for female-headed households is 12.6 percent, 
compared with 9.8 percent for male-headed households
Female housing owners are more likely than male 
owners to obtain housing through inheritance. 
Households with female decision-makers inherit at a higher 
rate than their male counterparts. 
Inside the findings: While 33 percent of female-
headed households inherited, compared to 17 percent of 
male-headed households and 10 percent of household 
with joint decision-making, approximately 50 percent of 
households with female decision-makers did purchase 
their housing. This compares with 69 percent of male-
headed households and 67 percent of joint decision-
making households who purchased their housing.
Form of Acquisition of House
n  Men    n  Women    n  Joint
	 80%
	 60%
	 40%
	 20%
	
0
	
Bought	
Inherited	
Constructed
Regardless of decision-maker gender, home ownership 
is driven by income and age, according to IFC’s 
research. With age, households accumulate more income 
and wealth, and so are more likely and able to buy a house 
and less likely to rent. However, households with a male-
decision maker are more likely to own a house across all 
types of family structure (for nuclear family, joint/extended 
family, or for single adults) compared to households with a 
female decision-maker. Households with female decision-
makers rent more than their male-counterparts across all 
types of family structures.
Sixty-four percent of female-headed households used 
personal savings to acquire their housing; only 27 
percent used a formal loan. Among homeowners, male-
headed households were more likely to have used a formal 
loan than female-headed households.
3. Colombia
15


Home Ownership
Men
NOTE: The above findings derive from IFC’s market study (2018). (A separate study, La Gran Encuesta Integrada de Hogares — 
GEIH 2017, while composed of a smaller and more specific data set — 140,000 urban households, no ex-urban households — 
produced similar results.)
COLOMBIA CONTINUED
	 80%
	 60%
	 40%
	 20%
	
0%
	
18-24	
25-34	
35-44	
45-54	
>55
Home Ownership by Age 
n  Women    n  Men
Type of Ownership by Family Structure  
n  Women    n  Men     n  Joint
	
Singles
	Joint/Extended Family
	
Nuclear Family
	
0%	 20%	 40%	 60%	 80%
Home Ownership by Monthly Income 
Distribution 
n  Women    n  Men     n  Joint 
60%
40%
	20%
	 0%
	
	
Less than	 USD340–	 USD 510–	 USD 680-	 More than
	
	
USD 340	
510	
680	
850	
USD 850
Women
Joint
16


Inside the findings: Overall, 45 percent of homeowners 
used formal loans and 45 percent used personal savings to 
purchase their housing. Among male-headed households, 
48 percent used formal loans and 44 percent personal 
savings. For making improvements to housing, the 
majority of homeowners used personal savings, followed 
by formal loans, with no significant gender variation. Use 
of informal loans and borrowing from friends and family 
is extremely limited for housing acquisition or home 
improvement.
Source of Funds for Housing Acquisition and 
Home Improvement 
n  Women    n  Men     n  Joint
	
House 
	
Acquisition
	
Personal Savings
	
Formal Loan
	
Friends/Family
	
Informal Loan
	
Home
	
Improvement 
	
Personal Savings
	
Formal Loan
	
Employer Loan
	
Friends/Family
	
Informal Loan
	
Other
	
0%	 10%	 20%	 30%	 40%	50%	60%	 70%
Inside the findings: Fifty-three percent of loan 
applications were for the purchase of new housing. While 
only a few survey respondents applied for housing loans, 
the data show that men were more likely to be approved 
at banks, while women were more likely to be approved 
at savings/credit cooperatives. (It should be noted that 
these differences are not statistically significant given the 
very small sample size.) Additionally, borrowers whose 
loans were approved had been clients of the bank for 
more than two years. 
In general, both on a monthly basis and in terms of 
total current savings, women have higher savings 
than men. While female-headed households have a lower 
median monthly income than male-headed households and 
joint decision-making households, monthly expenses are 
similar for female- and male-headed households and higher 
for joint-decision-making households. Households headed 
by women are saving more than their male counterparts. 
Median Income, Expenses and Savings
Head of 
Household
Monthly 
income
Monthly 
expenses
Monthly 
savings
Total 
Savings
Woman
$520
$312
$35
$139
Man
$555
$312
$0
$0
Joint
$694
$347
$35
$121
38%
62%
44%
56%
27%
48%
0%
8%
6%
3%
4%
2%
57%
63%
65%
24%
21%
19%
10%
2%
11%
5%
2%
3%
5%
5%
8%
Use of bank loans for housing is very low in 
Colombia. Only nine percent of men and eight 
percent of women have previously applied for 
housing loans. Of these, 67 percent of men and 47 
percent of women had their loans approved.
17


COLOMBIA CONTINUED
Current Access to Housing 
Finance and Supply 
Colombian financial institutions have been steadily 
increasing their mortgage portfolio since the crisis 
of the late 1990s. Between May 2016 and 2017 alone, the 
combined outstanding real estate loan portfolios of financial 
institutions increased by 13 percent, reaching $20.6 billion. 
Bancolombia, BBVA, and Davivienda are the largest lenders. 
Rent-to-own arrangements represent approximately 23 
percent of residential loan portfolios; 58 percent of these 
arrangements are held by Davivienda.
Government-supported programs represent a large 
part of the housing finance market. The two main 
programs are the vivienda de interés social (affordable 
housing —VIS) and the vivienda de interés prioritario (priority 
social housing — VIP). Both programs involve subsidized 
interest rates for lower income segments of the population. 
However, VIP targets the most vulnerable groups, including 
female-headed households. 
The satisfaction rate among men and women receiving 
loans was 75 percent. While taking into account that only 
a very low percentage actually applied for formal loans, 
satisfaction was based largely on the fact that clients were 
able to receive their loans quickly, followed by a perception 
of favorable terms and conditions. The dissatisfied clients 
complained mostly about not receiving the desired amounts 
and interest rates.
Barriers
The main barriers to housing finance are largely found 
to be a result of unstable income and difficulties 
qualifying for a loan. A lack of money was the primary 
reason non-homeowners gave for not wanting to purchase 
housing within the next five years. Only about 12 percent of 
women reported not qualifying for a loan as the reason not 
to purchase housing as compared to 32 percent of men.
Inside the findings: While both women and men 
reported a lack of money as the primary obstacle to 
purchasing housing, 50 percent of women cited this 
compared to 41 percent of men. 
Reasons for Not Planning to Buy a Home 
(LHS)/Perceptions of Equal Access to 
Housing Finance (RHS) 
n  Women    n  Men    
	 I don’t have money	
	
50%
	
	
41%
	
Gender barriers	
3%
	
	
	
I don’t need it	
	 39%
	
	
36%
	I don’t qualify for a loan	
12%
	
	
	
32%
	
Other	
9%
	
	
0%	 10%	 20%	 30%	 40%	 50%	
	
Survey respondents also reported requirements from 
banks as significant challenges to obtaining housing 
finance. A lack of credit records, low income, and high 
interest rates were also commonly cited as challenges to 
obtaining housing finance. 
18


Women loan applicants might be disadvantaged due to 
their generally lower level of income and more common 
employment in the informal sector. When two or more 
individuals apply for a loan together, the first debtor to 
appear on the loan contract is the person with the highest 
income. Typically, this is the male partner. In addition, 
most of the financial institutions that were interviewed 
reported that they focus their efforts on applicants with 
formal employment and proper income justification. A 
larger proportion of women are employed in the informal 
sector, and thus unable to fulfill the lending requirements of 
financial institutions.
Inside the findings: The above disparities between 
male and female loan applicants are in line with statistics 
showing that 7.3 percent of Colombian women have 
outstanding mortgages compared to 12.3 percent for men 
(2014). Source: Findex Database.
Loan Approval Rate
n  Women    n  Men
	Savings/Credit
	 Cooperative
	
Bank
	
0%	
20%	
40%	
60%	
80%	
Respondents perceive gender-specific economic factors 
drive inequalities in access to housing finance. The 
majority of both men (81 percent) and women respondents 
(68 percent) reported that women and men enjoy equal 
access to housing finance. However, respondents perceived 
opportunities between genders to be unequal. Those 
respondents who think women do not have equal access 
to housing finance as men cited less favorable employment 
opportunities and income gaps as the main barriers to 
women’s access to housing finance.  
ADDITIONAL INSIGHTS INTO 
BARRIERS TO HOUSING FINANCE 
ACCESS 
The following insights derive from a series of logistic 
regressions (see Notes for a detailed explanation and a 
chart of results) that identify potential factors affecting 
women’s demand for housing and loans. Model One 
identifies the predictors of planning to buy a house or 
making improvements to a current dwelling in the next five 
years. Model Two identifies the determinant factors related 
to existing demand (i.e., having used a loan in the purchase 
of the current home). Comparing the two models provided 
preliminary findings on the Colombia housing market. 
(Please note that the sample is distorted towards urban 
and peri-urban men and women, and does not include rural 
respondents.)
Being a woman decreases the probability of being 
employed by 35 percentage points, all other factors 
being equal. A logistic regression fitted to identify 
the determinants of employment identified several 
key independent variables, including gender, age, civil 
status, and having a bank account. The results indicate 
that traditional socio-cultural norms still play a role in 
Colombian society, particularly regarding employment, thus 
contributing to women’s economic disadvantages. 
Economic disadvantages put a disproportionate strain 
on women’s ability to access housing finance. The 
majority of respondents reported that women and men 
enjoy equal rights, and that they did not see gender itself 
as a significant barrier to obtaining housing finance. Yet, 
women cited insufficient income and resources as the main 
barrier to accessing housing finance. Among women who 
would like to be able to purchase housing, 68 percent of 
those not planning to purchase cite not having enough 
money as the biggest barrier to doing so. This suggests that 
the gender and socio-cultural norms that impact the ability 
of women to participate fully in economic life also have an 
adverse effect on their ability to access housing finance.  
19


Female-headed households are less likely to participate 
in the housing and housing finance markets. Even after 
controlling for income and socio-economic differences, 
households in which a woman is the household head are 
significantly less likely to be planning to purchase a home 
or make improvements to their current home. 
ADDRESSING BARRIERS: LEGAL, 
REGULATORY AND FINANCIAL 
INSTITUTIONS FRAMEWORKS 
In Colombia, policies, regulatory framework, and laws 
treat men and women the same. Similarly, there are 
no practices in financial institutions that explicitly 
distinguish between men and women. This was 
confirmed in interviews with stakeholders in government 
agencies and financial institutions. Moreover, there was no 
indication of institutional discrimination causing unequal 
opportunities reported in the demand survey. 
Women, Business and the Law 
Women, Business and the Law is a World Bank Group 
project collecting unique data on the laws and 
regulations that restrict women’s economic 
opportunities. The following findings for Colombia are 
relevant to women’s access to housing finance.  
ACCESSING INSTITUTIONS
1.	 Are wives required to obey their 
husbands?
No
2.	 Can a woman legally get a job in the same 
way as a man?
Yes
3.	 Can a woman sign a contract in the same 
way as a man?
Yes
4.	 Can a woman open a bank account in the 
same way as a man?
Yes
5.	 Can a woman choose where to live in the 
same way as a man?
Yes
6.	 Can a woman be “head of household” in 
the same way as a man?
N/A
USING PROPERTY
 
1.	 Who legally administers marital property?
Original 
owner
2.	 Does the law provide for valuation of 
nonmonetary contributions?
Yes
3.	 Do men and women have equal 
ownership rights to immovable property?
Yes
4.	 Do sons and daughters have equal 
inheritance rights?
Yes
5.	 Do female and male surviving spouses 
have equal inheritance rights?
Yes
GOING TO COURT
1.	 Does a woman’s testimony carry the 
same evidentiary weight in court as a 
man’s?
Yes
BUILDING CREDIT
1.	 Do retailers provide information to credit 
agencies?
Yes
2.	 Do utility companies provide information 
to credit agencies?
Yes
3.	 Is discrimination based on gender 
prohibited in access to credit?
No
4.	 Is discrimination based on marital status 
prohibited in access to credit?
No
COLOMBIA CONTINUED
20


Government Programs
Vivienda de interés social (VIS — affordable housing) and the 
vivienda de interés prioritario (VIP — most vulnerable groups 
including female-headed households) are the government’s 
two social housing programs. Davivienda is the main lender 
under social housing programs followed by Fondo Nacional 
del Ahorro, Bancolombia, and Banco Caja Social. 
Within this context, the Colombian Government has 
been increasing efforts to encourage marginalized 
women to facilitate ownership of their own housing. 
According to the Ministry of Housing, more than 238,000 
women from low-income households have become 
owners of their proper houses since 2010. An additional 
51,268 women in the poorest neighborhoods have obtained 
housing through “Mi Casa Ya — Ahorradores,” and 169,368 
women in extreme poverty are benefitting from the free 
housing program. (Source: http://www.minvivienda.gov.
co/sala-de-prensa/noticias/2016/noviembre/el-70-de-
propietarios-de-vivienda-en-colombia-son-mujeres-
ministra-elsa-noguera) 
Financial Institutions
None of the financial institutions that were 
interviewed used different loan approval criteria for 
men and women. 
Inside the findings: Meetings were held with 16 
financial institutions, including all the main lenders in 
housing finance. According to interviewed stakeholders, 
financial institutions use gender-neutral approaches and 
policies in their day-to-day-business.
Financial institutions do not keep gender-
disaggregated statistics on client applications or 
rejections. Because of this, financial institutions are 
not able to track potential gender-based distinctions 
throughout the loan application process and have limited 
ability to understand the characteristics and financial 
behavior of their customers by gender. The Superintendencia 
Financiera de Colombia, which supervises the main actors in 
housing finance, also does not track gender-disaggregated 
information. 
21


Market Opportunities
Approximately 43 percent of women living in rented 
housing plan to purchase housing within the next 
year. According to the demand survey, about half of 
respondents overall plan to purchase housing within the 
next five years. About 65 percent of men respondents plan 
to purchase a house. 
Approximately 26 percent of current homeowners plan 
to move to or construct another house. This percentage 
is only slightly lower for women than it is for men. 
Another 30 percent of homeowners plan to make 
improvements to their current home. Male-headed 
households are significantly more likely to plan to make 
improvements than female-headed households, but slightly 
less likely than joint decision-maker households.
The plan to purchase varies by income levels. Middle/
low-income households earning between $340-680 a 
month are most likely to have plans to purchase housing as 
compared to households with other income ranges. 
The potential demand for housing, based on 
respondents planning to purchase, is only four percent 
higher for men than women. About 56 percent of 
women expect to seek funding from banks as opposed to 
60 percent of men.
Cluster Analysis identified opportunities for tailoring 
housing products and services to specific groups 
who plan to purchase housing in the next five years. 
The analysis of demand survey responses (see Notes for 
more detail on Cluster Analysis) identified homogenous 
subgroups of potential customers that have similar needs 
and attributes, and thus represent sub-markets for targeted 
products and services. As indicated in the chart below, it 
studied variables of employment, type of current dwelling, 
income, and the expected loan amount needed to purchase 
housing among four major sub-segments of urban and peri-
urban men and women (thus this study did not cover rural 
men and women). 
The total size of the urban market for women’s housing 
loans in Colombia is estimated at approximately 
$23 billion. This total market size represents the total 
estimated amount of loans needed from urban women in 
Colombia who currently have plans to purchase a home. It was 
estimated from values including number of urban households, 
percentage of female-headed households, percentage of 
women who reported they would use a loan to pay for 
the purchase of housing in the next five years, and median 
expected loan amount, relying on figures from the demand 
survey and census data. More detail on this calculation 
appears in the Notes section at the end of this report.
COLOMBIA CONTINUED
Non-homeowners Median Expected Cost 
of New Home Purchase 
Cost of 
purchasing 
Loan 
amount 
needed
Expected 
Monthly 
payment
Woman
$27,200
$17,179
 $136 
Man
$23,800
$19,550
$187 
Joint
$26,500
$16,563
$133
Non-homeowners and Homeowners Who Plan 
to Purchase or Make Housing Improvements
n  Women    n  Men     n  Joint
	 Purchase/build
	
[non-owners]
	Move/construct
	
[owners]
	 Improvements
	
[owners]
	
0%	
10%	 20%	
30%	 40%	 50%	 60%
22


Cluster Analysis of Potential Housing Finance Market
	
Segment 1	
Segment 2	
Segment 3	
Segment 4
	
Married	
Self-employed/ 	
Non-married	
Self-employed/
	
Employee	
Entrepreneur	
Employee	
Entrepreneur
	
House	
Apartment	
House	
Apartment
	
$1,189	
$509	
$408	
$408
	
$33,961	
$23,773	
$20,378	
$27,169	
Employment (of respondent)
Median Household Income 
(from all contributing family 
members)*
Loan Amount Desired†
Other Key Variables:
Sector of Employment	
Commerce	
Commerce	
Manufacturing/ 	
Services
	
	
	
Construction 
Average Age	
31 	
39	
34	
34
Marital status 	
69%	Married 	
42%	 Married	
60%	Single	
36%	Married
	
19%	 Cohabitating 	
35%	 Single	
34%	 Separated/	
31%	 Single
	
12%	 Separated/	
23%	 Cohabitating	
	
Divorced	
25%	 Cohabitating
	
	
Divorced	
	
	
6%	
Widowed	
8%	 Separated/	

	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
Divorced
Average Number of family members  
contributing to household income	
2.25	
2.06	
0.95	
1.65
Percentage of Households with 
Female Household Head	
24%	
48%	
41%	
66%
Percentage of Households with 
Woman Involved in Decision-making	
58%	
70%	
68%	
76%
Percentage of Households with
Bank Account	
65%	
56%	
41%	
45%
Percentage Applied for Housing 
Loan Previously	
6%	
29%	
6%	
7%
*Median household income is the median income brought in for the household by all family members. If the respondent does not work and is not 
bringing income, the household can still have income from a spouse, parents, adult children, etc. 
† Loan amount desired is based on respondent’s own evaluation of amount needed for home purchase or construction and not a reflection of 
financial analysis of repayment capacity
Type of dwelling
Variables Used in Clustering:
23


INDIA Key Findings
$32. 3 billion 
Estimated size of market for women’s housing loans
Market profile
48% of households have a woman 
involved in financial decision-making
6% of female-headed households 
applied for a housing loan in the 
previous 5 years
Female-headed households save 
20% more, on average, than 
male-headed households 
The median amount that joint 
decision-making households expect 
to borrow for home purchase is 
$16,563
Current access to housing finance loans obtained by women
• Banks  83% 
• Mutuals  8% 
• Cooperatives  5% 
  
Opportunity
5% of female-
headed households 
plan to take a loan 
for housing finance 
in the next 5 years
18% of female-
headed households 
are planning home 
improvements
Apartments are 
preferred by 
84% of women 
who plan to 
purchase housing 
(16% prefer houses)
49% of joint 
decision-making 
households live in 
apartments 
(29% houses)
24


The estimated demand for women housing loans 
in India totals $32. 3 billion. This demand is largely for 
apartments (84 percent), rather than houses. Eighty-
three percent of women prefer banks to other financial 
institutions for housing finance. The main barriers to 
women’s access to housing finance are found to be 
insufficient income and traditional gender norms. For 
instance, in the demand survey, 52 percent of households 
had no female involvement in decision-making. The 
government’s Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme provides a 
subsidized interest rate on housing loans if a woman will 
hold the title to the new property. The program, although 
bringing more women into the housing finance market, is 
only able to reach a small portion of the potential female 
borrowers. Thus, a gap remains.
Market Profile
Home ownership is relatively high in India. Seventy-
seven percent of households own their homes, rather than 
rent. This percentage is the same for households headed 
by a man, woman, or joint decision-makers. Of those who 
own, 93 percent have a registered title deed.
Inside the findings: The 77 percent figure is consistent 
with findings from the most recent census collected by 
the government in 2011 (Source: Government of India 
Population and Housing Census 2011), which found that 
87 percent of households own their own home. The 10 
percent difference is due to this study’s focus on low- and 
middle-income households, which are less likely than 
high-income households to own their homes.
An estimated 65 percent of female-headed households 
and 63 percent of male-headed households live in 
houses. .
Inside the findings: In joint decision-making 
households, apartments are most common (49 percent), 
followed by houses (29 percent) and chawls (22 percent). 
Chawls are buildings with one room or two room units 
of not more than two hundred square feet attached by a 
common corridor with shared toilets on each floor.
Significant drivers of home ownership include age, 
education, income, length of occupancy, and city. 
According to results of the demand survey, respondents’ 
age and education and their household’s income affect 
the likelihood the household owns rather than rents their 
housing. Additionally, the more years a household has 
resided in the current dwelling, the greater the probability 
they own their home.
Households headed by women have similar income and 
expenses, but higher monthly savings than households 
headed by men (Source: demand survey). Female-headed 
households are saving more than their male counterparts, 
and also at similar levels as joint decision-making 
households, although the income and expenses of joint 
decision-making households are higher than female-headed 
households.
Median Income, Expenses and Savings
Monthly 
income
Monthly 
expenses
Monthly 
Savings
Total 
Savings
Woman
$364
$218
$73
$1,456
Man
$364
$218
$58
$1,165
Joint
$437
$291
$73
$1,456
 
 
4. India
25


INDIA CONTINUED
Purchase is the most common form of acquisition, 
but inheritance is highest among female-headed 
households and joint decision-making households. 
Thirty-seven percent of female-headed households, 
44 percent of joint decision-making households, and 
only 18 percent of male-head of households own their 
home via inheritance.
Inside the findings: These low levels of housing loan 
usage are consistent with statistics from Findex, which 
shows that only three percent of women and six percent 
of men currently have outstanding mortgages. (Source: 
World Bank Global Financial Inclusion — Findex — 
Database.)
Source of Funds for Home Acquisition
n  Women    n  Men     n  Joint
	
Personal 
	
savings
	
Formal loan
	
Informal loan
	
Borrow from
	 friends/family
	
	0%	 10%	 20%	 30%	 40%	 50%	60%	 70%
Household Head	
	
Legal Owner
              n  Women    n  Men     n  Joint
Means of Home Acquisition 
n  Women    n  Men     n  Joint 
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
	
Bought	
Built	
Inherited
10%
38%
52%
10%
9%
81%
Female legal ownership of homes is rare. Only nine 
percent of households in the demand survey sample 
have a female head of household. (This is consistent 
with the 2011 census, in which only 10 percent 
of households had a female head of household.) 
Additionally, among households that own, 81 percent 
have a man as the sole legal owner of the house, 
nine percent are legally owned by a woman, and 10 
percent are jointly owned. This indicates that even 
among joint heads of households (38 percent), the 
legal owner of the house is generally a man.
Across home purchasers, use of formal loans 
remains low overall. Among survey homeowner 
respondents, joint decision-making households 
were more likely to use formal loans (33 percent) 
and informal loans (22 percent) than female-headed 
households and male-headed households, which 
primarily used personal savings. However, female-
headed households were more likely than male-
headed households to use formal loans. For housing 
improvements, the majority of households, regardless 
of gender, relied on personal savings.
26


The recent rise in dual-income households, particularly 
in urban areas, has increased the demand for housing 
finance loans among joint decision-makers.
Inside the findings: The Demand Survey indicated that 
while all female-headed households and 91 percent of 
male-headed households applied to banks, 67 percent of 
joint households applied to banks as well as to mutual 
(17 percent), cooperatives (8 percent), and microfinance 
institutions (8 percent).
Current Access to Housing 
Finance and Supply 
Housing finance has traditionally been dominated by 
banking institutions, but housing finance companies 
are playing an increasingly larger role. In 2015, banks 
controlled 63 percent of the total volume of the housing 
finance market, with the rest of the market served by 
non-bank financial institutions (NBFIs), primarily Housing 
Finance Corporations (HFC). Estimates from 2017, however, 
suggest HFC’s market share has grown to over 40 percent.
Affordable housing loans are provided by the majority 
of banks that are involved in housing finance and by 
HFCs. However, commercial banks are targeting more in 
the urban areas, whereas HFCs are targeting in urban and 
semi-urban areas. Rural areas are largely excluded by these 
financial institutions.
 Most of the financial institutions that were 
interviewed do not have specific gender products 
or services targeting women as a differentiated 
segment. However, a few exceptions exist such as the 
State Bank of India (SBI), SEWA, and Aspire Home Finance. 
SBI’s Her Ghar loan is offered to female customers at a 
concessional interest rate. SEWA Grih Rin Ltd. (SGRL) 
only lends to women for the explicit purpose of house 
purchase, construction, upgrading, or home improvement. 
Aspire Home Finance has a product entitled “Mahila Awaas 
(MALA),” which offers housing loans to low-income women 
at a lower interest rate.
Financial institutions do not use different loan approval 
criteria for men and women applicants. FIs reported 
that internal policies, regulations, and practices are gender 
neutral. The FIs largely reported that the loan origination 
process is the same for male and female borrowers and that 
loan decisions are based on eligibility criteria such as income 
and repayment capacity. However, gender-disaggregated 
statistics or data on client applications or rejections are not 
being kept. 
Inside the findings: The historic gap between the market share of banks and non-bank financial institutions is primarily 
due to banks’ access to Current Account and Savings Account funds, which come at a very low cost. In contrast, NBFIs 
— including Housing Finance Corporations — primarily have had to rely on costlier bank funding, and thus charge higher 
interest rates to customers. However, in recent years, the average interest rates charged by banks and major HFCs have 
converged. As a result, HFCs are becoming an increasingly important element of the housing finance sector, accounting for 
their increased market share as of 2017.
Housing Finance Market Share of Major Housing Finance Providers
	
SBI Group 	
HDFC	
LIC HFL	
ICICI	
Axis Bank	
Dewan	
Canara	
PNB
	
19%	
18%	
9%	
9%	
5%	
4%	
3%	
3%
Source: ICRA 2016 Estimates
27


FIs interviewed for this study believe that loan 
repayment is enhanced when women are co-borrowers. 
While no data was available to justify the following 
statement, FIs reported that their loans’ delinquency 
significantly declines when a woman is a co-applicant 
because it increases the likelihood that the loan will be 
repaid.
The satisfaction rate was very high among survey 
respondents and did not show any difference by gender. 
The satisfaction rate was 96 percent, and based largely 
on the fact that clients perceive terms and conditions as 
being favorable, followed by the fact that clients were 
able to receive their loans quickly. As suggestions, most 
respondents recommended reducing the interest rate 
charged.
Barriers
Fifty-four percent of respondents believe financial 
decisions should be made by men, or were unsure 
whether financial decisions should be made only by 
men. Only 15 percent of women are the main contributors 
to household income, compared to 89 percent of men. 
For men and women, the main barriers to access 
housing finance are largely found to be a result of 
insufficient income. While both women and men reported 
a lack of money as the primary hindrance, a greater share 
of women (55 percent) cited this compared to men (47 
percent). Another 20 percent of women and 27 percent of 
men mentioned not qualifying for a loan or program as the 
reason not to purchase.
Reasons for Not Planning to Buy a Home
n  Women    n  Men     
	
I don’t have money
	
I don’t need it
	I don’t quality for a loan/program
	
Gender barriers
	
Other
	
	0%	
20%	
30%	
60%
However, women still remain disadvantaged because 
of their lack of formal and stable income. Although 
the government’s Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme program 
is helping, the share of loans with a woman as the main 
applicant is very low compared to loans with a man as the 
main applicant. 
Traditional gender norms also limit women’s ability 
to access housing finance Single women applicants. 
Financial institutions, despite having gender neutral 
processes reported they would likely use a higher level of 
scrutiny in evaluating a single woman’s application than a 
single man’s application because cultural norms suggest a 
single woman should not need to purchase a home, doing 
so with her husband once she is married.
Formal and stable income. Only 15 percent of women 
are the main contributors to household income, compared 
to 89 percent of men. As a large segment of population 
including women is still found in the informal sector.
Too many requirements make it difficult to access 
loans. Survey respondents who plan to purchase in the 
next five years plan to use informal rather than formal loans 
because of such requirements as identification, income 
statements, and credit history. The next most common 
reason for using informal loans was that respondents could 
not offer collateral.
INDIA CONTINUED
Most FI mortgages are given to married couples. 
Among those who have applied for a loan recently, 
joint decision-making households were approved 
at a rate of 83 percent, compared to 66 percent for 
male-headed households and 57 percent for female-
headed households.
28


Inside the findings: Sixty-seven percent of female-
headed households, 65 percent of male-headed 
households and 72 percent of joint decision-making 
households reported they would use an informal loan. 
Formal loans and personal cash/savings are the next 
most frequently mentioned. Thirty-three percent 
of female-headed households also planned to use a 
government subsidy.
What Is Your Reason for Using an Informal, 
Rather Than Formal Loan?
	Too many requirements
	
Lack of collateral
	
High interest rate
	
Lack of title
	
	 0%	 20%	 40%	 60%	 80%	100%
This lack of applicant documentation hampers financial 
institutions’ ability to lend. A lack of clear property 
titles of potential borrowers — essential for the purpose of 
collateral — makes it difficult for financial institutions to 
process the loan.
Inside the findings: These factors contribute to the 
challenge of meeting document requirements: 1) In India, 
land is a state subject, and each state has its own set of 
laws governing property titles; 2) Households working 
in the informal labor sector or daily jobs are not able to 
produce proper income documentation.
Limited funding is another constraint for financial 
institutions. This is especially true for small Housing 
Finance Corporations and Microfinance Institutions, which 
rely on commercial banks for capital funds.
ADDITIONAL INSIGHTS INTO 
BARRIERS TO HOUSING FINANCE 
ACCESS
To provide additional insight into potential factors driving 
women’s demand for housing and for loans, a series of 
logistic regressions were fitted. The first logistic regression 
(Model 1) aimed to identify the predictors of planning to 
buy a house or make improvements to a current dwelling 
in the next five years. The second logistic regression (Model 
2) aimed to identify the determinant factors related to 
existing demand (i.e. having used a loan in the purchase of 
the current home). Comparing the two models provides 
additional insight into the Indian housing market. (See 
Notes for a detailed explanation and a chart of results.)
Women are seen as main caretakers of the home and 
family. Analysis results indicate that being a woman 
decreases the probability of being employed by 38 
percentage points, all else equal.
Women’s lower socioeconomic status plays a role in 
determining whether and where they find employment, 
how much income they generate, and therefore their 
ability to access housing finance. According to the World 
Values Survey 2012, almost 80 percent of respondents in 
India agreed that when jobs are scarce, men should have 
more right to a job than women. As a result, women are 
significantly more likely to not work or to work from home 
than their male counterparts. This makes it more likely that 
women will not have enough money to purchase housing or 
qualify for a loan.
Women’s labor force participation in India is very low. 
Since its decline in recent years from 35 percent in 2005 
to its current 27 percent (World Bank World Development 
Indicators), India’s female labor force is the lowest among 
G20 countries with the exception of Saudi Arabia.
Female-headed households are significantly less likely 
than male-headed households to plan to purchase a 
home in the next five years. They also are less likely to 
have previously used a formal loan to acquire housing.
29


ADDRESSING BARRIERS: LEGAL, 
REGULATORY AND FINANCIAL 
INSTITUTIONS FRAMEWORKS
The government of India’s focus on “housing for all” by 
2022 has increased the attractiveness and the size of 
this sector; continued growth is expected. The housing 
finance industry has achieved a cumulative 17-18 percent 
annual growth rate over the last five years. Total housing 
credit outstanding in India stood at roughly $198.5 billion 
(Rs. 13.7 trillion) as of December 31, 2016, up from roughly 
$179.6 billion (Rs. 12.4 trillion) in March 2016.
Inside the findings: Over the medium- and long-
term, it is expected that the industry will grow 18-to-20 
percent, driven by the growth in affordable housing space 
and increased support from the central government. 
As result, a large number of institutions have recently 
entered the market. Banks also have increased their focus 
on retail housing finance, increasing competition within 
the roughly $36,000-to-$1,086,000 (Rs. 25-to-75 Lakhs) 
housing market. HFCs operating in the affordable housing 
space ($36,000 or Rs. 25 Lakhs loan category) have been 
growing and are expected to register a compound annual 
growth rate of 30-to-50 percent over the next three-to-
five year period, outpacing the industry average.
INDIA CONTINUED
30


The Government of India’s Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana 
(PMAY) initiative is designed to provide affordable 
housing to the urban and rural poor, with a specific 
focus on female empowerment. Under the PMAY’s Credit-
Linked Subsidy Scheme for the urban poor, the government 
grants a subsidized interest rate of up to 6.5 percent for 
individuals within the Economically Weaker Section and 
a Low Income Group who are seeking housing loans from 
banks, housing finance companies, and other financial 
institutions. To obtain the subsidy, the title must include 
at least one woman, which can be the female household 
head or any relative of the male household head including a 
wife, mother, sister, etc. This program has been successfully 
attracting women as co-applicants for housing loans.
Inside the findings: Financial institutions that were 
interviewed for this study had positive perceptions 
of the PMAY program and believed it was improving 
women’s access to housing finance and access to housing 
ownership. 
To improve the flow of formal housing finance to women 
in urban areas, the National Housing Bank launched a 
Special Refinance Scheme for Women for retail-lending 
institutions. The program provides refinance assistance to 
primary lending institutions at concessional rates where the 
primary borrower is a woman and the property is solely or 
jointly owned by women. Its purpose is both to encourage 
women to acquire residential property in their own name 
and retail-lending institutions to improve their housing 
finance to women borrowers. The program is implemented 
through eligible primary lending institutions.
Women Business and the Law
Women, Business and the Law is a World Bank Group 
project collecting unique data on the laws and 
regulations that restrict women’s economic 
opportunities. The following findings for India  are relevant 
to women’s access to housing finance
ACCESSING INSTITUTIONS
1.	 Are wives required to obey their 
husbands?
No
2.	 Can a woman legally get a job in the same 
way as a man?
Yes
3.	 Can a woman sign a contract in the same 
way as a man?
Yes
4.	 Can a woman open a bank account in the 
same way as a man?
Yes
5.	 Can a woman choose where to live in the 
same way as a man?
Yes
6.	 Can a woman be “head of household” in 
the same way as a man?
N/A
USING PROPERTY
 
1.	 Who legally administers marital property?
Original 
owner
2.	 Does the law provide for valuation of 
nonmonetary contributions?
No
3.	 Do men and women have equal 
ownership rights to immovable property?
Yes
4.	 Do sons and daughters have equal 
inheritance rights?
Yes
5.	 Do female and male surviving spouses 
have equal inheritance rights?
Yes
GOING TO COURT
1.	 Does a woman’s testimony carry the 
same evidentiary weight in court as a 
man’s?
Yes
BUILDING CREDIT
1.	 Do retailers provide information to credit 
agencies?
No
2.	 Do utility companies provide information 
to credit agencies?
No
3.	 Is discrimination based on gender 
prohibited in access to credit?
No
4.	 Is discrimination based on marital status 
prohibited in access to credit?
No
31


INDIA CONTINUED
Market Opportunities
About five percent of women expect to make a home 
purchase in the next five years using a formal loan 
compared to 13 percent of men. The median expected loan 
amount for male-headed households is $8,734 compared with 
$7,279 for female-headed households and $9,462 for joint 
decision-making households.
Female-headed households are more likely to be planning 
improvements to their homes than those headed by men.
Inside the findings: Eighteen percent of female-
headed households are planning improvements, more 
than both male-headed households (13 percent) and joint 
decision-making households (12 percent). Twelve percent 
of female-headed households and 11 percent of joint 
decision-making households are planning to purchase a 
new home in the next five years, compared to 16 percent 
of male-headed households.
Households Planning to Purchase or Make 
Improvements in Next 5 Years
n  Women    n  Men     n  Joint
	 Purchase/build
	 (non-owners)
	Move/construct
	
(owners)
	 Improvements
	
(owners)
	
	0%	 5%	 10%	 15%	 20%	 25%	30%	35%	 40%
Cluster Analysis identified opportunities for tailoring 
products and services to specific groups who plan to 
purchase housing in the next five years. The analysis 
of demand survey responses (see Notes for more detail 
on Cluster Analysis) identified homogenous subgroups of 
potential customers that have similar needs and attributes, 
and thus represent sub-segments for tailored products and 
services. (Because the demand survey focused on urban 
and peri-urban men and women, these results do not cover 
rural men and women.)
The total size of the urban market for women’s housing 
loans in India is estimated at approximately $32. 3 
billion. The total market size represents the total estimated 
amount of loans needed from urban women in India who 
currently have plans to purchase a home. It was calculated 
from values including number of urban households, 
percentage of female-headed households, percentage 
demand, and median expected loan amount, relying on 
figures from the demand survey and census data. More 
detail on this calculation appears in the Notes section at the 
end of this report.
While the decision of where to apply for a 
housing loan varies by gender, 47 percent of 
women respondents to the demand survey 
based their decision on an advertisement and 
29 percent on a reference from a friend. No 
female-headed households reported that their 
decision was based on the best interest rate or 
terms.
Inside the findings: In contrast, reference from a 
friend is the most common basis for a decision 
among 51 percent of male-headed and 54 
percent of joint decision-making households) but 
best interest rate or terms is the second most 
commonly mentioned reason (mentioned by 43 
percent of male headed and 46 percent of joint 
households)..
29%
Women’s decision 
based on a 
reference
47%
Women’s decision 
based on an 
advertisement
32


Cluster Analysis of Potential Housing Finance Market
	
Segment 1	
Segment 2	
Segment 3	
Segment 4
	
100%	 Does not 	
100% Does 	
47%	 Part-time 	
31%	Self-employed
	
	
work	
	
not work 	
	
employee	
28%	Permanent
	
	
	
	
	
33%	 Permanent	
	
employee
	
	
	
	
	
	
employee	
28%	Part-time
	
	
	
	
	
15%	 Self-employed	 	
employee
	
	
	
	
	
5%	 Non-contract	
14%	Non-contract
	
Rent	
Own	
Own	
Rent
	
$291	
$364	
$437	
$291
	
$14,557	
$6,046	
$9,462	
$6,551
Home ownership
Other Key Variables:
Sector of Employment	
Commerce	
Commerce	
Manufacturing/ 	
Services
	
	
	
Construction 
Average Age	
34 	
37	
34	
36
Marital status 	
100%	Married 	
90%	Married	
73%	 Married	
100%	Married
	
	
 	
7%	 Single	
23%	 Single	

	
	
	
3%	
Widowed	
4%	
Widowed/	

	
	
	
	
	
	
Divorced
Percentage of Households with 
Female Household Head	
12%	
19%	
23%	
25%
Percentage of Households with
Bank Account	
97%	
95%	
98%	
100%
Percentage Applied for Housing 
Loan Previously	
12%	
5%	
32%	
11%
*Median household income is the median income brought in for the household by all family members. If the respondent does not work and is not 
bringing income, the household can still have income from a spouse, parents, adult children, etc. 
† Loan amount desired is based on respondent’s own evaluation of amount needed for home purchase or construction and not a reflection of 
financial analysis of repayment capacity
Employment (of respondent)
Variables Used in Clustering:
Median Household Income 
(from all contributing family 
members)*
Loan Amount Desired†
33


KENYA Key Findings
$14. 8 billion
Estimated size of market for women’s housing loans
Market profile
59% of households have a woman 
involved in financial decision-making
6% of female-headed households 
applied for a housing loan in the 
previous 5 years
Female-headed households save 
31% more, on average, than 
male-headed households
The Median amount that Joint 
decision-making households expect 
to borrow for home purchase is 
$24,844 
Current access to housing finance loans obtained by women
• Savings and Credit Cooperative Societies (SACCOs)  57%  
• Banks  29%
• Government  7%
• Informal chamas  7%
Opportunity
33% of female-headed 
households plan to take a 
loan for housing finance in 
the next 5 years
25% of female-headed 
households are planning 
home improvements
Houses are preferred by 
91% of women who 
plan to purchase housing
34


Kenya has a relatively untapped housing finance 
market with significant unmet demand for housing 
finance among women. There is high demand among 
women in Kenya for housing finance products. Thirty-three 
percent of female-headed households and 66 percent of 
joint-decision-making households intend to purchase 
housing in the next five years and 25 percent plan to make 
home improvements. The demand for housing finance 
among women in Kenya is estimated at $14. 8 billion. The 
overwhelming majority of women want to purchase a 
house (91 percent), rather than an apartment. Yet, despite 
high demand, women remain constrained by low income 
and inability to meet bank requirements. The majority 
of women use Savings and Credit Cooperative Societies 
for housing finance needs, primarily because they cannot 
meet the down payment or provide documents required 
by banks. Traditional roles also contribute to women not 
having equal access to housing finance. 
Market Profile
Home ownership is very low for women and men 
in Kenya. According to “Housing: Unavailable and 
Unaffordable,” World Bank Kenya Economic Update 2017, 
Kenya has an estimated accumulated housing deficit of two 
million units, and the deficit is estimated to grow 200,000 
units each year. In IFC’s demand survey, only 16 percent own 
their home. 
Inside the findings: This is consistent with findings 
from the Kenya Integrated Household Budget Survey 
(KIHBS) 2015-2016, which found that 22 percent of urban 
households own their home. The demand survey’s slightly 
lower number is due to its focus on low- and middle-
income households, which are less likely than high-
income households to own their home..
Households headed by a woman are only slightly more 
likely to be renting than those headed by men or joint 
decision-making households. Among households that 
own, 92 percent have a registered title deed. 
Ownership Status
n  Women    n  Men     n  Joint
Rent
Own
	
0%	
20%	
40%	
60%	
80%	
100%
While gender is not a significant driver of home 
ownership, age, family size, education, income, 
length of occupancy, and city are. A regression analysis 
explored the impact of these various factors, confirming 
findings from the demand survey. The analysis found one 
exception to the positive impact of “length of occupancy” 
on home ownership, living in Nairobi. Perhaps because of 
higher property prices and limited supply of houses, living 
in Nairobi decreases the probability of ownership by nine 
percent. 
Ownership by Age and Income
n  Men    n  Women   
	80%
	 60%
	 40%
	 20%
	
0%
	
18-24	
25-34	
35-44	
45-54	
>54
	40%
	 30%
	 20%
	 10%
	
0%
	
	
Less than	
150–300	
301–600	 More than
	
	
150 USD	
USD	
USD	
600 USD
5. Kenya
35


However, the legal owner of the home is most 
commonly the man.
Overall Legal Ownership
n  Women    
n  Men    
n  Joint
Ownership by head of household gender
Female-headed households: 
58% female sole owner 
(8% joint owner)
Male-headed households: 
81% man sole legal owner
Joint decision-making 
households: 74% male sole 
legal owner
	
0%	
25%	
50%	
75%
Purchasing and building a home are the most common 
ways to acquire a home. Among women, inheritance is a 
more common means of home acquisition than among both 
male-headed and joint households. A quarter of female-
headed households inherited. 
Acquisition of Housing Among 
Homeowners 	
n  Women    n  Men     n  Joint
Bought
Built
Inherited
	
0%	
10%	
20%	
30%	
40%	
50%	
60%
KENYA CONTINUED
13%
18%
69%
36


Median Income, Expenses and Savings by Gender of Household Head
Men
Women
Joint
In terms of means to purchase, women have higher 
savings than households headed by men, despite 
their lower income and similar expenses. Joint heads 
of household, which have a higher monthly income, also 
have the highest monthly and cumulative, despite higher 
monthly expenses.
Use of bank loans for housing is very low. Of the demand 
survey respondents, only seven percent of men and four 
percent of women had previously applied for housing loans. 
Savings and Credit Cooperative Societies and banks were 
the most common institutions to which both men and 
women applied.
Most loans were sought to build a house (37 percent) 
or purchase land on which to build (37 percent). The 
purpose of the remainder of loan applications was to 
fund the purchase of a house (16 percent) or repairs/
improvements (11 percent).
A greater percentage of women applicants had loans 
approved than men. Of those who applied for a loan, 87 
percent of women and 60 percent of men were approved.
Inside the findings: These findings were consistent 
with statistics from the World Bank Global Financial 
Indicators (Findex) Database, which show that only seven 
percent of women and 10 percent of men currently have 
outstanding loans. 
Institutions to Which Men and Women 
Applied
n  Women    n  Men    
	 Savings/credit
	
cooperative
	
Bank
	
Government 
	
programs
	
0%	
20%	
40%	
60%	
80%
	
Monthly income	
348	
497	
696
	
Monthly Expenses	
248	
248	
398
	
Monthly Savings	
38	
29	
50
	
Total Savings	
994	
398	
1,988
37


Current Access to Housing 
Finance and Supply
Savings and Credit Cooperative Societies are the 
major providers of home construction loans in Kenya. 
According to “Housing: Unavailable and Unaffordable,” 
World Bank Kenya Economic Update 2017, SACCOs now 
account for more than 90 percent of home loans (over 
100,000). SACCOs largely rely on member deposits for 
capital and lack long-term sources of capital, which limits 
their ability to expand.
Inside the findings: The advantages that SACCOs offer 
to loan applicants include: 1) they package home loans 
as development loans at more affordable interest rates, 
usually about 12 percent per annum; 2) they offer small 
formal mortgages through the Kenya Union of Savings 
and Credit Co-operatives (Kuscco Housing Fund), and; 3) 
they fund unsecured construction loans.
Mortgages from commercial banks have decreased in 
number of accounts but increased in value. According 
to the Bank of Kenya’s “Bank Supervision Annual Report 
2016,” from December 2015 to December 2016, the number 
of mortgage loan accounts decreased by 1.5 percent from 
24,458 to 24,085, while the average mortgage size increased 
by nine percent from $80,676 (K Sh 8.3 million) to $88,452 
(K Sh 9.1 million) as property prices rose. During the same 
period, the outstanding value of banks’ mortgage loan 
assets increased by 8.1 percent from $1.976 billion (K Sh 
203.3 billion) to $2.137 billion (K Sh 219.9 billion). (Currency 
conversion rate applied: K Sh .0097 per $1.00)
Inside the findings: The decrease in number of 
mortgage loan accounts is partly due to an interest 
rate cap imposed by the Central Bank. This reduced the 
average interest rate from 18.7 percent in 2015 to 13.5 
percent in 2016, and subsequently led to tightened credit 
standards and fewer mortgage loan accounts. 
Commercial banks currently service a small portion of 
the population in providing mortgages. There are fewer 
than 25,000 mortgages outstanding in Kenya, compared 
to a population of 48 million. The ratio of outstanding 
mortgages to GDP in 2015 was only three percent. This 
low level of mortgage lending, while comparable to other 
Sub-Saharan African countries (e.g., Uganda and Tanzania), 
puts Kenya behind emerging markets and more developed 
countries (e.g., South Africa at more than 30 percent).
Financial Institutions reported that their processes 
are gender neutral. Interviews with three banks, 
two Savings and Credit Cooperative Societies, and one 
microfinance bank (including the main lenders in housing 
finance) reported that their internal policies, regulations, 
and practices — including loan origination processes — are 
gender neutral.
Commercial banks do not offer gender-specific 
products and services for the women’s segment. In 
part, this is because organizations such as the microfinance 
institution Kenya Women Finance Trust (KWFT) are already 
targeting this segment. They are weary of being perceived 
as a “woman’s bank” and they see gender-specific products 
and services as outside their traditional realm of business. 
However, financial institutions have a perception that 
women clients are better payers. Although none of the 
FIs in this study keep disaggregated data on repayment 
behavior, the generally accepted perception is that women 
are more emotionally connected to their homes, and as 
caretakers of their family, will go to great lengths to ensure 
loans are repaid. 
Demand study respondents agree that women do 
not enjoy equal access to housing finance. More than 
50 percent of women and approximately 75 percent of 
men perceive a gender-specific difference in access to 
housing finance.
KENYA CONTINUED
38


Do Women Enjoy Equal Access to Housing 
Finance? (RHS) 
n  Yes    n  No    
	
Women
	
Men
	
0%	
50%	
100%
The satisfaction rate among men receiving loans 
was 100 percent, and among women was 92 percent. 
Satisfaction was based largely on whether clients perceive 
the terms and conditions of their loan as favorable. For 
instance, when asked what aspect of their loan product 
they would change, clients most frequent mentioned lower 
interest rates.
Barriers
The main barrier to housing finance is insufficient 
money. While both men and women reported a lack 
of sufficient funds as a major reason for not wanting to 
purchase a home, more 64 percent of women and 45 
percent of men cited this reason.  
Inside the findings: Other significant, related 
challenges to accessing housing finance is inability to 
repay, lack of employment opportunities, high interest 
rates, and inability to meet bank requirements for 
collateral or a guarantor.
For women, another barrier is that big financial 
decisions, including the purchase of the house, are seen 
as the man’s responsibility. For instance, a quarter of the 
demand survey respondents responded that they agreed 
with this view.
Women are generally disadvantaged in terms of 
income and property ownership. Financial institutions 
reported that women are more likely to be self-employed 
or employed in the informal sector, thus having a lower 
income and lacking proof of a stable income. Land titles are 
also a challenge. Even though women can inherit property, 
the property is held in the name of the man, following 
tradition. Thus, women do not have the titles needed to 
offer banks collateral.
Those that had been approved for loans by a financial 
institution are largely long-term clients. Not 
surprisingly, household income positively correlated with 
the decision to apply for and receive approval for a loan. 
Over time, though, this has resulted in a greater likelihood 
of loan approval for existing rather than new customers 
(which could disadvantage female-headed households). 
39


Post-Harvest 
Processing and 
Storage
KENYA CONTINUED
Median Length of Time as a Financial 
Institution’s Client
n  Approved    n  Not approved
	More than 
	
5 years
	 2-5 years
	 1-2 years
	
1 year 
	
or less
	
0%	 10%	 20%	 30%	 40%	 50%	60%	 70%	 80%	 90%
ADDITIONAL INSIGHTS INTO 
BARRIERS TO HOUSING FINANCE 
ACCESS
To better understand the role of culture and norms on the 
employment status of men and women, a logistic regression 
model was fitted to explore how personal characteristics of 
respondents impact their likelihood of working. Variables 
identified included gender, marital status, and having a 
bank account. (See Notes for a detailed explanation of this 
analysis and a chart of results.)
Results of the analysis indicate that being a woman 
decreases the probability of being employed by 12 
percentage points, all else equal. Traditional gender 
norms dictate that women in Kenya are significantly more 
responsible for taking care of the home, limiting whether 
and where they find employment, and thus how much 
money they earn. 
Among women who would like to be able to purchase 
housing, 64 percent of those not planning to purchase 
cited not having enough money as the biggest barrier 
to home acquisition. Women are more likely than men 
to not work at all or work from home, resulting in lower 
income.
ADDRESSING BARRIERS
The Kenya Women Finance Trust (KWFT) is a 
microfinance bank explicitly established to serve 
women as clients. Approximately 90 percent of its clients 
are women. KWFT is currently working with Habitat for 
Humanity to provide housing microfinance loans in rural 
areas. 
Savings and Credit Cooperative Societies such as the 
United Women SACCO and the Federation of Women 
Entrepreneur Associations (FEWA) SACCO cater 
specifically to women clients. However, the majority 
of these institutions’ loans are for personal or business 
purposes. Only a small portion of their loan portfolios is 
housing finance.
The Kenya Mortgage Refinance Company (KMRC) 
was launched in May 2019, part of the government’s 
affordable housing pillar of President Uhura Kenyatta’s 
“Big Four” strategies. The sole function of KMRC is to 
provide long-term lower-cost loans to primary mortgage 
lenders, helping housing finance to become more widely 
available and more affordable. Another government priority 
is the promise of 500,000 new affordable housing units 
by 2022, doubling current output. The affordable housing 
initiative, KMRC, combined with an increase in affordable 
housing may combine to energize housing finance lending 
to Kenya’s women.
Women, Business and the Law 
Women, Business and the Law is a World Bank Group 
project collecting unique data on the laws and 
regulations that restrict women’s economic 
opportunities. The following findings for Kenya are 
relevant to women’s access to housing finance. 
40


ACCESSING INSTITUTIONS
1.	 Are wives required to obey their 
husbands?
No
2.	 Can a woman legally get a job in the same 
way as a man?
Yes
3.	 Can a woman sign a contract in the same 
way as a man?
Yes
4.	 Can a woman open a bank account in the 
same way as a man?
Yes
5.	 Can a woman choose where to live in the 
same way as a man?
Yes
6.	 Can a woman be “head of household” in 
the same way as a man?
N/A
USING PROPERTY
 
1.	 Who legally administers marital property?
Both must 
agree
2.	 Does the law provide for valuation of 
nonmonetary contributions?
Yes
3.	 Do men and women have equal 
ownership rights to immovable property?
Yes
4.	 Do sons and daughters have equal 
inheritance rights?
Yes
5.	 Do female and male surviving spouses 
have equal inheritance rights?
No
GOING TO COURT
1.	 Does a woman’s testimony carry the 
same evidentiary weight in court as a 
man’s?
Yes
BUILDING CREDIT
1.	 Do retailers provide information to credit 
agencies?
No
2.	 Do utility companies provide information 
to credit agencies?
Yes
3.	 Is discrimination based on gender 
prohibited in access to credit?
No
4.	 Is discrimination based on marital status 
prohibited in access to credit?
No
Market Opportunities
Female-headed households are approximately 13 
percentage points more likely to be planning a home 
purchase or renovation in the next five years. These 
results stem from a data mining logistic regression analysis 
of observable characteristics such as gender, age, education, 
type of employment, etc.
Similarly, the demand survey indicated that female-
headed households are more likely to be planning 
improvements to their homes than those headed by 
men, but slightly less likely to be planning to purchase 
houses. Joint decision-making households renting and 
owning have the highest proportion planning to purchase 
or construct, and the least likely to make improvements to 
their home. 
Inside the findings: Among households currently living 
rented housing, 66 percent of households with a male 
decision-maker and 64 percent with a female decision-
maker reported planning to purchase a home in the next 
five years. Among homeowners, 38 percent of male-
headed households and 33 percent of female-headed 
households plan to move or construct a new home in the 
next five years. 
For purchase or improvements, about 33 percent 
of women expect to seek funding from formal 
financial institutions, compared to about 25 
percent of men. The median expected loan amount 
is same for female- and male-headed households 
at $9,921; the highest is for joint decision-making 
households at $24,844.
41


For housing purchases, formal loans are the second-
most common type of funding (after personal cash/
savings). Loans are substantially more common among 
joint decision-making couples than female- or male-headed 
households, and of these, married couples are the most 
likely to use a formal loan (53 percent). 
Funding Used for Housing Acquisition
n  Women    n  Men     n  Joint
	 Personal/
	
savings
	
Formal 
	
loan
	 Informal
	
loan
	
Acquire
	 materials
	
Other
	
Govt.
	
Subsidy
	Friends or
	
Family
	
0%	 10%	 20%	 30%	 40%	 50%	60%	 70%	 80%	 90%
Expected Loan Amounts Needed for 
New Home Purchase
Cost of 
purchasing
Loan amount 
needed
Expected 
Monthly 
payment
Woman
$22,360
$9,921
$100
Man
$19,876
9,921$
$134
Joint
$29,814
$24,844
$100
Cluster Analysis reveals opportunities for tailoring 
products and services to specific segments who plan to 
purchase housing in the next five years. This analysis of 
demand survey responses (see Notes for more information 
on Cluster Analysis methodology) identified homogenous 
groups of potential customers that have similar needs and 
attributes, and thus represent sub-segments for tailored 
products and services. Segment 1 is largely double-income 
households. Segment 2 is single-income married couples. 
Segment 3 is single-income female-headed households.
The total size of the urban market for women’s housing 
loans in Kenya is estimated at approximately $14. 8 
billion. The total market size represents the total estimated 
amount of loans needed from urban women in Kenya who 
currently have plans to purchase a home. It was calculated 
from values including number of urban households, 
percentage of female head, percentage demand, and 
median expected loan amount, relying on figures from 
the demand survey and census data. More detail on this 
calculation appears in the Notes section at the end of this 
report.  
42


Cluster Analysis of Potential Housing Finance Market
	
Segment 1	
Segment 2	
Segment 3
	
Married	
Married	
Single
Household Head	
Both	
Man	
Woman
	
55%	 Self-employed/ 	
57%	 Does not work 	
35%	 Permanent
	
	
entrepreneur	
18%	 Self-employed/	
	
employee
	
45%	 Permanent	
	
entrepreneur	
29%	 Self-employed/
	
	
employee	
14%	 Permanent	
	
entrepreneur
	
	
	
	
employee	
21%	 Part-time
	
	
	
6%	
Part-time 	
	
employee
	
	
	
	
employee	
9%	
Does not work
	
	
	
5%	
Non-contract	
6%	
Non-contract
	
	
	
	
employee	
	
employee
	
$645	
$495	
$396
	
$26,750	
$14,860	
$28,730
	
$5,268	
$1,972	
$3,809
Median Household Income 
(from all contributing family 
members)*
Loan Amount Desired†
Savings for Housing
Other Key Variables:
Steps taking to buy/build home:
  • Saving/putting money away myself	
59%	
64%	
74%
  • Belong to cooperative/savings group	
34%	
18%	
38%
  • Purchasing land	
18%	
10%	
9%
Structure wanted	
7% 	
8%	
18%
	

                                       House    Apartment	
                         93%	
                        92%	
                       82%
Anticipated monthly repayment amount	
$219	
$162	
$283
Monthly disposable income	
$347	
$230	
$301
*Median household income is the median income brought in for the household by all family members. If the respondent does not work and is not 
bringing income, the household can still have income from a spouse, parents, adult children, etc. 
† Loan amount desired is based on respondent’s own evaluation of amount needed for home purchase or construction and not a reflection of 
financial analysis of repayment capacity
Employment (of respondent)
Marital status
Variables Used in Clustering:
43


44


Current Barriers to Women’s 
Housing Finance
1. WOMEN TYPICALLY LACK 
SUFFICIENT INCOME AND 
DOCUMENTATION OF THEIR 
INCOME. 
Women are less able to meet the level of income and 
formal income documentation required by financial 
institutions to assess credit worthiness.
Women are less likely to be employed than men. 
Regression results show that women are significantly less 
likely to be employed than men even when controlling for 
other observable characteristics, and that being married 
reduces the likelihood of women’s employment, but has 
no effect for men. Compared to male respondents, female 
respondents were 35 percent less likely to be working in 
Colombia, 38 percent less likely in India, and 12 percent less 
likely in Kenya. 
Female-headed households have a lower average 
monthly income than for male-headed households, and 
in married households, men are typically considered 
the main contributor to the household income. Female-
headed households make up 26 percent of households in 
Colombia, 9 percent in India, and 25 percent in Kenya. These 
are largely single, divorced or widowed women, many of 
whom have children. 
Employed women are more likely to be self-employed 
or in the informal sector — sectors that do not 
generate income statements or tax documents 
required by financial institutions. The lack of necessary 
income documentation hinders the ability of FIs to assess 
applicants’ repayment capacity. 
2. WOMEN DISPROPORTIONATELY 
LACK HOME OWNERSHIP AND 
TITLING DOCUMENTATION. 
Women are less able to provide home ownership 
documentation required by banks as collateral for 
housing finance.
Women are less likely to own property. Colombia fully 
recognizes women’s equal rights, and protects women’s 
equal rights to marital property and marital assets. 
However, while half of Colombia’s male-headed households 
own their housing, only 37 percent of female-headed 
households own housing, and 43 percent of households 
with joint decision-makers own housing. In Kenya, where 
women’s right to inheritance are protected but with many 
exceptions and rights to marital assets are based on a 
woman’s contributions to acquiring the asset, 67 percent 
of owned housing have a man as the sole legal owner. In 
India, which has no provision protecting women’s rights 
to inheritance or rights to marital property, 81 percent of 
owned housing have a man as the sole legal owner. 
Women are less likely to have registered property 
titles (and in some cases separate land titles), required 
by banks as collateral for housing finance. The legal 
framework in each of the three countries prohibits 
discrimination based on sex, endorses explicit recognition 
of women’s rights and guarantees equal access to land, 
housing and property. However, when it comes to 
inheritance, only Colombia fully recognizes women’s equal 
rights. In India, there is no provision regarding women’s 
rights to inheritance and in Kenya, this right is granted but 
with many exceptions. There is a similar situation in terms 
of women’s rights to marital property. In Colombia, women 
have equal rights to marital assets, while in Kenya they 
have the right to assets based on their contribution to the 
acquisition of said assets and in India, they have no rights to 
marital assets. Therefore, in practice, patriarchal norms that 
6. The Business Case for Women’s 
Housing Finance Programs
45


constrain women’s right of inheritance and property titling, 
continue to prevail in India and Kenya. Because of this, 
women are less likely to own land or housing, which means 
they are less likely to be able to offer registered titles as 
collateral. This obstacle is especially complex in India, where 
land titles are a state subject, with different states having 
different regulatory requirements. 
3. WOMEN HAVE LESS EXPERIENCE 
WITH FORMAL LOANS
Women are less likely to be familiar with the procedures 
and requirements for applying for a formal loan and less 
likely to have developed a relationship with a financial 
institution.
While use of housing loans remains relatively low for 
both men and women, female-headed households are, 
when controlling for other variables, significantly less 
likely to have used a formal loan for the purchase of 
housing. Only nine percent of men and eight percent of 
women in Colombia; seven percent of men and four percent 
of women in Kenya; and five percent of men and six percent 
of women in India have previously applied for housing loans 
in the last five years. Among those households that had 
applied in India, joint decision-making households were 
most likely to have been approved (83 percent) compared to 
male-headed (66 percent) and female-headed (57 percent) 
households. 
Formal Housing Loans in Colombia, India, 
and Kenya
n  Used formal loan to purchase housing    
n  Applied for formal loan in past 5 years 
n  Planning to use formal loans in next 5 years
Colombia
	
Men
	
Women
India
	
Men
	
Women
Kenya
	
Men
	
Women
	
0%	 5%	
10%	
15%	
20%	
25%	
30%	
35%
	
4. INFORMAL CULTURAL BIAS 
WORKS AGAINST WOMEN
Although financial institutions have gender-neutral 
lending policies, traditional cultural norms can affect 
how banks view female loan applicants and how 
potential female loan applicants view banks.
Gender norms play a role in whether women will 
approach a bank for housing finance. In Kenya, for 
example, survey respondents and financial institutions 
mentioned that purchase of a home is considered the man’s 
responsibility, and a single woman is expected to move into 
her husband’s home when she marries. Thus, women are 
disincentivized to seek housing finance for themselves. 
Financial institutions often do not take housing finance 
applicants who are unmarried women as seriously as 
they do applicants who are men or married women. 
Financial institutions reported that they scrutinize the 
loan application of single women more than single men or 
married women.
THE BUSINESS CASE CONTINUED
46


Despite Barriers, This is a Market 
Worth Addressing 
Private-sector solutions and public-sector policies can 
transform women’s interest in housing finance into 
economic growth.  
There is a strong demand: many women are planning 
to purchase a home or make home improvements in 
the next five years. Among women involved as the sole 
decision-maker or joint decision-maker with their husband, 
49 percent in Colombia, 20 percent in India, and 65 percent 
in Kenya are planning to purchase a home or make home 
improvements in the next five years. In Colombia and Kenya, 
women overwhelmingly prefer to purchase houses, while in 
India, women are largely planning to purchase apartments. 
Many women plan to finance their purchases and 
improvements through a formal loan. Planned source 
of funds differs by country, but formal loans are most 
common in Colombia and Kenya, while women in India 
prefer informal loans. In Colombia, almost half of the 
women who plan to make a home purchase plan to use a 
formal loan, a quarter government subsidy, and another 
23 percent personal savings. In Kenya, personal savings are 
most common (53 percent), closely followed by formal loans 
(40 percent). In contrast, in India, informal loans are most 
common with 47 percent of women expecting to use an 
informal loan, followed by personal savings (18 percent) and 
formal loans (15 percent).
There is a significant gap between women’s rising 
demand for housing finance and current FI supply. The 
housing finance programs that currently exist do not have 
the scope or breadth to meet the growing demand among 
women for housing finance.
Estimated Market Size by Gender of 	
Household Head
Female Headed 
Households
 Joint Decision-Making 
Households
Colombia
$5.7 billion
$17.3 billion
India
$2.8 billion
$29.5 billion
Kenya
$2.4 billion
$12.4 billion
Financial institutions consider women to be better 
savers as well as better payers than men. Financial 
institutions in India and Kenya reported that they prefer to 
have a woman on housing loans because their emotional 
ties to their home ensure repayment to prevent foreclosure; 
however, no data was provided by the financial institutions 
to support these statements. From the demand survey, 
households in which a woman is involved in financial 
decision-making save more than households in which men 
make financial decisions. Despite having lower levels of 
income, these households find a way to save more each 
month to purchase a home.
47


Reasons for FIs to Pursue the 
Women’s Housing Finance 
Market
Brand Enhancement
•	 Social impact
•	 Differentiation
•	 New client base
•	 Stronger ties to current 
clients
Profitability
•	 Large, untapped market
•	 Better payers, low NPLs
•	 Stable market — 
greater financial 
discipline
Reasons for Policy 
Intervention
Quality of Life
•	 Equal access to property and 
titling 
•	 Equal socioeconomic conditions
•	 Improved access to quality 
dwellings and public services
•	 Improved safety and security 
National Economy
•	 Increased FI profitability
•	 More stable communities
•	 Growth in housing, home 
improvement and construction 
sectors
Policy interventions could have a positive effect 
on women’s housing finance. Low income, informal 
employment, unequal property rights, and other structural 
factors can affect women’s access to housing and housing 
finance and be moderated by policy intervention. For 
example, despite available studies on the situation of 
women suggesting that women have equal rights to 
property ownership and inheritance, titles are still largely in 
the name of the men in the family rather than the women, 
and inheritance goes first through sons rather than 
daughters. Policy interventions could close this disconnect 
between rights and reality. 
Policy interventions that support women’s housing 
finance and home ownership also could affect the 
disparate socioeconomic conditions between men and 
women. Specifically, female-headed households living 
in informal settlements are more vulnerable to forced 
displacement and poverty. Displacement and migration 
from rural to urban areas are the main drivers of informal 
employment for women in urban Colombia, especially for 
women with low education and low socioeconomic status 
(Source: C. Flórez, 2003, Migration and the urban informal 
sector in Colombia, Universidad de los Andes: Bogota). Such 
women live in precarious dwellings that lack basic needs 
and adequate public services (Source: UN Habitat, 2005, 
Law, Land Tenure and Gender Review: Colombia). In India 
and Kenya, women’s rights are often compromised due to 
the patriarchal nature of the society and their safety and 
security are compromised due to lack of adequate housing. 
 
THE BUSINESS CASE CONTINUED
48


Lessons Learned: The results of 
current women-focused banking 
initiatives
Housing finance programs and policies tailored to 
women in this study’s target countries, as well as 
significant FI experience lending to women-led Small 
and Medium Enterprises worldwide, have produced 
positive results.
A few institutions and government policies in 
Colombia, Kenya, and India already have housing 
finance programs tailored to women. In India, SEWA 
Grih Rin Ltd. provides housing loans specifically for low-
income women (more detail below). In Kenya, Kenya 
Women Finance Trust is working with Habitat for Humanity 
to provide housing microfinance loans for women in rural 
areas. In Colombia, vivienda de interés social (affordable 
housing — VIS) and vivienda de interés prioritario (Priority 
Social Housing — VIP) programs involve subsidized interest 
rates for a lower income segment of the population, which 
includes female-headed households (more detail below). 
India’s “Housing for All,” a Credit Link Subsidy program, 
provides a subsidy if a woman is on the registered title. 
Institutions active in women-led Small and Medium 
Enterprise lending specifically reported business 
growth and low non-performing loans.
Dominican Republic’s Banco BHD León (BHDL). Within its 
first year, BHDL’s Mujer Mujer program produced an internal 
rate of return of over 35 percent, along with a return on 
assets of 20 percent for individuals, 14 percent for small 
enterprises, and 12 percent for medium-sized businesses. In 
addition, between December 2015 and July 2016, the bank’s 
credit portfolio grew 26 percent in commercial loans, 19 
percent in car loans, and eight percent in consumer loans. 
Colombia’s Leasing Habitacional Program
Begun in 2017 by Fondo Nacional del Ahorro to help 
low-income Colombians who have difficulty saving 
for a down payment, this program allows people with 
income between $262 to $1,572 to access a new home 
by paying a monthly rental fee for a term of five to 
30 years. After this term, the person may exercise 
his or her purchase option to become the owner 
of the property. This “social leasing” finances up to 
100 percent of the value of the property for a new 
home, and up to 95 percent for existing construction. 
The program finances both Priority Social Housing 
(VIP) with maximum value of $18,340, and affordable 
housing (VIS) with a maximum value of $35,370.  For 
Colombians, additional advantages of the program 
include: 
•	 The money used for the payment of rent is 
credited to the purchase of housing
•	 Competitive interest rates 
•	 No mortgage expenses at the conclusion of the 
leasing term  
•	 Term up to 30 years, facilitating acquisition of 
higher-value housing 
While not explicitly targeted to women, this program 
disproportionately benefits women, as more female-
headed households are in the low-income category. 
Such programs could be specifically tailored to 
improve women’s and female-headed households’ 
access to housing finance.
49


THE BUSINESS CASE CONTINUED
Sewa Grih Rin Limited (SGRL)
As part of the Self-Employed Women’s Association 
(SEWA), Sewa Grih Rin Ltd. provides affordable 
housing finance to the under-served, low-income 
households in urban and peri-urban locations of 
India. Their focus is on serving women, especially 
those who run micro and small businesses and those 
who are paid workers in the informal sector,  a 
segment that dominates the Indian urban workforce, 
but remains unserved by formal lenders due to lack of 
formal title and income verification.
As of May 2018, Sewa Grih Rin Ltd. had no NPLs and a 
portfolio of approximately $950,000. The average loan 
provided by SGRL to clients is approximately $ 3,500. 
SGRL reduces the high costs of customer acquisition 
and collections by its replicable marketing outreach 
methods:
•	 Door-to-door marketing in target areas 
(particularly where there is a strong SEWA 
presence). SGRL sends loan officers out for 
approximately 1.5 hours a day to meet with 
potential customers at their home. Loan officers 
meet with potential customers, explain the 
types of products offered, the process to getting 
a loan and the requirements for each product. 
This personal approach combined with some 
elements of financial literacy has contributed 
to reduce women’s cultural barriers to lending 
and grow SGRL’s customer base. During the 
visit, men and women in the household gain 
an understanding of the borrowing process 
and the importance of a woman as borrower, 
information that helps overcome the prevalent 
cultural bias towards men as borrowers. This 
personalized approach can be easily replicated 
by other institutions, particularly MFIs.
•	 Marketing through existing networks and clients. 
SGRL markets through the SEWA Network and 
its nearly 1.4 million members. Additionally, 
there are more than 20 sister organizations 
associated with SEWA involved in housing, 
banking, insurance, research, ecotourism, and 
other activities. This wide network of women 
throughout India is a ready market for SGRL 
products. Banks and other financial institutions 
could adapt this approach by marketing to 
existing transactional clients.
•	 Looking beyond formal titles for collateral. 
Because most women will not be able to access 
formal titles, SGRL supports women to obtain 
paralegal titles, including property papers. 
During a home visit, the loan officer assesses not 
only family income, but also history of savings, 
borrowing history, equity contribution, and 
household assets. If a household has made big 
purchases on installment (refrigerator, television, 
etc.), for example, and paid them off, this can 
increase SGRL’s confidence in the household’s 
willingness and ability to repay.  Other financial 
institutions can carry out similar analyses of a 
household’s overall borrowing capacities and 
assist with obtaining collateral documents.
50


Lebanon’s BLC Bank. In four years of its Women 
Empowerment program, BLC increased the number 
of its women SME lenders by 82 percent, increased its 
women’s outstanding loan portfolio by 121 percent, and 
grew women’s total deposits by 65 percent, outpacing its 
portfolio as a whole. The compound annual growth rate 
and return on assets for products launched under the 
Women Empowerment initiative consistently outperformed 
those sold to men. The rate of non-performing loans for 
women at BLC was 2. 45 percent, substantially lower 
than the bank’s overall rate.
Palestine’s Bank of Palestine. BOP created a mini-MBA 
program for women business owners to increase their 
business financial literacy. The program resulted in 
increased access to finance and use of financial products 
by women business owners. BOP itself developed a special 
collateral-free loan to ease restrictions for women who 
have limited access to land ownership beyond lending.
Jordan’s Bank Al Etihad. The results of a Bank Al Etihad 
study were clear: there were no non-performing loans 
for female SME customers. Because of the overall positive 
performance of its women-targeted SME finance business, 
Bank Al Etihad will continue to serve women, which it 
considers the next emerging market.
Turkey’s Garanti Bank. Garanti Bank has integrated 
its Women Entrepreneurs business into its entire SME 
Banking business line, but has tracked its specific growth. 
Currently, WE customers represent a significant portion of 
its customer base: 21 percent of its profit, 10 percent of 
its deposits, 11 percent of its customer loans, and 12. 5 
percent of its customers.
Moving forward: Addressing 
the needs of women in housing 
finance 
Research household incomes and average loan size. 
Before creating new products and services to attract 
the women’s segment of housing finance, banks can 
obtain some valuable baseline information by researching 
current borrowers’ income and loan levels. In Colombia, 
for example, 42 percent of households are dual income 
with an average loan size of $26,000, and 26 percent are 
female-headed with an average loan size of $17,179. In India, 
38 percent are dual-income with an average loan size of 
$9,462, and 9 percent are female-headed with an average 
loan size of $7,279. In Kenya, 34 percent of households are 
dual-income with an average loan size of $24,844, and 25 
percent of households are female-headed with an average 
loan size of $9,921. 
A survey conducted with a sample of 154 IFC 
banking clients found that their women-owned 
or women-led Small and Medium Enterprise 
(WSME) loan portfolio contains significantly 
lower non-performing loans than total SME 
loan portfolios.  
•	 Just 3. 6 percent of WSME loans were non-
performing  versus 4. 5 percent of the total 
SME portfolio
•	 The average loan size to WSMEs was 
$27,708 compared with an average loan of 
$43,136 in the total SME portfolio
•	 WSME outstanding loans accounted for 
roughly 10 percent of the total volume of 
outstanding SME loans 
51


Learn the goals women hope to accomplish with 
housing finance. Despite barriers to housing finance, 
this study revealed significant interest among women 
to accomplish three categories of housing goals: home 
improvement, incremental instruction, and purchase. 
•	 Home Improvement. An estimated 25 percent of 
women homeowners in Kenya, 18 percent in India, 
and 23 percent in Colombia plan to make home 
improvement changes in the next five years. An 
estimated five percent of women homeowners in 
Kenya, five percent in India and 17 percent in Colombia 
plan to use a loan for this purpose. The most common 
home improvement changes mentioned were 
building and improving a kitchen and building and 
improving a bathroom. The average loan size for home 
improvements is $411 in Kenya, $1,340 in India, and 
$2,382 in Colombia.
•	 Incremental Construction. Building a home in 
incremental stages is common practice in the 
developing world, and constitutes between 50 to 90 
percent of residential construction (Source: Habitat 
for Humanity. Step by Step: Supporting Incremental 
Building through Housing Microfinance. Shelter Report 
2014). An estimated 64 percent of women in Kenya, 66 
percent in India, and 32 percent in Colombia cannot 
afford to purchase even the least expensive housing in 
urban areas. For these households, smaller, consecutive 
loans might be more appropriate.
•	 Purchase. The average loan size to purchase a home 
in Kenya is $29,290, in India $20,978, and in Colombia 
$17,022. In Kenya, an estimated 36 percent of women 
can afford the minimum housing price, while six 
percent can afford the median house price; in India, 
an estimated 34 percent of women can afford the 
minimum, six percent the median; and in Colombia, 
an estimate 68 percent of women can afford the 
minimum, 35 percent the median.
Develop products, terms, and services that meet 
women’s needs. In India, for example, a housing finance 
product was designed with a credit-linked subsidy. 
Borrowers receive a concessional rate on the housing loan 
when the woman’s name is included in the registered 
title deed. In addition, free financial literacy programs tied 
to housing finance benefit both women consumers and 
the financial institutions. Through the programs, women 
become more competent and confident borrowers, and 
institutions form a valuable brand-loyalty relationship with 
them.
Simplify procedures to improve the women’s housing 
finance environment. Once financial institutions identify 
products and services to offer, reconsidering loan processing 
procedures can make offerings more accessible. In India, 
for example, one of the biggest reasons households seek 
informal loans is due to the requirements that formal 
financial institutions have for obtaining a loan. By reducing 
the processing time and steps for registering and/or 
perfecting mortgages, banks can make housing loans more 
accessible to more consumers.
Train staff on gender awareness. Gender sensitization 
training within banks and financial institutions ensures 
that all staff understand the specific barriers women face 
and their specific financing needs, as well as the financial 
institution’s specific value proposition for women. Staff 
become able to engage women in conversations about 
products and services in a way that encourages brand 
loyalty and new business. 
Know how to market to women consumers. 
Relationships are key to marketing to women, a fact that 
determines which tactics will be most successful.
•	 Women prefer to obtain advice on housing finance from 
friends and family. According to a survey carried out 
by Nielsen in emerging markets, across 22 forms of 
advertising measured, “recommendations from people 
you know” is the most trusted advertising source for 
women (Source: The Nielsen Company, Women of 
THE BUSINESS CASE CONTINUED
52


Tomorrow: A Study of Women Around the World, 
June 2011). Word of mouth is thus a significant driver 
of purchasing decisions, particularly for women. 
IFC’s study also found that friends and family are 
the preferred sources for financial advice on housing 
finance. As a result, the most effective tool to reach 
women is to promote brand and product image 
through personal recommendations between friends, 
family, and formal and informal networks. 
•	 Women also want to receive advice from banks themselves. 
Fifty-three percent of women in Colombia, 25 percent 
in India, and 27 percent in Kenya report that banks are 
their preferred source of financial advice for buying/
building a house. This suggests the effectiveness of 
marketing techniques such as: 
–
– Easily accessible in-bank marketing materials 
(pamphlets, posters, etc.) to showcase housing 
finance offerings for women.
–
– Staff engagement of women clients at every 
interaction, using the opportunity to reinforce 
marketing and consumer education messaging and 
strengthen the bank-client relationship.
–
– Protocols and incentives that encourage staff 
engagement.
•	 Women appreciate a sense that their bank understands them 
and their needs, as reflected in their interactions with bank 
staff and clear processes for loan application and approval. 
A positive customer experience is something women 
greatly value. To ensure a continuing positive customer 
experience, banks can conduct a Voice of the Customer 
survey to capture feedback from customers about their 
experience, needs, and requirements. Insights from 
the survey can be used to develop staff incentives for 
different levels of interaction with consumers, and 
pinpoint processes or policies that need improvement. 
Ongoing monitoring and analysis of women’s housing 
finance programs can ensure continuing profitability. 
Gender-disaggregated data provides banks with the 
information they need to know about how well they are 
serving women, and to make strategic decisions that 
improve performance over time. Gender-specific data can 
include statistics on applications and rejected applications, 
the number and value of loans granted by gender and 
performance indicators including non-perrforming loans 
and profit margins. 
53


54


Notes
For Colombia, Kenya, and India this study: 1) examined potential factors driving women’s demand for housing and 
housing loans; 2) performed a Cluster Analysis to reveal homogenous subgroups of potential customers with similar 
needs and attributes; and 3) calculated the market size for women housing loans. 
1) Potential factors driving women’s demand for housing and housing loans and housing demand predictors. For 
each of the countries, the first logistic regression (Model 1) seeks to identify the predictors of planning to buy a house or 
make improvements to a current dwelling in the next five years. The second logistic regression (Model 2) seeks to identify 
the determinant factors related to existing demand (i.e., having used a loan in the purchase of the current home). Comparing 
the two models provides additional insight into the housing market. Please note, raw coefficients in logistic regressions are 
scaled in terms of log odds; marginal coefficients used to determine probability. Marginal coefficients enable interpretation 
of results in terms of probability. Charts of each country’s analysis appear below. 
2) Cluster Analysis (segmentation) Methodology. In this segmentation exercise to identify market sub-groups, the two-
step cluster analysis used an algorithm that first performs sequential clustering on the data to compress dense regions and 
form sub-clusters, and then applied the cluster method to the sub-clusters. Quality of cluster analysis is determined by: (1) 
minimizing Schwarz’s Bayesian Information Criterion,a statistical index used to measure the goodness of fit of a model; and 
(2) maximizing variation between clusters to ensure the model chosen shows significant differences between the segments 
identified. Cluster analysis results appear in each country’s section. 
3) Calculation of Market Size. The following equation was used to determine each country’s total market size. The results 
represent the total estimated amount of loans needed from urban women who currently have plans to purchase a home. 
Details and results of each country’s calculations appear below. 
Colombia
1) PREDICTORS OF HOUSING DEMAND (i.e. Existing or Future)
Variables 
Model 1:
Potential demand for 
housing in the next 5 years
Model 2: 
Used a formal loan to 
purchase home
Gender 
•	 Female
-.5573* 
-.0260
Age
-.00314 
.0029
Civil Status 
•	 Married
•	 Separated/Divorced
•	 Civil Union
.0096
-.2206 **
.2274
.0825 
-.0262
.3145**
Education level 
•	 Primary school
•	 Some secondary
•	 Secondary completed
•	 Some university
•	 University complete
-.0405
-.0878
.0135
-.3121
-.1785
-.1764 
-.0943
-.1703
-.0991
-.0576
Log income
.4266***
.0264*
Employment
.8357**
-.0311
total market = urban households * % female head * % demand * exp (amount)
55


Gender of Household Head
•	 Woman 
•	 Both 
-.5785*
-.1248
-.2347**
-.0339
Family Structure
•	 Joint/Extended
•	 Singles
.1406**
-.0459
.2532**
Number of Observations
298
342
  *** P <0.01, ** P<0.05, *p<0.10
NOTES CONTINUED
56


3) COLOMBIA’S MARKET SIZE: THE 
TOTAL SIZE OF THE URBAN 
MARKET FOR WOMEN IN 
COLOMBIA IS ESTIMATED AT 
APPROXIMATELY $23 BILLION.
The following equation was used where total market is 
the calculated total market size, urban households is the 
estimated number of urban households in Colombia in 
2017, % female head is the proportion of households that 
have a woman in decision-making, i.e. either have a female 
household head or have joint decision-making in the 
demand survey, % demand is the proportion of women who 
reported that they would use a loan to pay for the purchase 
of housing in the next 5 years in the demand survey, and exp 
(amount) is the median expected loan amount reported by 
women in the survey. The total market size thus represents 
the total estimated amount of loans needed from urban 
women in Colombia who currently have plans to purchase 
a home. The number of urban households was estimated by 
calculating the average household size in urban areas from 
the 2009 census data and assuming the same ratio in 2017. 
Thus, the number of urban households was calculated as 
follows: 
2017 urban population
average urban household size. 
2017 Urban population data are sourced from the World 
Bank World Development Indicators.
[total market = urban households * % female head * % demand * exp (amount)]
Female Headed Households:
5,694,548,303 = 9,841,460 * 25.5% * 13.7% * 16,563
Joint Decision-Making Households:
17,330,155,570 = 9,841,460 * 41.5% * 24.7% * 17,179
57


NOTES CONTINUED
India
1) PREDICTORS OF HOUSING DEMAND (i.e. Existing or Future)
Variables 
Model 1:
Potential demand for 
housing in the next 5 years
Model 2: 
Used a formal loan to 
purchase home
Gender 
•	 Female
0.079 
-0.003*
Age
-.001 
.002**
Civil Status 
•	 Single
•	 Separated/Divorced
•	 Widow
-0.039
-0.064
0.130
0.049
-
0.049
Education
.004
0.011*
Log income
.067**
0.157***
Employment
.061*
0.004*
Gender of Household Head
•	 Woman 
•	 Both 
-0.070**
-0.045**
-0.038*
-0.011
Family Structure
•	 Joint/Extended
0.033*
0.015
Mumbai
-0.286***
-0.039*
Number of Observations
1,238
1,234
  *** P <0.01, ** P<0.05, *p<0.10
58


3) INDIA’S MARKET SIZE: THE 
TOTAL SIZE OF THE URBAN 
MARKET FOR WOMEN IN INDIA IS 
ESTIMATED AT APPROXIMATELY 
$32. 3 BILLION. 
The following equation was used where total market is 
the calculated total market size, urban households is the 
estimated number of urban households in India in 2017, 
% female head is the proportion of households that have 
a women in decision-making, i.e. either have a female 
household head or have joint decision-making in the 
demand survey, % demand is the proportion of women with 
decision-making authority who reported that they would 
use a loan to pay for the purchase of housing in the next 
five years in the demand survey, and exp (amount) is the 
median expected loan amount reported by women in the 
survey. The number of urban households was estimated by 
calculating the average household size in urban areas from 
2011 census data and assuming the same ratio in 2017, as 
follows:
2017 urban population
average urban household size. 
The number of urban households was estimated by 
calculating the average household size in urban areas from 
2011 census data and assuming the same ratio in 2017. 
The total market size thus represents the total estimated 
amount of loans needed from urban women in India who 
currently have plans to purchase a home.
[total market = urban households * % female head * % demand * exp (amount)]
Female Headed Households:
2,783,009,881 = 96,330,082 * 9.45% * 4.2% * 7,279
Joint Decision-Making Households:
29,515,803,593 = 96,330,082 * 38.13% * 6.9% * 11,646
59


Kenya
1) PREDICTORS OF DEMAND 
Variables
Demand
Potential demand for 
housing in the next 5 years
Female household head
0.132*
Age
-0.009**
Married
0.195***
Education
0.008*
Log income
0.715**
Log income
-0.036**
Employment
.061*
Type of employment
•	 Self-employed
•	 Non-contract employee
•	 Part-time employee
•	 Permanent employee
0.071
-0.135
0.168
0.071
Account
0.262***
Own
-0.124*
Made improvements
0.158**
Nairobi
-0.035
Number of Observations
402
  *** P <0.01, ** P<0.05, *p<0.10
A dummy variable equal to 1 if the respondent was located 
in Nairobi is also included to control for potential structural 
differences between Nairobi and Nakuru.
NOTES CONTINUED
60


3) KENYA’S MARKET SIZE: THE TOTAL
SIZE OF THE URBAN MARKET FOR 
WOMEN IN KENYA IS ESTIMATED AT 
APPROXIMATELY $14. 8 BILLION. 
The following equation was used where total market is 
the calculated total market size, urban households is the 
estimated number of urban households in Kenya in 2017, 
% female head is the proportion of households that have 
a woman in decision-making, i.e. either have a female 
household head or have joint decision-making in the 
demand survey, % demand is the proportion of women with 
decision-making authority who reported that they would 
use a formal loan to pay for the purchase of housing in the 
next five years in the demand survey, and exp(amount) is the 
median expected loan amount reported by women in the 
survey. The number of urban households was estimated by 
calculating the average household size in urban areas from 
the 2009 census data and assuming the same ratio in 2017. 
Thus, the number of urban households was calculated as 
follows:
2017 urban population
average urban household size. 
The total market size thus represents the total estimated 
amount of loans needed from urban women in Kenya who 
currently have plans to purchase a home.
[total market = urban households * % female head * % demand * exp (amount)]
Female Headed Households:
2,393,226,531.80 = 3,592,153 * 25.37% * 26.47% * 9,920.98
Joint Decision-Making Households:
12,433,311,659.36 = 3,592,153 * 34.08% * 40.88% * 24,844
61


PHOTO CREDITS
Cover: Daniel M Ernst/Shutterstock
Page ii: Petr Kapuscinski/World Bank
Page 5: Vladimir Zhoga/Shutterstock
Page 8: Philou1000/Shutterstock
Page 21: Dominic Chavez/World Bank
Page 30: Charlotte Kesl/World Bank
Pge 36: Jorge Sanchez Photos/Shutterstock
Page 39: Bob Pool/Shutterstock
Page 44; Popular Pics/Shutterstock
Page 54: Petr Kapuscinski/World Bank
Inside Back Cover: Luis Echeverri Urrea/Shutterstock
62




November 2019
ifc. org
Contact Information
IFC
2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW 
Washington, DC 20433 USA 
BMurti@ifc.org
www.IFC.org/gender
@WBG_Gender