HAL Id: hal-03375121
https://univ-tours.hal.science/hal-03375121v1
Submitted on 22 Aug 2022
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive
for the deposit and dissemination of scientific re-
search documents, whether they are published or not.
The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or pri-
vate research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est des-
tinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents scien-
tifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non, émanant
des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche
français ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou
privés.
Distributed under a Creative Commons CC BY-NC 4.0 - Attribution - Non-commercial use - International
License
Psychological and sociological factors influencing police
officers’ decisions to use force: A systematic literature review
Sébastien Cojean, Nicolas Combalbert, Anne Taillandier-Schmitt
To cite this version:
Sébastien Cojean, Nicolas Combalbert, Anne Taillandier-Schmitt. Psychological and sociological factors in-
fluencing police officers’ decisions to use force: A systematic literature review. International Journal of Law
and Psychiatry, 2020, 70, pp.101569. ⟨10.1016/j.ijlp.2020.101569⟩. ⟨hal-03375121⟩


1 
 
Title 
Psychological and sociological factors influencing police officers' decisions to use force: a sys-
tematic literature review 
 
Running head 
Review of factors underlying police officers’ decisions to use force  
 
Authors’ names 
Sébastien Cojean*, Nicolas Combalbert & Anne Taillandier-Schmitt 
 
 
 
 
 
*Corresponding author: 
Sébastien Cojean, M.A. and Staff Sergeant in French Gendarmerie nationale 
EA 2114 Département de Psychologie – Université de Tours 
3, rue des Tanneurs, 37000, Tours, France 
Email : cojean_sebastien@orange.fr 
 
Prof. Nicolas Combalbert 
Professor of psychopathology at the University of Tours 
EA 2114 Département de Psychologie – Université de Tours 
3, rue des Tanneurs, 37000, Tours, France 
 
Anne Taillandier-Schmitt 
Lecturer in social psychology at the University of Tours 
EA 2114 Département de Psychologie – Université de Tours 
3, rue des Tanneurs, 37000, Tours, France 
 
 
© 2020 published by Elsevier. This manuscript is made available under the CC BY NC user license
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/
Version of Record: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0160252720300285
Manuscript_a992f3e84d9d1b38a3f5c977da3ddefb


Review of factors underlying police officers’ decisions to use force 
 
2 
 
Title  
 
Psychological and sociological factors influencing police officers' decisions to use force: a sys-
tematic literature review  
 
Abstract 
 
Aim 
Police action is frequently discussed and almost always monitored. The aim of this systematic 
review is to identify the psychological and social factors underlying police officers' decisions to 
use force. 
 
Methodology 
Scientific articles were selected from six databases (PsycINFO, PsycARTICLES, Psychology and 
Behavioral Sciences Collection, HeinOnline, ScienceDirect, PubMed). 
 
Results 
We found 923 articles matching our search, and 52 were retained based on their results regarding 
the psychological factors underlying police officers' decisions to use force and the decision-
making process itself. We found that the most frequently studied factors were belonging to an 
ethnic minority, carrying a conducted energy device (CED), the police department’s policies and 
managerial organization, and the environment in which the encounter occurred. However, it 
seems that the most predictive factor in the decision to use force is the resistance and behavior of 
the suspect. 
 
 
Keywords 
Decision-making, law enforcement, police, use of force, predictive factors 
 
 
 


Review of factors underlying police officers’ decisions to use force 
 
3 
 
Introduction 
The use of force by police officers is frequently reported in the international media. Praised after 
the terrorist attacks of 2015, hated during the “gilet jaune” protests in France sparked by the rise 
in fuel taxes announced in November 2018, police officers are under particular scrutiny because 
they have the right to use force. In France, the first “gilet jaune” protests led to numerous injuries 
among citizens confronting riot police, caused by extensive “Flash-ball” use. But France is not 
the only country concerned about police use of force. In the United States, there is often criticism 
of fatal shootings by police officers. The Michael Brown case, involving an Afro-American teen-
ager shot by a police officer on August 9th, 2014, raised considerable concern about the role of 
racism in police shootings. In order to understand the deployment of legitimate violence by police 
officers, it is important to identify the psychological and sociological factors underlying their 
decisions to use force. At the same time, environmental factors are likely to influence the way 
officers perceive and react emotionally to the situation and will therefore affect the cognitive pro-
cesses underlying their decisions. These factors are thus also included in this work. 
 
The decision for the police to use legitimate violence is one of the most important concerns of 
public policy about security, because it reflects the quality of police actions. It also reveals some-
thing about the type of political regime. In all countries, legitimate violence occurs within a legal 
framework that lays down the rules that police forces are required to follow in order to fulfill 
their duty (Jobard, 2002). According to Max Weber, legitimate violence is the use of physical 
force authorized solely by the state in order to maintain its domination over a given territory and 
its population (Weber, 1919). By definition, this force can therefore only be used by the police, 
and governments wish to keep it this way (Mouhanna, 2011). Use of force by the police is one of 
the main ways that governments ensure public order. Not only Weber (1919), but also Norbert 
Elias (1939) and Maslow (1943) observed that citizens crave for safety and therefore need a 
community force to ensure it, generally known as “the police”. The police must therefore be al-
lowed to use force, within the limits laid down by the law, in order to maintain the safety of citi-
zens. The very existence of a police force depends on the use of force (Bittner, 1970), although 
most constitutions introduce precautions to avoid any risk of a coup d’état by the police. For ex-
ample, in France, there are two coexisting forces that can take over from each other in the event 
of failure of one. 


Review of factors underlying police officers’ decisions to use force 
 
4 
 
 
Most countries provide a use-of-force model (i.e. Desmedt, 2009) to guide police officers in their 
decisions to use force in their daily duties by showing the relationship between the suspect’s be-
havior and the appropriate response to that behavior. Unfortunately, these models do not take into 
account the complexity of the decision to use force, although they can offer a good way of show-
ing recruits how the job is supposed to be done. Most authors conclude that policing is an on-
going learning situation (Bayley & Bittner, 1997). 
 
The use of force lies at the heart of police officers’ actions. While some authors see that use of 
force is legally justified (Colliot-Thélène, 1995), even if there seems to be insufficient training 
(Moreau de Bellaing, 2009), others see it as a necessary and essential part of police functions 
(Bittner, 1970; Bittner, 1990). The need to be able to use force arises from the “irreducibly inde-
terminate” aspect of police work (Monjardet, 1996) involving a vast range of actions and inci-
dents, and the duty of the police to enforce the law (Moreau de Bellaing quoting Napoli, 2003, p. 
207). This raises the question of what constitutes use of force. Can it be just a simple verbal order 
by a police officer? Or must there be physical contact? This is a long-standing question in the 
literature, but we refer to a widely held model of aggression (Allen, Bushman, & Anderson, 
2018) based on Tedeschi and Felson’s (1994) social interactionist theory, which states that a sim-
ple verbal order can be seen as coercive action because it interferes with the individual’s freedom 
to come and go. In France, it is mandatory to obey an order by an identifiable police officer 
(L.233-1 of the French Highway Code, and 78-1 to 78-7 of the criminal procedure code, which 
are constitutional laws based on art. 7 of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen). 
Therefore, a verbal order can be considered to be an act of coercion toward an individual. 
 
Understanding why the police use coercion is important because it would help explain errors 
made by officers and reduce negative public opinions of the police. The main aim of this study of 
the decision to use legitimate violence is thus: 
• To identify the psychological and social factors involved in law enforcement officers’ de-
cisions to use legitimate violence, and possibly those that are the most predictive. 
This should help us understand how police officers decide whether or not to use coercive action. 
This would make it possible to set up appropriate training programs to enable officers to find 


Review of factors underlying police officers’ decisions to use force 
 
5 
 
alternative solutions. Police use of force is under considerable scrutiny by citizens, who on the 
one hand expect the police to protect them, but on the other hand also wish to be safe from the 
police. The results could thus help reduce the use of force by police officers by giving them keys 
to understanding and dealing with social interactions (Tedeschi, & Felson, 1994). 
 
 
Methodology 
We conducted a systematic literature review by searching several scientific databases: PsycINFO, 
PsycARTICLES, Psychology and Behavioral Sciences Collection, HeinOnline, ScienceDirect 
and PubMed. These databases were selected because they cover the main publications in our 
field. More pragmatically, they were also those that were most accessible.  
Due to the large proportion of studies in English in our field of study, the search terms were deci-
sion-making, use of force, law enforcement and police (in English). We ran the search using the 
following procedure: first, we looked for [police OR “law enforcement”] AND use of force AND 
decision making. As this yielded a large number of results, we then added a combination of two 
of these words in the Title, Abstract or Keywords. We would have preferred to find them only in 
the Title, but this is not possible in some databases. At this point, 923 articles met our search cri-
teria. We retained only those with a Title that matched at least one of our search terms. We also 
only retained those published since 2009 as an earlier review of the literature already exists 
(Klahm, & Tillyer, 2010), and we wished to focus on more recent studies.  
To be selected, the articles had to meet three conditions. They had to concern: 
1) the police in general or a police force in particular, 
2) the use of force or coercion by any means, 
3) one or more factors influencing the decision to use force. 
These criteria were mandatory. If one was missing, the article was excluded. To ensure their 
presence, we checked the methodology section of the articles; the population had to be, at least 
partially, a police force, and observations had to concern decisions to use legitimate violence. We 
excluded studies using data prior to 2000 as their reports no longer correspond to policing today. 
We also excluded articles about the decision to use force that did not focus on a factor that could 
influence it in some way, and those with fewer than twenty participants. However, we did retain 
some studies that at first sight did not specifically involve a factor influencing the decision to use 


Review of factors underlying police officers’ decisions to use force 
 
6 
 
force, as they provide some interesting input on the subject (see Hickman, Atherley, Lowery, & 
Alpert, 2015). 
 
Results 
Database searches yielded a total of 923 articles, but only 52 were considered relevant to our 
study according to our criteria. These studies (N = 52) involved a total of nineteen factors that 
may influence the decision to use legitimate violence:  
 
TABLE 1 - STUDY SELECTION AND MAIN STUDIED FACTORS 
Main studied factors 
Relevant studies 
1. suspect's ethnic group  
(n = 10) 
• 
Buehler, 2017 
• 
Dabney, Teasdale, Ishoy, Gann, & Berry, 2017 
• 
Fridell, & Lim, 2016 
• 
James, 2012 
• 
Jetelina, et al., 2017 
• 
Kahn, Steele, McMahon, & Stewart, 2017 
• 
Mears, Craig, Stewart, & Warren, 2017 
• 
Morrow, White, & Fradella, 2017 
• 
Paoline III, Gau, & Terrill, 2018 
• 
Shane, Lawton, & Swenson, 2017 
2. suspect with mental disorders  
(n = 5) 
• 
Kesic, Thomas, & Ogloff, 2013 
• 
McTackett, & Thomas, 2017 
• 
Morabito, Socia, Wik, & Fisher, 2017 
• 
Schulenberg, 2016 
• 
Johnson, 2011 
3. neighborhood of the encounter  
(n = 5) 
• 
Boivin, & Obartel, 2017 
• 
Klinger, Rosenfeld, Isom, & Deckard, 2016 
• 
Krishan et al., 2014 
• 
Lee, Jang, Yun, & Lim, 2010 
• 
Lee, Vaughn, & Lim, 2014 
4. police officer carrying a conducted 
energy device (CED) 
(n = 4) 
• 
Crow, & Adrion, 2011 
• 
Lin, & Jones, 2010 
• 
Sousa, Ready, & Ault, 2010 
• 
Taylor, & Woods, 2010 


Review of factors underlying police officers’ decisions to use force 
 
7 
 
5. organizational policy and training  
(n = 4) 
• 
Ferdik, Kaminski, Cooney, & Sevigny, 2014 
• 
Lee, & Vaughn, 2010 
• 
Prenzler, Porter, & Alpert, 2013 
• 
Terrill, & Paoline III, 2017 
6. suspect's behavior and resistance  
(n = 4) 
• 
Boivin, & Lagace, 2016 
• 
Bolger, 2015 
• 
Dai, & Nation, 2009 
• 
Hickman, Atherley, Lowery, & Alpert, 2015 
7. police officer's experience  
(n = 3) 
• 
Boulton, & Cole, 2016 
• 
Mangels, Suss, & Lande, 2020 
• 
Vickers, & Lewinski, 2012 
8. police officer using a bodycam  
(n = 2) 
• 
Ariel, 2016 
• 
Henstock, & Ariel, 2017 
9. officer's decision-making style  
(n = 2) 
• 
Brown, & Daus, 2015 
• 
Hine, Porter, Westera, Alpert, & Allen, 2018a 
10. police officer's stress  
(n = 2) 
• 
Renden et al., 2017 
• 
Verhage, Noppe, Feys, & Ledegen, 2018 
11. police officer's ego depletion  
(n = 2) 
• 
Staller, Christiansen, Zaiser, Körner, & Cole, 2018 
• 
Staller et al., 2019 
12. police officer's physiology 
(n = 2) 
• 
Akinola, & Mendes, 2012 
• 
Andersen et al., 2018 
13. police officer's personality 
• 
Brandl, & Stroshine, 2013 
14. officer’s working memory ability 
• 
Kleider, Parrott, & King, 2010 
15. suspect's age 
• 
Brown, Novak, & Frank, 2009 
16. police officer's gender  
• 
Nickel, 2016 
17. prior information 
• 
Johnson, D.J. 2018 
18. fellow officer at the scene 
• 
Pickering, 2017 
19. police officer's level of education 
• 
Rydberg, & Terrill, 2010 
 
 
We grouped these nineteen factors into three categories: 
• factors specific to the suspect (n = 20); 
• factors specific to the police officer (n = 15); 
• contextual factors (n = 17). 


Review of factors underlying police officers’ decisions to use force 
 
8 
 
 
1. Factors specific to suspect 
  
This category includes studies focusing on the characteristics of the suspect against whom law 
enforcement officers used legitimate violence. 
 
1.1 Belonging to an ethnic minority 
 
As the literature comprises almost exclusively Northern American studies (43 studies carried out 
in Canada or the United States), it is not surprising that the suspect's ethnic origin is at the heart 
of a relative majority of articles on the topic of police use of force (10 out of 52). However, the 
data from this literature are somewhat contradictory.  
Some studies support the thesis of the existence of an ethnic bias leading to disparities in the use 
of lethal force; the mortality rate among Blacks and Hispanics has been shown to be respectively 
2.8 and 1.7 times higher than among Whites (Buehler, 2017). Likewise, Blacks are 1.49 times 
more likely to be the target of a conducted energy device (Fridell, & Lim, 2016). Morrow, White 
and Fradella (2017) also found that ethnic minorities are more likely to be physically coerced. 
Moreover, it seems that White police officers are more coercive than their Black counterparts 
towards Blacks (Paoline III, Gau, & Terrill, 2018). This was also observed by Jetelina et al. 
(2017), who postulated that ethnic differences between suspect and officer seem to play a signifi-
cant role in the decision to use force. They found considerable variability related to the ethnicity 
of the suspect and the police officer, with greater intermediate weapon use in all combinations of 
officer/citizen ethnicity compared to White-White dyads, except for Hispanic-Hispanic (0.58 
versus 1 for White-White). With regard to ethnic minority groups, attire and appearance that rein-
force stereotypes, such as dreadlocks or an "Afro" cut, aggravate the ethnic bias towards the sus-
pect (Dabney et al., 2017). Finally, indicators tend to show that negative cultural perceptions, 
such as bias against certain ethnic groups, reinforce the phenomenon, exponentially so when the 
suspect is convinced that the police are going to arrest him because they are biased towards him 
(Mears et al., 2017). This point is corroborated by Jetelina et al. (2017). Some authors have also 
observed how ethnicity influences the way the encounter plays out. Kahn et al. (2017) observed 


Review of factors underlying police officers’ decisions to use force 
 
9 
 
that coercion tends to be used against Blacks and Hispanics earlier in the encounter, whereas 
greater force is used against Whites as the situation develops. 
However, other studies take a different approach. For example, Fridell and Lim (2016) found 
lower rates of ethnic bias in high crime neighborhoods. In other words, the influence of the loca-
tion takes precedence over ethnic minority, reinforcing or diminishing the use of force. This issue 
remains open to debate. At the micro-ecology level, Klinger et al. (2016) found that deadly force 
was mainly deployed in neighborhoods with largely Black and young populations and low own-
er-occupancy households. Both Lee et al. (2010) and Hickman et al. (2015) observed that it is 
only the suspect's behavior that is responsible for coercive action against him and not his ethnici-
ty. It has also been shown that police officers hesitate longer to use their service weapon against 
armed Black than White individuals (James, 2012). Similarly, they erroneously shot unarmed 
Whites more rapidly than unarmed Blacks during simulations (James, 2012). Other studies show 
that it is only the suspect's resistance that is likely to trigger a reaction, and not ethnicity (Shane, 
Lawton, & Swenson, 2017). On a related subject, Johnson (2018) found that ethnic bias disap-
peared completely when patrol officers received accurate dispatch information about the suspect 
prior to the encounter.  
These studies therefore indicate that ethnicity may influence police officers’ decisions to use 
force. However, no clear conclusions can be drawn about how and to what extent it moderates or 
exacerbates the use of force.  
 
1.2 Suspects with mental disorders 
 
Our review also includes a large number of studies on the impact of mental disorders on the po-
lice use of legitimate violence. Mental disorders involve a small proportion of the people police 
officers have to deal with and only affect the individual’s behavior sporadically and in the most 
extreme cases. Evidence of a suspect’s erratic or poor discernment is likely to affect the way the 
police perceive his dangerousness and hence their use of force. 
However, empirical studies show that suspects with mental disorders are subject to increased 
vigilance by law enforcement officials (Kesic, Thomas, & Ogloff, 2013; McTackett, & Thomas, 
2017; Morabito et al., 2017; Schulenberg, 2016; Johnson, 2011). This can be seen, for example, 
by the fact that 7.2% of those who have experienced the use of force suffer from mental disor-


Review of factors underlying police officers’ decisions to use force 
 
10 
 
ders, which is more than their share of the general population (Kesic, Thomas, & Ogloff, 2013). 
However, the fact that people with mental disorders are more likely to be aggressive, resist or 
carry a gun makes it more likely that they will be subjected to legitimate violence (Johnson, 
2011; Kesic, Thomas, & Olgoff, 2013). Similarly, it is not the unpredictability of the suspect's 
behavior but his resistance that leads to greater use of force (McTackett, & Thomas, 2017). In-
deed, mental health symptomatology seems to have a moderating effect on the use of force, at 
least at the lower end of the continuum. Individuals presenting with these symptoms are half as 
likely to be subject to empty-hand tactics (Jetelina et al., 2017). Similarly, citizens under the in-
fluence of alcohol or drugs are 25% less likely to be subject to these techniques. On the other 
hand, they are more likely to be subject to intermediate weapon use (Jetelina et al. 2017). Moreo-
ver, the comorbidity of mental disorders with intoxication influences police officers’ perception 
of the dangerousness of the suspect, particularly if his behavior is inappropriate, and is likely to 
explain more frequent use of force (Morabito et al., 2017). It thus seems that mentally ill people 
are at particular risk of being criminalized and subject to a high level of coercion. This is un-
doubtedly largely due to inadequate mental health resources (Schulenberg, 2016). 
 
1.3 Suspect's behavior 
 
There is greater consensus about the issue of the suspect's behavior as a factor in police offic-
ers' decisions to use force. All the selected articles (Boivin, & Lagace, 2016; Dai, & Nation, 
2009; Bolger, 2015; Hickman, et al., 2015) agree that the suspect’s behavior and resistance are 
the most predictive factors in the use of force. This supports earlier studies (Terrill, 2005), as 
evidenced by reviews covering different periods (Bolger, 2015; Klahm, & Tillyer, 2010). For 
example, some authors claim that behavior is the primary factor in the decision to use force 
(Boivin, & Lagace, 2016), and others show that the suspect’s behavior and resistance greatly 
influence the use of coercion (Dai, & Nation, 2009). It therefore seems that the suspect’s be-
havior and resistance are the main causes of police officers’ decisions to use force. 
Hickman et al. (2015) also investigated whether the suspect’s resistance and behavior are the 
key factors underlying police officers’ use of force. To this end, they used a method of force 
factor coding. Two teams coded the suspect’s and the officer’s behavior on a 6-point scale, 
from (1) no resistance by suspect and presence of officer, to (6) use of lethal force. The two 


Review of factors underlying police officers’ decisions to use force 
 
11 
 
teams showed a high level of agreement. They then subtracted the suspect’s resistance level 
from the officer’s level of force. Most cases came within -1 to +1 correspondence, indicating 
that the police officer’s use of force was in line with the suspect’s behavior, supporting previ-
ous hypotheses.  
 
1.4 Age and gender 
 
The suspect's age and gender are also involved in the decision to use force. Irrespective of the 
circumstances, it appears that age is not likely to influence the decision to use coercion (Brown, 
Novak, & Frank, 2009) although it does affect the likelihood of arrest (Brown, Novak, & Frank, 
2009). Regarding gender, it seems that women are to some extent protected from all forms of 
coercion and the police are less likely to use physical force against them (Dai, & Nation, 2009) or 
any other means of intermediate force such as conducted energy devices (Crow, & Adrion, 2011). 
Without further regression analyses, Jetelina et al. (2017) also found that men were one third 
more likely to be subject to empty-hand control tactics than women, and more than twice as like-
ly to be subject to intermediate weapon use.  
In sum, the suspect's age does not seem to have an impact on the use of coercion, and women are 
treated more favorably, law enforcement officers being less likely to use force against them at 
any level. 
 
2. Factors specific to the police officer 
 
This category includes the characteristics of law enforcement officers who use legitimate vio-
lence. 
 
2.1 Character and personality 
 
Police officers make the decision to use legitimate violence on their own. It thus seems obvious 
that their character and personality are at the heart of the decision-making process. However, the 
meta-analysis by Klahm and Tillyer (2010) shows that there has been no recent study of the in-
fluence of personality. While the use of force is rare, a limited number of officers are responsible 


Review of factors underlying police officers’ decisions to use force 
 
12 
 
for a large number of incidents – 6% of officers are responsible for 40% of reported use of force 
by the police (Brandl, & Stroshine, 2013). Jetelina et al. (2017) also observed that a third of of-
ficers are responsible for two thirds of police use of force, corroborating the findings of Brandl 
and Stroshine (2013)  who divided officers into “low-rate” and “high-rate” groups based on the 
number of force incidents in which they were involved.  They observed that shift hours and patrol 
area seem to have as much influence as experience and age on the officer’s propensity to use 
force (Brandl, & Stroshine, 2013). 
Self-control has been observed to play a key role. Staller et al. (2018 and 2019) found that when 
police officers’ self-regulation resources are depleted, impairing their self-control, they show less 
patience and react earlier to provocative resistance by using force. This phenomenon was defined 
by Baumeister (1994 and 1998) as “ego depletion”, based on the theories of Freud (1961a / 1923 
and 1961b / 1933), and it can be seen to affect police officers' decisions to use force. This may be 
correlated with personality traits or the officer’s ability to regulate emotions. Further research is 
required to elucidate this point. 
Anxiety, whether due to a personality trait (Renden et al., 2017) or generated by officers’ aware-
ness that they will be held accountable for their actions (Verhage et al., 2018), could also be a 
notable factor in decision-making. For some authors, accountability leads to increased stress that 
could affect the quality of decisions made by officers in the most difficult situations (Verhage et 
al., 2018), while for others, stress does not affect decisions, and it is only the intensity of the 
threat that affects the decision to use force (Renden et al., 2017). However, stress could affect the 
effectiveness of the response, making the implementation of coercion less than optimal (Renden 
et al., 2017). 
Taken together, these observations provide some indication of how police officers cope with anx-
iety and “ego depletion” phenomena. We can hypothesize that there is strong correlation between 
officer’s emotion regulation and cognitive abilities on the one hand and the frequency and inten-
sity of their use of force on the other.  
 
2.2 Personal characteristics and professional experience 
 
In addition to character, personality and ethnicity, police officers' gender, level of education and 
experience can influence their decisions to use legitimate violence. As mentioned above, White 


Review of factors underlying police officers’ decisions to use force 
 
13 
 
police officers are more coercive towards Blacks than their Black counterparts (Paoline III, Gau, 
& Terrill, 2018). However, that is the only study examining the ethnicity of police officers. The 
gender of the officer also influences the use of coercion; women officers use less force than men, 
based on different reasoning, with an emphasis on need and opportunity (Nickel, 2016). Moreo-
ver, while women generally use less force than men, they also use it differently. Studies show 
that they use less empty-hand control than men, but they are significantly more likely to use in-
termediate weapons (Jetelina et al., 2017). This could be explained by the fact that most use of 
force is toward men (Dai, & Nation, 2009; Jetelina et al., 2017), and intermediate weapon use 
could compensate for women’s relatively less strength. 
Regarding professional experience, experts and experienced police officers adapt better to cir-
cumstances and possible outcomes than novices, whose reasoning is more sequential and linear. 
This was shown in an analysis of cognitive tasks performed by 12 experienced officers (special-
ized firearm officers, SFO) and 11 novices (authorized firearm officers, AFO) (Boulton, & Cole, 
2016), corroborating previous research showing that experts use an intuitive reasoning system 
whereas novices use analytical reasoning (Chi, 2006). Mangels et al. (2020) also observed con-
siderable differences in the way experts and novices reacted to videos showing police use of 
force; the experts focused on the broader picture, putting “force mitigation” and “back-up oppor-
tunity” at the top of their word list. They also referred to “verbal command” or “verbal direction”, 
whereas novices frequently referred to “control” (Mangels et al., 2020). Experts thus seem to 
focus on the event as a whole, and not solely on the aim of controlling the suspect.  
This observation also applies to shooting speed and accuracy. In a study comparing elite mem-
bers of an Emergency Response Team (ERT) and rookie police officers, the former had greater 
shooting speed, better accuracy and made fewer mistakes. An eye-tracking device revealed that 
the better performance of the experts could partly be explained by their greater use of the “quiet-
eye” technique, enabling them to focus longer on the target before shooting (Vickers, & Lew-
inski, 2012). 
We can also assume that a higher education level, while not affecting the number of arrests or 
searches, may significantly reduce the frequency of the use of coercion (Rydberg, & Terrill, 
2010). Interestingly, police officers with more than five years of experience have been shown to 
use hard-empty hand control more than intermediate weapons (Jetelina et al., 2017). This could 


Review of factors underlying police officers’ decisions to use force 
 
14 
 
be explained by the fact that experienced officers are older and do not wish to get physically in-
volved with suspects to avoid injury. Further research is required on this issue. 
 
2.3 The decision-making system and physiology 
 
The decision-making system underlying the use of legitimate violence also influences the deci-
sion itself. Hine et al. (2018a) found that recruits tended to use intuitive reasoning and reported 
experiencing perceptual, cognitive and physiological impairments when making a decision to use 
force. When interviewed after a scripted simulation, 91 Australian police recruits said that they 
did not consider more than three coercive options, and more than half (51.35%) reported that they 
intuitively considered and implemented a single option. More than one-third (34.07%) experi-
enced cognitive impairment impeding their ability to recall information that could have helped 
them make their decision (Hine et al., 2018a). It has also been shown that rationality leads to 
avoiding extreme choices, while intuitiveness coupled with low anger control invites action 
(Brown, & Daus, 2015). It can therefore be hypothesized that rationality has the potential to re-
duce the use of weapons but is not involved in the decision to use coercion, at least among re-
cruits. 
From a physiological perspective, heart rate appears to influence officers’ decisions. Andersen et 
al. (2018) found that interventions aimed at enhancing parasympathetic nervous system activation 
can reduce the heart rate during stressful situations and reduce lethal force decision errors. Fur-
thermore, this benefit lasted over time, as optimal results were obtained six months after the in-
tervention, and effects were still noticeable at eighteen months (Andersen et al., 2018). Akinola, 
and Mendes (2012) found that police officers performed a shoot/don’t shoot task (Correll et al., 
2002) better when their cortisol level had previously been raised by carrying out a stressful su-
pervised task. Officers with higher cortisol levels made fewer errors, notably when the suspect 
was an armed Black man. The results were not significant when the suspect was an armed White 
man (Akinola, & Mendes, 2012). 
A study by Kleider et al. (2010) investigated working memory and negative emotionality. They 
found a correlation between working memory capacity, negative emotionality and overall per-
formance in a shooting task (Correll et al., 2002). Negative emotionality was monitored by inter-
beat interval (IBI) measured by electrocardiogram (ECG) and facial muscle movement measured 


Review of factors underlying police officers’ decisions to use force 
 
15 
 
by electromyography (EMG). High working memory capacity was correlated with high discrimi-
nability and low error rate. Surprisingly, high negative emotionality and high working memory 
capacity also led to fewer mistakes. Shooting speed was not affected. 
Physiology and cognitive capacity therefore seem to play a key role in police officers’ decisions 
to use force. 
 
 
3. Contextual factors 
 
In addition to factors related to the police officer and the suspect, contextual and social aspects 
play an important role in police officers' decisions to use legitimate violence. These include or-
ganizational aspects, training and equipment, which are outside the control of either the suspect 
or the agent, as police officers do not usually choose the equipment they carry. 
 
3.1 Managerial organization and institutional policies 
 
Managerial organization and police training yield consistent outcomes. Studies show that strict 
policies on the use of force tend to reduce police officers’ use of coercion (Prenzler, Porter, & 
Alpert, 2013; Terrill, & Paoline III, 2017). Managerial organization is particularly important: 
division of responsibilities, supervision and a well-established hierarchy are all factors that re-
duce the use of force (Lee, & Vaughn, 2010). Moreover, some law enforcement agencies adopt 
the use of less lethal technologies such as conducted energy devices to replace other means of 
force such as batons and tear gas, reducing the use of firearms (Ferdik et al., 2014). The accuracy 
of dispatch information about the suspect also helps to remove ethnic bias (Johnson, 2018), by 
providing an effective preparatory phase for the decision to use force (Johnson, Cesario, & 
Pleskac, 2018). The presence of other officers in the vicinity is also a factor in the deployment of 
force by providing the possibility of assistance. By contrast, a colleague’s use of a firearm may 
influence the decision of another officer to open fire. Thus, the close proximity of other law en-
forcement officers influences the decision to use coercion (Pickering, 2017). 
 
3.2 Equipment 


Review of factors underlying police officers’ decisions to use force 
 
16 
 
 
In addition to institutional policies, practical aspects such as carrying certain types of equipment 
provided by the police department also play a role. For example, body-worn cameras tend to re-
duce the use of force. Indeed, the Denver Police Department found that body-worn cameras led to 
a 35% decrease in complaints of police use of force (Ariel, 2016). Similarly, in Great Britain, 
body-worn cameras led to a 50% reduction in the use of force, but mostly at the bottom of the 
force continuum, in other words, physical restraint and handcuffing (Henstock, & Ariel, 2017). 
The use of conducted energy devices (CED) also reduces the use of other types of intermediate 
force (Lin, & Jones, 2010; Sousa, Ready, & Ault, 2010, Taylor, & Woods, 2010). It appears that 
CEDs are deployed in almost half the situations requiring the use of force (Crow, & Adrion, 
2011). Carrying a CED reduces the use of batons, physical force and tear gas, as well as opportu-
nities for using firearms. Police officers prefer to use CEDs than their gun when possible, espe-
cially when the department’s policy does not restrict CED use (Ferdik et al., 2014). CEDs also 
reduce the risk of injury and remove field officers from physical confrontation, even if its effec-
tiveness in life-threatening situations is poor (Lin, & Jones, 2010). 
 
3.3 Neighborhood 
 
The neighborhood where the interaction between the suspect and the police officer occurs is also 
important. However, studies have produced divergent results. While some researchers have found 
that the neighborhood and its characteristics have no impact on the use of violence or likelihood 
of arrest (Krishan et al., 2014), others postulate that social disorganization (Boivin & Obartel, 
2017), unemployment rate (Lee et al., 2010) and crime rate (Boivin, & Obartel, 2017; Lee et al. 
2010; Lee, Vaughn, & Lim, 2014) in the neighborhood increase the deployment of force. Along-
side, Klinger et al. (2016) show that Blacks, lower income, low owner-occupation household rate 
and younger population are correlated with deadly force usage. In the end, it seems to support 
that the environment where the interaction occurs does affect police officer’s use of force. 
 
Discussion 
This systematic literature review reveals considerable diversity in the selected publications. Each 
article describes a particular factor, in isolation or combined with other factors. Retaining only 


Review of factors underlying police officers’ decisions to use force 
 
17 
 
the main factor within each study, we identified no fewer than nineteen different factors. Several 
conclusions can be drawn. 
 
First, it seems that police officers’ decisions to resort to legitimate violence is effectively multi-
factorial. This is in line with previous reviews on the subject that found a significant number of 
factors involved to a greater of lesser extent in the decision-making process (Bolger 2015; Klahm 
& Tillyer, 2010). Secondly, it appears that the most predictive factor for the deployment of force 
is the suspect's resistance and behavior (Klahm, & Tillyer, 2010; Bolger, 2015; Lee et al., 2010; 
Boivin, & Lagace, 2016; Dai, & Nation, 2009; Hickman, et al., 2015; Klinger, et al, 2016); a con-
sistent finding of studies is that officers only use force if the suspect's behavior makes them do 
so. However, this does not address the issue of proportionality. Finally, and more surprisingly, 
while it is the police officer who ultimately makes the decision, there has been little research on 
this factor, and only 15 studies in this systematic review (N = 52) concerned the characteristics of 
law enforcement officers. However, it may not always be possible to observe officers’ character-
istics (Ericson, 1981). For example, there has been no research on this issue in France, and we 
found only one article from Belgium (Verhage et al., 2018), one from Netherlands (Renden et al., 
2017) and two from Germany (Staller et al., 2018, 2019). 
 
Regarding the suspect, skin color is the main factor in the studies we selected. Ten of them stud-
ied the issue but drew divergent conclusions about the extent to which ethnicity affects the deci-
sion to use force. However, all the studies agree that police officers, whatever their ethnicity and 
skills, shoot Black men more than White men (e.g. Akinola, & Mendes, 2012; Vickers, & Lew-
inski, 2012). Another factor is gender; women are less likely than men to be subject to any form 
of coercion (Dai, & Nation, 2009; Jetelina et al., 2017). 
Apart from ethnicity, other characteristics of the suspect are rarely studied. Their behavior is gen-
erally described in terms of their possible aggression against police officers (Hickman et al., 
2015; Boivin, & Lagace, 2016). The issues of mental health and intoxication are raised, but as an 
aggravating factor. While it would clearly be difficult to study the suspect’s personality or inten-
tion, it could help determine whether or not to use coercion against them. The literature consist-
ently observes that the use of force is the result of split-second micro-decisions (Hickman et al., 
2015; Kahn et al., 2017). It could be useful to observe the progression of suspects’ behavior in 


Review of factors underlying police officers’ decisions to use force 
 
18 
 
situations leading to the decision to use force; this would help police officers anticipate the course 
of events and respond accordingly to avoid using coercive measures. However, this would require 
considerable perspicacity and discernment by police officers who are already in a stressful situa-
tion. 
 
Regarding the officer, and in order to explore their decision-making process in depth, ideally, 
they should be interviewed immediately after the event. However, it is not easy to conduct an 
interview after an intervention involving the use of force, not least because the officer has to con-
tinue working, taking suspects into custody and following all the relevant procedures. External 
observers would not be able to obtain reliable information about the officer's decision after a 
lapse of time. In fact, outside of a setting where all the untested variables are controlled, in train-
ing for example, as in Hine et al.’s (2018a, 2018b) study with recruits, it would be very difficult 
to obtain reliable reports, as memories become blurred over time. Pickering (2017) tried to obtain 
information from 83 US police officers a short time after the events, but with little success; mem-
ories had faded, some officers saying they did not remember having made the decision, others 
admitting that they only realized afterwards what they had done (Pickering, 2017). One explana-
tion for this phenomenon is that the amygdala, which plays an essential role in emotional pro-
cessing, has links with the nervous system, enabling it to control actions without their author be-
ing aware of it at the moment of accomplishing them (Goleman, 1995; LeDoux, 1996; Berthoz, 
2003; Evans, 2010). 
Hine et al. (2018a; 2018b) used semi-structured interviews to obtain information about the deci-
sion-making process of Australian recruits immediately after an intervention. They found that the 
main decision-making system was intuitive and involved many factors such as the immediate 
environment and the risk of possible escalation or collateral damage, as well as the stress gener-
ated by the intervention and the behavior of the suspect (Hine et al., 2018a; Hine et al., 2018b). 
These results support previous work by Terrill (2003 and 2005). Other authors have investigated 
cognitive aspects to understand if these have any effect on officers’ decisions to use force. Their 
results seem generally consistent. As expected, greater cognitive abilities, such as working 
memory, improve decision making and reduce error rates when deciding whether or not to shoot 
a possibly armed suspect (Kleider et al., 2010). Other authors have studied cognitive load, estab-
lishing that low cognitive resource availability leads to quicker and hence poorer decisions (Stall-


Review of factors underlying police officers’ decisions to use force 
 
19 
 
er et al., 2018; Staller et al., 2019). These elements suggest that police officers perform within the 
limits of their cognitive and physical abilities. Training is clearly paramount, as experienced of-
ficers are less likely to make mistakes in relation to the use of force (Mangels et al., 2020; Vick-
ers, & Lewinski, 2012). The department’s policies may also be a significant factor (Ferdik et al. 
2014; Lee et al., 2010). In this way, our study highlights the multifactorial aspect of police offic-
ers’ decisions to use legitimate violence. 
 
Overall, studies focusing on specific issues draw similar conclusions. One consistent finding is 
that CED use reduces the use of firearms (Crow, & Adrion, 2011; Ferdik et al., 2014; Lin, & 
Jones, 2010; Sousa, Ready, & Ault, 2010; Taylor, & Woods, 2010). However, it also seems to 
affect the use of other coercive means, for example, by replacing other intermediate means of 
coercion such as pepper spray (Sousa, Ready, & Ault, 2010). Another consistent finding concerns 
the difficult interactions between police agents and suspects with mental disorders, which often 
leads to greater use of force (Kesic, Thomas, & Ogloff, 2013; McTackett, & Thomas, 2017; Mo-
rabito et al., 2017; Schulenberg, 2016; Johnson, 2011). Jetelina et al. (2017) found moderate use 
of force against suspects presenting with mental health symptomatology, notably regarding hard-
empty hand control and intermediate weapon use. The results highlight the fact that mental health 
disorders are perceived as inappropriate social behavior, and not just as a potential threat to po-
lice officers and citizens.  
 
Other conclusions can also be drawn from studies focusing on the personality of police officers. 
Based on the fact that a small proportion of officers are responsible for a large proportion of co-
ercive actions – 6% of officers are responsible for 40% of use of force (Brandl & Stroshine, 
2013; Jetelina et al., 2017), it seems likely that personality plays a significant role. It has been 
demonstrated that poor ability to cope with anxiety leads to greater use of force (Renden et al., 
2017; Verhage et al. 2018). Likewise, efficient use of cognitive load seems to prevent ego deple-
tion and therefore preserve the ability to act rationally when confronted by aggressive individuals 
(Staller et al., 2018; Staller et al., 2019). Interestingly, both experience (Boulton & Cole, 2016) 
and education level (Rydberg, & Terrill, 2010) lead to significantly reduced use of force, suggest-
ing the importance of training, and that it is not just a question of personality traits. Regarding 
gender, Nickel (2016) demonstrated that female police officers do not use legitimate violence as 


Review of factors underlying police officers’ decisions to use force 
 
20 
 
much as their male counterparts; although their sample was limited, the authors concluded that 
this was a cultural and not a genetic trait, which would be inconvenient in a predominantly male 
profession (80% of officers in the French gendarmerie are male). These results are also supported 
by Jetelina et al. (2017). 
Regarding the cognitive processes involved in decision-making, recruits mainly seem to use an 
intuitive process (Hine et al., 2018a), as opposed to the rational process used by experts (Chi, 
2006). Moreover, Brown and Daus (2015) observed a link between action (i.e. use of force) and 
intuitiveness, whereas rationality is correlated with analytical thinking and restraint (Brown & 
Daus, 2015). This suggests the importance of developing rationality and discretion in order to 
reduce the use of legitimate violence by police officers. However, Vickers and Lewinsky (2012) 
found that expert firearm officers shoot faster than rookies, while Kleider et al. (2010) demon-
strated that fast shooters rely on more intuitive decision making, which could lead to higher error 
rates. Overall, results show that expert officers take better decisions than novices about using 
coercion; while this seems obvious, it could also be counter-intuitive in that experts base their 
decisions on intuition (Hine et al., 2018a). Furthermore, they focus on force mitigation rather 
than on physical control, which is the primary objective when they are put in a real-life situation 
(Mangels et al., 2020). These discrepancies require further investigation. 
 
 
Limitations 
This systematic literature review only included studies published in the last ten years – since 
2009 – from six databases and based on restrictive selection criteria. It is likely that other relevant 
studies on this topic exist but are not included in this review. 
 
Certain factors identified and discussed in this review are the subject of only one of the 52 stud-
ies. These include: 
• police officer’s experience (Boulton, & Cole, 2016) 
• police officer’s personality (Brandl, & Stroshine, 2013) 
• age of the suspect (Brown, Novak, & Frank, 2009) 
• gender of police officer (Nickel, 2016) 
• prior information (Johnson, D.J. 2018) 


Review of factors underlying police officers’ decisions to use force 
 
21 
 
• presence of colleagues (Pickering, 2017) 
• police officer’s educational level (Rydberg, & Terrill, 2010) 
• police officer’s working memory ability (Kleider, et al., 2010) 
 
While some of these factors have produced consistent results with relative consensus, such as 
level of education (Fyfe, 1988), it would have been interesting to see other larger-scale studies on 
these subjects to confirm and validate the results. For example, the officer’s personality has been 
little studied – only 15 of the articles in this review specifically addressed this issue – although it 
could largely underlie their decision to use force. A more balanced distribution of the various 
factors involved in the decision-making process would thus be desirable. Furthermore, some is-
sues do not seem to interest researchers despite particularly encouraging initial results. For exam-
ple, it would be interesting to examine in more depth the role of "ego depletion" in law enforce-
ment discussed by Staller et al. (2018, 2019) as it involves a reduction of the resources required 
to maintain self-control. These resources represent a cognitive reserve that can be used for deci-
sional purposes (Freud, 1961a / 1923; Freud, 1961b / 1933), and when they are reduced, law en-
forcement officers resort to legitimate violence more frequently and more rapidly (Staller et al., 
2018; Staller et al. 2019). These results should be examined further, as they indicate that some 
mental abilities and personality traits could lead to reactions by police officers that are widely 
perceived to be inappropriate. They also have implications for recruiting police officers. 
 
Some studies also involved very small samples, even though we mainly retained those with at 
least twenty participants: 25 officers for Nickel (2016), 24 for Vickers and Lewinski (2012), 23 
for Boulton and Cole (2016), and 7 cases for Prenzler, Porter and Alpert (2013). Most PhD theses 
included in the review have small samples (Nickel, 2016; Pickering, 2017; James, 2012). Their 
findings thus need to be supported by further studies with larger samples to avoid drawing con-
clusions that could be biased by the small sample. 
Some factors have been investigated by a single author and therefore also require further re-
search; for example, in our review, the effect of body-worn cameras, which concerns many police 
departments, was only studied by Ariel (Ariel, 2016; Henstock, & Ariel, 2017).  
 
Finally, some factors have yielded divergent results in different studies, making it difficult to 


Review of factors underlying police officers’ decisions to use force 
 
22 
 
determine a trend regarding their influence on the decision to use force or on the decision-making 
process (Brown, & Daus, 2015; Hine et al., 2018a). In addition, some factors receive considera-
ble attention that appears unrelated to their actual influence on the decision to use force. For ex-
ample, the ethnicity of the suspect or the police officer has been the subject of a disproportionate-
ly large number of studies and their findings are contradictory (Buehler, 2017; Dabney et al., 
2017; Fridell, & Lim, 2016; James, 2012; Mears et al., 2017; Morrow, White, & Fradella, 2017; 
Paoline III, Gau & Terrill, 2018; Shane, Lawton, & Swenson, 2017; Jetelina, et al., 2017; Kahn, 
et al., 2017). Indeed, while some authors found that Blacks were 2.8 times more likely than 
Whites to be shot during a police intervention (Buehler, 2017), others found no evidence that 
ethnicity influences officers’ decisions to use legitimate violence (Shane, Lawton, & Swenson, 
2017). These disparities can probably be explained by methodological differences. For example, 
the only factor that Buehler (2017) explored in a study of 2,285 reports of fatal shootings was 
ethnicity. Thus, by ignoring other factors that could explain the use of lethal weapons, it lacks a 
cross-sectional analysis that could reveal elements other than ethnicity justifying the deployment 
of lethal force. In another study with a similar sample, involving 1,948 reports of lethal force, the 
authors concluded that it was the suspect’s behavior and not belonging to a minority ethnic group 
that led to the use of the highest degree of coercion (Shane, Lawton, & Swenson, 2017). This 
suggests that statistical analysis and consideration of multiple factors such as ethnicity and the 
individual’s behavior are likely to lead to significant differences in the results. Likewise, these 
divergent results may be due to the different perspectives; some studies focus solely on ethnicity 
and use of force (see Buehler, 2017), while others see a bigger picture and take several factors 
into account (Fridell, & Lim 2016). Buehler (2017) looked only at racial disparities in lethal po-
lice shootings and found that Blacks and Hispanics are more likely to be shot at than Whites. By 
contrast, Fridell and Lim (2016) looked at the role of the neighborhood alongside ethnic dispari-
ties and concluded that ethnic disparities disappear in high crime rate neighborhoods, with no 
difference between Blacks, Whites and Hispanics. We can therefore assume that these two stud-
ies drew different conclusions about the same issue because they looked at it from different per-
spectives. Nevertheless, their conclusions do not entirely contradict each other. 
 
 
Conclusion 


Review of factors underlying police officers’ decisions to use force 
 
23 
 
This systematic literature review provides an overview of the psychological and social factors 
underlying police officers’ decisions to use legitimate violence. It highlights interest in certain 
factors such as the underlying decision-making process involved in the use of force. It raises the 
question of the influence of the environment where the encounter occurred. It also corroborates 
previous studies showing the predominant influence of the suspect's behavior and resistance in 
the decision to resort to coercion. 
 
By contrast, our review shows that some questions about the decision to resort to legitimate vio-
lence remain unanswered, as certain factors that could be particularly relevant to police forces 
around the world have been little studied. For example, physiological and emotional factors are 
only discussed in a few studies. Nevertheless, it can be assumed that police officers face situa-
tions that are highly emotionally charged and they could be overwhelmed by those emotions. 
Works on emotion regulation and cognitive abilities would help police agencies in their training 
process and police officers in their daily duty. In any event, these issues about the decision to use 
force require further research as its ins and outs could be further explored. 
 
 
Conflict of interest 
Authors report no conflict of interest. 
 
Acknowledgements 
Thanks to Elizabeth Yates for her help with the English. 
 
Formatting of funding sources 
This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, 
or not-for-profit sectors. 
 


Review of factors underlying police officers’ decisions to use force 
 
24 
 
First author, 
year (Coun-
try) 
Studied factor 
Sample 
Methodology 
 
Main results 
Akinola, 2012 
(US) 
Cortisol influ-
ence on threat 
related decision 
73 police officers 
Officers were stressed by a role play 
task under supervision to increase 
their cortisol level and then asked to 
perform the shoot/don’t shoot tasks 
Increased cortisol level reduces 
errors for armed and Black targets. 
This negative correlation is lower 
for unarmed and White targets. 
Andersen, 
2018 (US) 
Influence of 
heart rate on use 
of force 
57 police officers 
Officers were trained to moderate 
their heart rate and observations were 
made on simulated intervention af-
terward. 
Reducing heart rate by enhancing 
activation of parasympathetic 
nervous system reduces the number 
of lethal shooting errors, even 18 
months after training. 
Ariel, 2016 
(US) 
Body-worn 
cameras 
16774 arrests in 
response to a call 
Analysis of reports 
Wearing a body camera led to a 
35% decrease in complaints about 
use of force and an 18% decrease 
in police arrests. 
Boivin, 2016 
(CA) 
Suspect's behav-
ior 
1174 Canadian 
police reports 
Analysis of reports 
Suspect's resistance and behavior is 
the most predictive factor of police 
use of force. 
Boivin, 2017 
(CA) 
Influence of 
neighborhood  
1411 reports of use 
of force  
Analysis of reports 
Social disorganization predicts use 
of force and crime rate in the area. 
Bolger, 2015 
(US) 
All factors 
 
Meta-analysis 
 
Suspect's conduct during the en-
counter is the most influential ele-
ment in police use of force. 
Boulton, 2016 
(GB) 
Police officer's 
experience 
12 SFOs and 11 
AFOs 
Interviews about past interventions 
Experts show adaptive flexibility to 
changing task demands, while nov-
ices stick to procedural rules. 
Brandl, 2013 
(US) 
Police officer's 
personality 
1084 police offic-
ers and 477 reports 
of use of force 
 Analysis of reports 
A small proportion of officers are 
responsible for a large number of 
use-of-force situations. 


Review of factors underlying police officers’ decisions to use force 
 
25 
 
Brown, R. A., 
2009 (US) 
Suspect's age 
671 encounters 
with suspects 
 Analysis of reports 
Young people are more likely to be 
arrested than adults, but there is no 
difference in the use of force. 
 
Brown, S. G., 
2015 (US & 
JM) 
Decision-
making style 
and anger con-
trol 
120 police officers 
Officers had to decide whether they 
would take coercive action or not in 
two scenarios of different gravity. 
Rationality leads to avoiding ex-
treme choices, while intuition and 
weak anger control lead to action. 
Buehler, 2017 
(US) 
Belonging to an 
ethnic minority  
2285 legal inter-
vention deaths  
 Analysis of reports 
Mortality rates among Blacks and 
Hispanics following legal interven-
tions are 2.8 and 1.7 times higher 
than among Whites. 
Crow, 2011 
(US) 
CED deploy-
ment 
461 reports of use 
of force  
 Analysis of reports 
CEDs deployed in 50.3% of en-
counters. CEDs are used more of-
ten on non-White men. 
Dabney, 2017 
(US) 
Belonging to an 
ethnic minority  
934 encounters in 
an African Ameri-
can neighborhood 
Data collected during ride-along pa-
trols and coded on three categories: a 
warning is given, a citation is issued, 
or an arrest is made. 
In a highly multicultural environ-
ment, physical appearance, such as 
dreadlocks that enhance suspect’s 
racial stereotype, is correlated with 
more frequent use of force. 
Dai, 2009 (US) Suspect's behav-
ior and gender 
263 cases 
 Analysis of reports 
Suspect's behavior greatly influ-
ences police use of coercion. 
Women are less likely to be co-
erced by force. 
Ferdik, 2014 
(US) 
Institutional 
policies and 
CED deploy-
ment 
259 county police 
departments 
 Analysis of reports 
Less restrictive CED policies lead 
to greater CED deployment and 
less use of firearms. 
 
Fridell, 2016 
(US) 
Belonging to an 
ethnic minority 
and CED 
deployment 
1846 reports of use 
of force  
 Analysis of reports 
A Black suspect is 1.49 times more 
likely to experience CED deploy-
ment. No change for other forms of 
coercion. This effect is moderated 
by neighborhood crime rate. 
 


Review of factors underlying police officers’ decisions to use force 
 
26 
 
Henstock, 
2017 (GB) 
Wearing a body 
camera 
430 police shifts 
 Analysis of reports 
Body-worn cameras reduce the use 
of force by 50%. This effect is 
mainly concentrated on the lowest 
degree of force (physical restraint 
or handcuffing). 
Hickman, 
2015 (US) 
Force factor and 
suspects’ behav-
ior 
1240 police reports 
Analysis of reports 
Study demonstrates police use of 
force mostly (75%) matches (-
1;+1) suspect’s resistance. It also 
increases over time from lower to 
higher than suspect’s resistance. 
Hine, 2018a 
(AU) 
Decision-
making process 
91 recruits 
Recruits went into a simulated inter-
vention and were then debriefed 
about the decision they had taken. 
Recruits make more use of intuitive 
than analytical reasoning. They 
also report perceptual, cognitive 
and physiological impairments. 
James, 2012 
(US) (Thesis) 
Belonging to an 
ethnic minority  
Three trials involv-
ing soldiers, police 
officers and civil-
ians with no expe-
rience of carrying 
arms. 
Third experiment was exclusively 
with police officers. They were tested 
immediately after their shift and after 
three days off. 
Police officers are slower to shoot a 
Black than a White suspect. They 
are more likely to shoot unarmed 
Whites than unarmed Blacks. 
Jetelina, 2017 
(US) 
Ethnicity and 
use of sublethal 
force 
5630 reports from 
1693 police offic-
ers 
Analysis of reports 
There is tremendous variation in 
intermediate weapon use depend-
ing on the ethnicity of officers and 
civilians. 
Johnson, R., 
2011 (US) 
Suspects with 
mental disorders 
619 encounters 
Analysis of reports 
People with mental disorders are 
more likely to be aggressive, resist 
or carry a weapon. But once these 
aspects are factored out, use of 
force is not affected. 
Johnson, D. 
J., 2018 (US) 
(Thesis) 
Influence of 
prior 
information on 
ethnic bias 
102 students and 
51 police officers 
Participants were given prior infor-
mation about a decision to shoot situ-
ation, then had to make a decision 
relative to a picture showing a suspect 
who was either armed or not. 
When police officers are given 
accurate prior information, ethnic 
bias disappears and decisions are 
better. 


Review of factors underlying police officers’ decisions to use force 
 
27 
 
Kahn, 2017 
(US) 
Belonging to an 
ethnic minority 
and time 
139 use of force 
cases 
Analysis of cases 
Force used against Blacks or His-
panics starts at a higher point than 
against Whites. Over time, greater 
force is used against Whites. 
Kesic, 2013 
(AU) 
Suspects with 
mental disorders 
4267 reports of use 
of force  
Analysis of reports 
7.2% of the people against whom 
force is deployed suffer from men-
tal disorders. They are more likely 
to use weapons and be violent to-
ward police officers, who respond 
accordingly. 
Kleider, 2009 
(US) 
Working 
memory and 
negative emo-
tionality 
24 urban police 
officers 
Participants took a working memory 
test, watched a video ending with the 
shooting of an officer on duty and 
then were asked to take the 
shoot/don’t shoot task while they 
were monitoring their inter-beat in-
terval by electrocardiogram and facial 
muscle movement by electromyogra-
phy. 
Low working-memory capacity is 
correlated with high false alarm 
rate. Low working-memory capaci-
ty and high negative emotionality 
lead to lower discriminability. 
These variables have no effect on 
shooting speed.  
Klinger, 2016 
(US) 
Influence of 
neighborhood 
230 police shooting 
reports 
Analysis of reports 
Micro-ecology analysis demon-
strates that Blacks, lower income, 
low owner-occupation household 
rate, and younger population are 
correlated with deadly force usage. 
Krishan, 2014 
(US) 
Influence of 
neighborhood  
916 police reports 
 Analysis of reports 
Use of force and probability of 
arrest are independent of the 
neighborhood. 
Lee, 2010 
(US) 
Influence of 
neighborhood  
8798 custody re-
ports 
Analysis of reports 
Suspect's behavior and not ethnici-
ty explains use of force. Neighbor-
hood unemployment rate increases 
the use of coercion and possibly 
crime rate. In-service training is a 
significant factor of level of police 
use of force. 


Review of factors underlying police officers’ decisions to use force 
 
28 
 
Lee, 2010 
(US) 
Managerial 
organization and 
institutional 
policies 
86 cases 
Case analysis 
Division of labor, hierarchy of au-
thority, extensive monitoring, unity 
of command are factors responsible 
for bad decisions to open fire. 
Lee, 2014 
(US) 
Influence of 
close neighbor-
hood 
1459 reports of use 
of force  
Analysis of reports 
High crime rate in a small neigh-
borhood is correlated with a higher 
level of legitimate force. 
Lin, 2010 (US) CED deploy-
ment 
1188 reports of use 
of force  
Analysis of reports 
CED replaces other means of coer-
cion. It generally reduces intensity 
of use of force and decreases of-
ficer injury rates. Its effectiveness 
is poor in life-threatening situa-
tions. 
Mangels, 2020 
(US) 
Police officers 
experience 
42 experts police 
officers and 36 
novices 
Participants watched footage of five 
real use of force events.  Afterwards 
they were asked about what they saw, 
if they felt threatened and what would 
they have done. 
Experienced police officers focus 
more on the possibility of mitigat-
ing use of force than novices. They 
are also more confident about the 
possibility of back up. 
McTackett, 
2017 (AU) 
Suspect with 
mental disorders 
286 use of force 
situations 
Analysis of reports 
The potential instability of the sus-
pect does not imply an increase in 
the use of force. It is proportional 
to suspect's resistance. 
Mears, 2017 
(US) 
Belonging to an 
ethnic minority 
None, literature 
search 
Literature review 
Heuristics relying on biases about 
the dangerousness of ethnic 
minorities increase the use of force, 
particularly when the suspects 
assume police officers are biased 
against them. 


Review of factors underlying police officers’ decisions to use force 
 
29 
 
Morabito, 
2017 (US) 
Suspect with 
mental disorders 
and comorbidi-
ties 
4211 use of force 
situations 
Analysis of reports 
Suspects who are both mentally 
disordered and intoxicated are per-
ceived to be more dangerous and 
are therefore subjected to more use 
of force than individuals with men-
tal disorders only. Individuals with 
no perceived disorders are the most 
likely to have a firearm pointed at 
them. 
Morrow, 2017 
(US) 
Belonging to an 
ethnic minority 
519948 police re-
ports 
Analysis of reports 
Blacks and Hispanics are signifi-
cantly more likely to be physically 
challenged than Whites. 
Nickel, 2016 
(CA) (Thesis) 
Gender of police 
officers 
25 police officers – 
13 men and 12 
women 
Focus groups were taped discussing a 
real-life event and what actions they 
would take. 
Women make the decision to use 
force differently from men. They 
prioritize need and timeliness. 
Paoline, 2018 
(US) 
Belonging to an 
ethnic minority, 
suspect and of-
ficer 
6059 encounters 
between Blacks 
and Whites 
Analysis of reports 
White police officers are more co-
ercive towards Black suspects. No 
difference for Black officers. Po-
lice officer’s ethnicity does not 
predict the suspect’s resistance. 
Pickering, 
2017 (US) 
(Thesis) 
Colleagues 
nearby 
83 police officers 
Interview with police officers in-
volved in a decision-to-shoot situa-
tion. 
Police officers influence each oth-
er, both through their actions and 
their presence. 
Prenzler, 2013 
(CA) 
Managerial 
organization and 
training 
7 case studies about 
use of force  
Literature review 
Police departments can reduce use 
of force. Problem-oriented resolu-
tion approach allows for more ap-
propriate interventions. 
Renden, 2017 
(NL) 
State anxiety 
and stress 
88 police officers 
Participants enter a 144m2 room and 
must proceed to an arrest in a ran-
domly assigned high or low threat 
scenario. 
Anxiety affects police officers’ 
state of stress but not their 
decisions. Decisions are only 
affected by the threat. Stress affects 
effectiveness. 


Review of factors underlying police officers’ decisions to use force 
 
30 
 
Rydberg, 2010 
(US) 
Level of 
education 
3356 encounters 
with a suspect 
Analysis of reports 
While level of education does not 
reduce likelihood of arrest or 
search, higher education 
significantly reduces use of force. 
Schulenberg, 
2016 (CA) 
Suspect with 
mental disorders 
577 encounters 
with a suspect 
Analysis of reports 
Suspects with mental disorders are 
more likely to be prosecuted than 
those without. 
Shane, 2017 
(US) 
Belonging to an 
ethnic minority 
1948 reports of use 
of lethal force 
Analysis of reports 
Data show that it is not ethnicity 
that influences the decision to open 
fire but only the suspect’s behavior. 
Sousa, 2010 
(US) 
CED deploy-
ment 
64 police officers 
One group was given a CED, not the 
other. Both groups faced with three 
scenarios with different suspect re-
sistance.  
CED deployment replaces other 
coercive means and reduces use of 
firearms. 
Staller, 2018 
(DE) 
Ego depletion 
80 police officers 
44 officers were shown a disgusting 
video and 36 immersed their hand in 
very cold water, both situations de-
signed to induce ego depletion. They 
were then placed in a scenario in 
which they had to prevent an increas-
ingly aggressive individual breaching 
a cordon. 
Video did not induce any change 
but the cold pressor task did. De-
pending on the circumstances, de-
creased self-control leads officers 
to use force more quickly. 
Staller, 2019 
(DE) 
Ego depletion 
200 German police 
recruits 
Recruits completed a cognitive deple-
tion task  (“e” crossing). They then 
worked through a video-based real-
life scenario with a provocative citi-
zen and had to indicate when they 
would intervene. 
Ego-depleted officers reported that 
they would use coercion more rap-
idly. 
Taylor, 2010 
(US) 
CED deploy-
ment 
18 police precincts 
over a four-year 
period 
Analysis of reports 
CED deployment reduces the use 
of any other coercive means. 


Review of factors underlying police officers’ decisions to use force 
 
31 
 
Terrill, 2017 
(US) 
Institutional 
policies 
3340 use of force 
situations 
Analysis of reports 
Restrictive use-of-force policies 
issued by police departments have 
a downward impact on use of force 
by their officers. 
Verhage, 2018 
(BE) 
Stress manage-
ment 
150 Belgian police 
officers 
Questionnaires were completed by 
137 officers. 13 were interviewed to 
explore in greater depth the influence 
of stress during interventions. 
Police officers' accountability for 
their actions increases their stress 
level, which hinders decisions in 
critical situations. 
Vickers, 2012 
(CA) 
Difference be-
tween experts 
and rookies 
24 emergency re-
sponse team police 
officers 
Participants were equipped with a 
gaze tracking device and were asked 
to decide whether they should dis-
charge their firearm on an armed or 
unarmed individual. 
Experts make fewer mistakes when 
a cell phone is drawn. Experts also 
shoot faster than rookies. Overall, 
experts have better performance. 


Review of factors underlying police officers’ decisions to use force 
 
32 
 
References: 
 
Akinola, M., & Mendes, W. B. (2012). Stress-induced cortisol facilitates threat-related decision 
making among police officers. Behavioral Neuroscience, 126(1), 167–174. 
 
Allen, J. J., Anderson, C. A., & Bushman, B. J. (2018). The General Aggression Model, Current 
Opinion in Psychology, 19:75–80. 
 
Andersen, P. J., Di Nota, P. M.,  Beston, B., Boychuk, E. C., Gustafsberg, H., Poplawski, S., & 
Arpaia, J. (2018). Reducing Lethal Force Errors by Modulating Police Physiology. Journal of 
Occupational and Environmental Medicine. 60, 1. 
 
Ariel, B. (2016). Police Body Cameras in Large Police Departments. Journal of Criminal Law & 
Criminology, 106(4), 729–768. 
 
Baumeister, R. E, Heatherton, T. E et Tice, D. M. (1994). Losing control : How and why people 
fail at self-regulation. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.  
 
Baumeister, R. E., Bratslavsky, E., Muraven, M. et Tice, D. M. (1998). Ego Depletion: Is the 
Active Self a Limited Resource ?, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, Vol. 74, No. 5, 
1252-1265.   
 
Bayley, D. H., & Bittner, E. (1997). Learning the skills of policing. In R. G. Dunham & G. Alpert 
(Eds.), Critical issues in policing: Contemporary readings (3rd ed., pp. 114-137). Prospect 
Heights, IL : Waveland. 
 
Berthoz, A. (2003). La décision, Odile Jacob.  
 
Bittner, E. (1970) The functions of police in modern society. Washington, National Institute of 
Mental Health.  
 
Bittner, E. (1990) Aspects of police work. Boston, Northeastern University Press.  
 
Boivin, R. & Lagace, M. (2016). Police Use-of-Force Situations in Canada: Analyzing the Force 
or Resistance Ratio Using a Trichotomous Dependent Variable. Police Quarterly, (Issue 2), 180.  
 
Boivin, R. & Obartel, P. (2017). Visitor Inflows and Police Use of Force in a Canadian City, Ca-
nadian Journal of Criminology and Criminal Justice, Vol. 59, Issue 3, pp. 373-396. 
 
Bolger, P. C. (2015). Just following orders: A meta-analysis of the correlates of American police 
officer use of force decisions. American Journal of Criminal Justice, 40(3), 466–492. 
 
Boulton, L. & Cole, J. (2016). Adaptive flexibility: Examining the role of expertise in the deci-
sion making of authorized firearms officers during armed confrontation. Journal of Cognitive 
Engineering and Decision Making, 10(3), 291–308. 
 


Review of factors underlying police officers’ decisions to use force 
 
33 
 
Brandl, S. G. & Stroshine, M. S. (2013). The role of officer attributes, job characteristics, and 
arrest activity in explaining police use of force. Criminal Justice Policy Review, 24(5), 548-569. 
 
Brown, R. A., Novak, K. J. & Frank, J. (2009). Identifying variation in police officer behavior 
between juveniles and adults. Journal of Criminal Justice, 37(2), 200–208. 
 
Brown, S. G. & Daus, C. S. (2015). The influence of police officers’ decision-making style and 
anger control on responses to work scenarios. Journal of Applied Research in Memory and Cog-
nition, 4(3), 294–302. 
 
Buehler, J. W. (2017). Racial/ethnic disparities in the use of lethal force by US police, 2010–
2014. American Journal of Public Health, 107(2), 295–297. 
 
Chi, M.T.H. (2006). Two approaches to the study of experts’ characteristics, The Cambridge 
Handbook of Expertise and Expert Performance, K.A. Ericsson, N. Charness, P. Feltovich, R. 
Hoffman (Eds.), Cambridge University Press, p. 21-30. 
 
Colliot-Thélène, C. (1995). Violence et contrainte. Lignes, n° 25, p. 264-279.  
Correll, J., Park, B., Judd, C. M., & Wittenbrink, B. (2002). The police officer’s dilemma: Using 
ethnicity to disambiguate potentially threatening individuals. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 83, 1314–1329. 
Crow, M. S. & Adrion, B. (2011). Focal concerns and police use of force: Examining the factors 
associated with taser use. Police Quarterly, 14(4), 366-387. 
 
Dabney, D. A., Teasdale, B., Ishoy, G. A., Gann, T. & Berry, B. (2017). Policing in a Largely 
Minority Jurisdiction: The Influence of Appearance Characteristics Associated with Contempo-
rary Hip-Hop Culture on Police Decision-Making. Justice Quarterly, (Issue 7), 1310. 
 
Dai, M., & Nation, D. (2009). Understanding non-coercive, procedurally fair behavior by the 
police during encounters. International Journal of Law, Crime and Justice, 37(4), 170–181. 
 
Desmedt, J. C. (2009). The use of force paradigm for enforcement and corrections. Retrieved 
October 10, 2016, from http://www.pss.cc/uofm.htm 
 
Elias, N. (1939) La dynamique de l'occident, Calmann-Lévy, 1975 
 
Ericson, R. V. (1981). Making Crime: A Study of Detective Work, Toronto, Butterworth. 
 
Evans, 
J. 
St. 
B. 
T. 
(2010). 
Intuition 
and reasoning: 
a 
dual-process 
perspec-
tive, Psychological Inquiry, 21: 313-326. 
 
Ferdik, F. V., Kaminski, R. J., Cooney, M. D. & Sevigny, E. L. (2014). The influence of agency 
policies on conducted energy device use and police use of lethal force. Police Quarterly, 
17(4), 328-358. 
 


Review of factors underlying police officers’ decisions to use force 
 
34 
 
Freud, S. (1961a). The ego and the id. In J. Strachey (Ed. and Trans.), The standard edition of the 
complete psychological works of Sigmund Freud (Vol. 19, pp. 12-66). London: Hogarth Press. 
(Original work published 1923)  
  
Freud, S. (1961b). New introductory lectures on psychoanalysis. In J. Strachey (Ed. and Trans.), 
The standard edition of the complete psychological works of Sigmund Freud (Vol. 22, pp. 7-182). 
London: Hogarth Press. (Original work published 1933)  
 
Fridell, L. & Lim, H. (2016). Assessing the racial aspects of police force using the implicit- and 
counter-bias perspectives. Journal of Criminal Justice, 44, 36–48. 
 
Fyfe, J. J. (1988). Police use of deadly force: Research and reform. Justice Quarterly, 5, 165-
205.  
 
Goleman, 
D. 
(1995). Emotional Intelligence: Why It 
Can Matter More Than IQ, 
New 
York, NY: Bantam. 
 
Henstock, D. & Ariel, B. (2017). Testing the Effects of Police Body-Worn Cameras on Use of 
Force during Arrests: A Randomized Controlled Trial in a Large British Police Force. European 
Journal of Criminology, (Issue 6), 720. 
 
Hickman, M. J., Atherley, L. T., Lowery, P. G., & Alpert, G. P. (2015). Reliability of the force 
factor method in police use-of-force research. Police Quarterly, 18(4), 368-396. 
 
Hine, K. A., Porter, L. E., Westera, N. J., Alpert, G. P. & Allen, A. (2018a). Exploring Police Use 
of 
Force Decision-Making Processes and Impairments Using a Naturalistic Decision-Making 
Approach. Criminal Justice and Behavior, 45(11), 1782–1801. 
 
Hine, 
K. 
A., 
Porter, 
L. 
E., Westera, 
N. 
J., Alpert, 
G. 
P. 
and 
Allen, 
A. 
(2018b). What were they thinking? Factors influencing police recruits’ decisions about 
force. Policing and Society: An International Journal of Research and Policing. Advance online 
publication.  
 
James, L. (2012). The influence of suspect race and ethnicity on decisions to shoot in a deadly 
force judgment and decision-making simulator. Dissertation Abstracts International Section A : 
Humanities and Social Sciences. ProQuest Information & Learning. 
 
Jetelina, K. K., Jennings, W. G., Bishopp, S. A., Piquero, A. R., & Gonzalez, J. M. R. (2017). 
Dissecting the Complexities of the Relationship Between Police Officer-Civilian Race/Ethnicity 
Dyads and Less-Than-Lethal Use of Force. American Journal of Public Health, 107(7), 1164–
1170. 
 
Jobard, F. (2002). Bavures policières ? La force publique et ses usages. Paris, La Découverte. 
 
Johnson, R. (2011). Suspect mental disorder and police use of force. Criminal Justice & Behav-
ior, 38, 127–145. 
 


Review of factors underlying police officers’ decisions to use force 
 
35 
 
Johnson, D. J. (2018). Dispatch information and police use of force: Computationally modeling 
simulated decisions to shoot. Dissertation Abstracts International: Section B: The Sciences and 
Engineering. ProQuest Information & Learning. 
 
Johnson, D. J., Cesario, J. et Pleskac, T. J. (2018). How Prior Information and Police Experience 
Impact Decisions to Shoot, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology: Attitudes and Social 
Cognition, Vol. 115, No. 4, 601–623. 
 
Kahn, K. B., Steele, J. S., McMahon, J. M., & Stewart, G. (2017). How suspect race affects po-
lice use of force in an interaction over time. Law and Human Behavior, 41(2), 117–126. 
 
Kesic, D., Thomas, S. D. & Ogloff, J. R. (2013). Use of nonfatal force on and by persons with 
apparent mental disorder in encounters with police. Criminal Justice and Behavior, 40(3), 321-
337. 
 
Klahm, C., & Tillyer, R. (2010). Understanding police use of force: A review of the evi-
dence. Southwest Journal of Criminal Justice, 7, 214–239. 
 
Kleider, H. M., Parrott, D. J., & King, T. Z. (2010). Shooting Behaviour: How Working Memory 
and NegativeEmotionality Influence Police Officer Shoot Decisions, Appl. Cognit. Psychol., 24: 
707–717. 
 
Klinger, D., Rosenfeld, R., Isom, D., & Deckard, M. (2016). Race, crime, and the micro-ecology 
of deadly force. Criminology and Public Policy, 15(1), 193-222. 
 
Krishan, S., Bakeman, R., Broussard, B., Cristofaro, S. L., Hankerson-Dyson, D., Husbands, L., 
… Compton, M. T. (2014). The influence of neighborhood characteristics on police officers’ en-
counters with persons suspected to have a serious mental illness. International Journal of Law 
and Psychiatry, 37(4), 359–369. 
 
LeDoux, J. (1996). The Emotional Brain: The Mysterious Underpinnings of Emotional Life, New 
York, NY: Touch- stone.  
 
Lee, H., Jang, H., Yun, I. & Lim, H. (2010). An examination of police use of force utilizing po-
lice training and neighborhood contextual factors: multilevel analysis. Policing: An International 
Journal of Police Strategies Management, 33(4),681-702. 
 
Lee, H., & Vaughn, M. S. (2010). Organizational factors that contribute to police deadly force 
liability. Journal of Criminal Justice, 38(2), 193–206. 
 
Lee, H., Vaughn, M. S., & Lim, H. (2014). The impact of neighborhood crime levels on police 
use of force: An examination at micro and meso levels. Journal of Criminal Justice, 42(6), 491–
499. 
 
Lin, Y. & Jones, T. R. (2010). Electronic control devices and use of force outcomes: Incidence 
and severity of use of force, and frequency of injuries to arrestees and police officers. Policing: 
An International Journal of Police Strategies Management, 33(1), 152-178. 
 


Review of factors underlying police officers’ decisions to use force 
 
36 
 
Mangels, L., Suss, J., & Lande, B. (2020). Police expertise and use of force: Using a mixed-
methods approach to model expert and novice use-of-force decision-making. Journal of Police 
and Criminal Psychology. 
 
Maslow, A. (1943) A Theory of Human Motivation, Psychological Review, no 50, p. 370-396. 
 
McTackett, L. J. & Thomas, S. D. M. (2017). Police perceptions of irrational unstable behaviours 
and use of force. Journal of Police and Criminal Psychology, 32(2), 163–171. 
 
Mears, D. P., Craig, M. O., Stewart, E. A., & Warren, P. Y. (2017). Thinking fast, not slow: How 
cognitive biases may contribute to racial disparities in the use of force in police-citizen encoun-
ters. Journal of Criminal Justice, 53, 12–24. 
 
Monjardet, D. (1996). Ce que fait la police, sociologie de la force publique, Paris, La 
Découverte.  
 
Morabito, M. S., Socia, K., Wik, A., & Fisher, W. H. (2017). The nature and extent of police use 
of force in encounters with people with behavioral health disorders. International Journal of Law 
and Psychiatry, 50, 31–37. 
 
Moreau de Bellaing, C. (2009). Comment la violence vient aux policiers. École de police et 
enseignement de la violence légitime. Genèses, n° 75, p. 24-44.  
 
Morrow, W. J., White, M. D., & Fradella, H. F. (2017). After the stop: Exploring the racial/ethnic 
disparities in police use of force during Terry stops. Police Quarterly, 20(4), 367–396. 
 
Mouhanna, C. (2011) De l’échec de la police nationale à l’avènement incertain des polices muni-
cipales, Archives de politique criminelle, 33, 1, 99-112.  
 
Napoli, P. (2003). Naissance de la police. Pouvoir, normes, société. Paris. La Découverte.  
 
Nickel, O. A. (2016). Critical factors in Police use of force decisions. Dissertation Abstracts In-
ternational Section A: Humanities and Social Sciences. ProQuest Information & Learning. 
 
Paoline III, E. A., Gau, J. M., & Terrill, W. (2018). Race and the Police Use of Force Encounter 
in the United States, British Journal of Criminology, Vol. 58, Issue 1, pp. 54-74 
 
Pickering, J. C. (2017). To shoot or not to shoot: An analysis of police officers’ deadly force de-
cision-making processes. Dissertation Abstracts International Section A: Humanities and Social 
Sciences. ProQuest Information & Learning. 
 
Prenzler, T., Porter, L., & Alpert, G. P. (2013). Reducing police use of force: Case studies and 
prospects. Aggression and Violent Behavior, 18(2), 343–356. 
 
Renden, P. G., Landman, A., Daalder, N. R., Cock, H. P., Savelsbergh, G. J. P., & Oudejans, R. 
R. D. (2017). Effects of threat, trait anxiety and state anxiety on police officers’ actions during an 
arrest. Legal & Criminological Psychology, 22(1), 116–129. 


Review of factors underlying police officers’ decisions to use force 
 
37 
 
 
Rydberg, J., & Terrill, W. (2010). The effect of higher education on police behavior. Police 
Quarterly, 13(1), 92–120. 
 
Schulenberg, J. L. (2016). Police decision-making in the gray zone: The dynamics of police–
citizen encounters with mentally ill persons. Criminal Justice and Behavior, 43(4), 459–482. 
 
Shane, J. M., Lawton, B., & Swenson, Z. (2017). The prevalence of fatal police shootings by U.S. 
police, 2015–2016: Patterns and answers from a new data set. Journal of Criminal Justice, 52, 
101–111.  
 
Sousa, W., Ready, J., & Ault, M. (2010). The impact of TASERs on police use-of-force deci-
sions: Findings from a randomized field-training experiment. Journal of Experimental Criminol-
ogy, 6(1), 35–55.  
 
Staller, M. S., Christiansen, P., Zaiser, B., Körner, S., & Cole, J. C. (2018). Do they aggress ear-
lier? Investigating the effects of ego depletion on police officers’ use of force behavior. Journal 
of Police and Criminal Psychology, 33(4), 332–344. 
 
Staller, M. S., Müller, M., Christiansen, P., Zaiser, B., Körner, S., & Cole, J. C. (2019). Ego de-
pletion and the use of force: Investigating the effects of ego depletion on police officers’ intention 
to use force. Aggressive Behavior, 45(2), 161–168. 
 
Taylor, B. & Woods, D. J. (2010). Injuries to officers and suspects in police use-of-force cases: 
quasi-experimental evaluation. Police Quarterly, 13(3), 260-289. 
 
Tedeschi, J. T., & Felson, R. B. (1994). Violence, aggression, and coercive actions. Washington, 
DC: American Psychological Association. 
Terrill, W. (2003). Police use of force and suspect resistance: The micro process of the police-
suspect encounter. Police Quarterly, 6, 51-83.  
  
Terrill, W. (2005). Police use of force: A transactional approach. Justice Quarterly, 22, 107-138.  
 
Terrill W. & Paoline III, E. A. (2017) Police Use of Less Lethal Force: Does Administrative Pol-
icy Matter?, Justice Quarterly, 34:2, 193-216. 
 
Tversky, A. et Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgement under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases, Sci-
ence, New Series, Vol. 185, n°4157, pp 1124-1131. 
 
Verhage, A., Noppe, J., Feys, Y., & Ledegen, E. (2018). Force, stress, and decision-making with-
in the Belgian police: The impact of stressful situations on police decision-making. Journal of 
Police and Criminal Psychology, 33(4), 345–357. 
 
Vickers, J. N., & Lewinski, W. (2012). Performing under pressure: Gaze control, decision mak-
ing and shooting performance of elite and rookie police officers. Human Movement Science, 
31(1), 101–117. 


Review of factors underlying police officers’ decisions to use force 
 
38 
 
Weber, M. (1919). Le savant et le politique. Paris : Union Générale d’Éditions, 1963, 186 pages. 
Collection : Le Monde en 10-18.