Brad Sears
Christy Mallory
Andrew R. Flores
Kerith J. Conron
SEPTEMBER 2021
LGBT PEOPLE’S 
EXPERIENCES 
OF WORKPLACE 
DISCRIMINATION 
AND HARASSMENT
RESEARCH THAT MATTERS


LGBT People’s Experiences of Workplace Discrimination and Harassment   |   1
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Over 8 million workers in the U.S. identify as LGBT.1 Employment discrimination and harassment 
against LGBT people has been documented in a variety of sources and found to negatively impact 
employees’ health and wellbeing and to reduce job commitment and satisfaction. 
This report examines experiences of employment discrimination and harassment against LGBT 
adults using a survey of 935 LGBT adults conducted in May of 2021. Lifetime, five-year, and past-
year discrimination were assessed among adults employed as of March 2020—just before many 
workplaces were forced to shut down because of COVID-19. 
Accordingly, this survey is one of the first to gather information about experiences of sexual orientation 
and gender identity employment discrimination during the COVID-19 pandemic and in the year 
following the U.S. Supreme Court’s decision in Bostock v. Clayton County,2 which held that employment 
discrimination against LGBT people is prohibited by the Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.3 
Our analysis indicates that employment discrimination against LGBT people continues to be 
persistent and widespread. Over 40% of LGBT workers (45.5%) reported experiencing unfair 
treatment at work, including being fired, not hired, or harassed because of their sexual orientation 
or gender identity at some point in their lives. This discrimination and harassment is ongoing: nearly 
one-third (31.1%) of LGBT respondents reported that they experienced discrimination or harassment 
within the past five years. 
Overall, 8.9% of employed LGBT people reported that they were fired or not hired because of their 
sexual orientation or gender identity in the past year, including 11.3% of LGBT employees of color and 
6.5% of white LGBT employees. The percentage was five times as high for those who were out as LGBT 
to at least some people at work as compared to those who were not out (10.9% compared to 2.2%).
Over half (57.0%) of LGBT employees who experienced discrimination or harassment at work reported 
that their employer or co-workers did or said something to indicate that the unfair treatment that 
they experienced was motivated by religious beliefs. Nearly two-thirds (63.5%) of LGBT employees 
of color said that religion was a motivating factor in their experiences of workplace discrimination 
compared to 49.4% of white LGBT employees.
Many employees also reported engaging in behaviors to avoid discrimination and harassment, 
including hiding their LGBT identity and changing their physical appearance, and many left their jobs 
or considered leaving their jobs because of unfair treatment.
While the key findings of the report are summarized below, the full report includes several quotes 
from respondents providing more detail about their experiences of discrimination and harassment in 
the workplace. 
1 Kerith J. Conron & Shoshana K. Goldberg, Williams Inst., LGBT People in the US Not Protected by State Non-
Discrimination Statutes 1 (2020), https://williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/publications/lgbt-nondiscrimination-statutes.
2 140 S. Ct. 1731 (2020).
3 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-2(a).


LGBT People’s Experiences of Workplace Discrimination and Harassment   |   2
KEY FINDINGS
•	 Discrimination: Over one in four (29.8%) LGBT employees reported experiencing at least 
one form of employment discrimination (being fired or not hired) because of their sexual 
orientation or gender identity at some point in their lives.
	
{
One-third (33.2%) of LGBT employees of color and one-quarter (26.3%) of white LGBT 
employees reported experiencing employment discrimination (being fired or not hired) 
because of their sexual orientation or gender identity.
	
{
LGBT employees of color were significantly more likely to report not being hired because 
of their sexual orientation or gender identity than white LGBT employees: 29.0% of LGBT 
employees of color reported not being hired based on their LGBT status compared to 
18.3% of white LGBT employees.
Transgender4 employees were also significantly more likely to experience discrimination based on 
their LGBT status than cisgender LGB employees: Nearly half (48.8%) of transgender employees 
reported experiencing discrimination (being fired or not hired) based on their LGBT status compared 
to 27.8% of cisgender LGB employees. More specifically, over twice as many transgender employees 
reported not being hired (43.9%) because of their LGBT status compared to LGB employees (21.5%). 
	
{
Beyond being fired or not being hired, respondents also reported other types of unfair 
treatment based on their sexual orientation and gender identity, including not being promoted, 
not receiving raises, being treated differently than those with different-sex partners, having 
their schedules changed or reduced, and being excluded from company events. 
•	 Harassment: About one-third (37.7%) of LGBT employees reported experiencing at least one 
form of harassment at work because of their sexual orientation or gender identity at some 
point in their lives. 
	
{
One in five (20.8%) LGBT employees reported experiencing physical harassment because 
of their sexual orientation or gender identity. Reports of physical harassment included 
being “punched,” “hit,” and ‘beaten up” in the workplace.
	
{
LGBT employees of color were significantly more likely to report experiencing verbal 
harassment (35.6% compared to 25.9%) at work because of their sexual orientation or 
gender identity than white LGBT employees. In addition, transgender employees were 
significantly more likely to report experiencing verbal harassment over the course of their 
careers than cisgender LGB employees (43.8% compared to 29.3%). In many cases, the verbal 
harassment came from employees’ supervisors and co-workers, as well as customers. 
	
{
One in four (25.9%) LGBT employees reported experiencing sexual harassment in the 
workplace because of their sexual orientation and gender identity at some point in their 
careers. Although transgender employees were not more likely than cisgender employees 
to report sexual harassment over the course of their careers, they were twice as likely to 
report recent experiences of sexual harassment: 22.4% reported sexual harassment in the 
past five years compared to 11.9% of cisgender LGB employees. 
4 Participants who selected gender identity response options, including male, female, transgender, and nonbinary, that 
differed from their sex assigned at birth, were classified as transgender. 


LGBT People’s Experiences of Workplace Discrimination and Harassment   |   3
•	 Workplace culture: Two-thirds (67.5%) of LGBT employees reported that they have heard 
negative comments, slurs, or jokes about LGBTQ people at work. Many LGBT people reported 
being called or hearing words like “f****t,” “queer,” “sissy,” “tranny,” and “dyke” in the 
workplace. 
•	 Recent experiences: Of LGBT employees who experienced discrimination or harassment in the 
workplace, about one-third (31.1%) said at least one of these experiences occurred within the 
past five years; an additional 14.0% said that they had these experiences over five years ago. 
	
{
LGBT people continue to experience workplace discrimination even after the U.S. Supreme 
Court extended non-discrimination protections to LGBT people nationwide in Bostock v. 
Clayton County. Nine percent (8.9%) of LGBT employees reported that they were fired or 
not hired because of their sexual orientation or gender identity in the past year.
	
{
One in ten (11.3%) LGBT employees of color reported experiencing some form of 
employment discrimination (including being fired or not hired) based on their sexual 
orientation or gender identity within the past year.
•	 Religious motivation for discrimination: Over half (57.0%) of LGBT employees who 
experienced discrimination or harassment at work reported that their employer or co-workers 
did or said something to indicate that the unfair treatment was motivated by religious beliefs. 
For many, this included being quoted to from the Bible, told to pray that they weren’t LGBT, 
and told that they would “go to hell” or were “an abomination.” 
	
{
Of those employees who experienced discrimination or harassment at some point in 
their lives, 63.5% of LGBT employees of color said that religion was a motivating factor 
compared to 49.4% of white LGBT employees.
•	 Out at work: Many LGBT people avoid discrimination and harassment in the workplace by not 
being out to their supervisor and co-workers. Half (50.4%) of LGBT employees said that they 
are not open about being LGBT to their current supervisor and one-quarter (25.8%) are not 
out to any of their co-workers. 
	
{
Those who are out to at least some people in the workplace were three times more likely 
to report experiences of discrimination or harassment because of their sexual orientation 
or gender identity than those who are not out to anyone in the workplace (53.3% 
compared to 17.9%).
	
{
While approximately 7% of those who are not out to anyone in the workplace reported 
experiencing verbal (7.4%) or physical (7.4%) harassment because of their sexual 
orientation or gender identity, of those who are out to at least some people in the 
workplace, about one in three reported experiencing verbal harassment (37.8%) and one 
in four (25.0%) reported experiencing physical harassment.
	
{
In terms of discrimination in the past year—post-Bostock—those who are out to at 
least some people in the workplace were five times more likely to report experiencing 
discrimination (including being fired or not hired) because of their sexual orientation or 
gender identity than those who are not out to anyone (10.9% compared to 2.2%). 


LGBT People’s Experiences of Workplace Discrimination and Harassment   |   4
•	 Covering: Many LGBT employees reported engaging in “covering” behaviors in order to avoid 
harassment or discrimination at work, including changing their physical appearance; changing 
when, where, or how frequently they used the bathroom; and avoiding talking about their 
families or social lives at work. Some of the respondents reported engaging in these covering 
behaviors because their supervisors or co-workers explicitly told them to do so.
	
{
Transgender employees were significantly more likely to engage in covering behaviors 
than cisgender LGB employees. For example, 36.4% of transgender employees said that 
they changed their physical appearance and 27.5% said they changed their bathroom use 
at work compared to 23.3% and 14.9% of cisgender LGB employees.
•	 Retention: One-third (34.2%) of LGBT employees said that they have left a job because of how 
they were treated by their employer based on their sexual orientation or gender identity. 


LGBT People’s Experiences of Workplace Discrimination and Harassment   |   5
RESULTS
LIFETIME EXPERIENCES OF DISCRIMINATION AND HARASSMENT
Over 40% of LGBT workers (45.5%) reported that they experienced employment discrimination or 
harassment because of their sexual orientation or gender identity at some point in their lives. The 
types of employment discrimination and harassment reported by LGBT employees ranged from 
being fired or not hired to experiencing verbal, physical, or sexual harassment because of their sexual 
orientation or gender identity. 
Over one in four (29.8%) LGBT employees reported experiencing at least one form of employment 
discrimination (including being fired or not hired) because of their sexual orientation or gender 
identity at some point in their lives. Over one-third of LGBT employees (37.7%) reported experiencing 
at least one form of harassment at work because of their sexual orientation or gender identity at 
some point in their lives.
Figure 1. Lifetime experiences of discrimination and harassment against LGBT employees based 
on sexual orientation or gender identity


About one in five LGBT employees reported being fired (22.8%) and/or not hired (23.7%) because of 
their sexual orientation or gender identity. Examples of these experiences include: 
“I was . . . working for a small-town local insurance company. The woman I worked with 
and I were having a casual conversation and she made a discriminatory remark about 
homosexuals. I told her that I was bisexual and she cut the conversation off instantly. Within 
two days, the owner fired me because he said he was ‘looking to go in a different direction.’”
White cisgender bisexual woman from Kentucky 
22.8%
23.7%
29.8%
30.7%
20.8%
25.9%
37.7%
Fired
Not hired
Verbal
harassment
Any
discrimination
Discrimination
Harassment
Physical
harassment
Sexual
harassment
Any
harassment


LGBT People’s Experiences of Workplace Discrimination and Harassment   |   6
“Because I’m gay and trans I got fired and blackmailed to leave.”
Black transgender gay man from New Jersey 
“My boss was really interested in dating me and . . . I was lesbian. When I finally told him 
[that] because he wouldn’t get the hint, he fired me.”
Latinx cisgender lesbian from Connecticut 
“I was let go from a private golf club. . . . The sentiment was that my being gay interfered with 
my abilities as a bartender and appearing straight.”
White cisgender lesbian from Illinois 
“I was harassed and when I finally complained, I was fired.”
Latinx cisgender bisexual man from Utah 
“[I was] fired from my favorite job because my boss disagreed with my sexual orientation 
. . . [it] was the worst experience in my life. Not only did I lose the job I loved, but I lost all the 
friends and long-lasting relationships I created with this job.”
White cisgender bisexual woman from Maine
Beyond being fired or not hired, respondents also reported other types of unfair treatment based on 
their sexual orientation and gender identity, including not being promoted, not receiving raises, being 
treated differently than those with different-sex partners, and being excluded from company events. 
Examples of these experiences include: 
“I am asexual and was a team lead. A supervisor used it as one of the reasons I was unfit 
for my position. She said it showed that I was either naive or just wanted to be special and 
neither were qual[ities] of a good team lead.”
White cisgender asexual woman from Pennsylvania 
“Once I asked to change my name tag at [a regional grocery store chain] as I finally came out 
as transgender. . . . [T]hey refused to call me by my chosen name and continued to misgender 
me constantly.”
White transgender sexual minority person from Ohio
“I was called the f-slur and often referenced as ‘fruity’ or ‘soy boy’ as a grown man. I was not 
promoted because I did not have a female partner.”
Black cisgender bisexual man from Virginia 


LGBT People’s Experiences of Workplace Discrimination and Harassment   |   7
“I was passed up for promotions because ‘the guys with a wife and kids’ needed the position 
more.’ Eventually [I] left after being told ‘maybe if you settled down with a nice girl we could 
find a better position here for you.”
White cisgender questioning man from Arkansas5
“This guy deadnamed my trans-male friend in security and told me I should make out with 
him because it’s ‘the best of both worlds for me because I’m bisexual.’ When I reported this as 
discrimination, they had my friend and I transferred to another site. Nothing happened to him.”
Latinx cisgender bisexual woman from Colorado
In addition, several respondents reported that the discrimination they experienced involved reducing 
their hours and changing their shifts. These reports include: 
“My boss found out I was dating a female and cut my hours to the point I had to quit because 
I wasn’t making ends meet.”
American Indian cisgender bisexual woman from Illinois 
“[My] employer . . . was very homophobic. He . . . stopped giving me shifts.”
Black cisgender bisexual woman from Florida
“My boss threatened to tell my co-workers I was bi if I didn’t work weekends.”
Latinx cisgender bisexual man from New Hampshire 
“I would always get scheduled to work with females because none of the males wanted to 
work with me. I guess they thought I would try something with them. The worst part is that 
they didn’t even get to know me first. Once they knew I was gay, they were done with me.”
Black cisgender gay man from Alabama 
One in five (20.8%) LGBT employees reported physical harassment at work because of their sexual 
orientation or gender identity. Reports of physical harassment included being “punched,” “hit,” and 
‘beaten up” in the workplace. Examples of such discrimination include: 
“I was treated horribly at the hands of my boss. She would call me queer at all times and slap 
me in the face . . . it went on and on for over a year. . . . It was one of the saddest moments 
of my entire career and life.”
White cisgender gay man from Ohio 
5 This respondent’s close-ended data is not included in the quantitative analysis in this report—which is limited to those 
who identified as LGBT and nonbinary. See methodology section below. However, we have included a few narrative 
examples of discrimination from cisgender respondents who indicated that they were “questioning” or noted “something 
else” as their sexual orientation if what they wrote in the survey’s open-ended questions indicated that they are sexual 
minorities and/or illustrated certain types of employment discrimination based on actual sexual orientation and gender 
identity or perceived sexual orientation or gender identity. Both types of discrimination are commonly prohibited by most 
non-discrimination laws, including the proposed federal Equality Act. H.R. 5, 117th Cong. (2021). 


LGBT People’s Experiences of Workplace Discrimination and Harassment   |   8
“At work (a high school) students have physically hit me and used gay slurs very often.”
Black nonbinary sexual minority person from New York
“[I was] beaten up by a fellow co-worker and . . . called a fag and spit on.” 
White cisgender gay man from North Carolina
“I was told to take out the trash because it was my duty. Then a group of men tried to abuse 
me . . . when I gave up fighting for myself, they hit my head against a trash can and called 
me names.”
Black transgender lesbian from North Carolina
Over one in four (30.7%) LGBT employees reported verbal harassment at work because of their sexual 
orientation and gender identity. Many LGBTQ people reported being called, or hearing the words, 
“f****t,” “queer,” “sissy,” “tranny,” and “dyke” in the workplace. Reports of such discrimination include: 
“One of my trainers changed her attitude once she found out I was queer and Muslim. She 
became hostile towards me and would single me out.”
Cisgender bisexual woman from West Virginia6 
“Working at [a national hardware chain] I had a large majority of my co-workers refuse to 
acknowledge my identity and I would fight with them every single day that I would work and 
get into arguments.”
White transgender bisexual person from Virginia 
“I was cleaning up my desk before I packed up to go home, and my boss walked up to my desk 
and said, ‘hurry up f****t.’”
Black cisgender bisexual woman from New York
“I had a boss at [a national pizza chain] that would call me a dyke and make jokes about me 
because I don’t shave my legs.”
White nonbinary bisexual person from Arizona
“I used to work at a warehouse. There were little sick comments if I was on my phone . . . 
asking [me if] was I ‘looking up gay porn.’”
Black cisgender gay man from Georgia
6 To protect the privacy of this respondent, we have not included their race/ethnicity because they have provided 
two additional demographic characteristics (queer and Muslim) in their quote. For all other quotes, we provide the 
respondents’ race/ethnicity.


LGBT People’s Experiences of Workplace Discrimination and Harassment   |   9
“I . . . moved to South Carolina three years ago. I didn’t realize how biased people are 
about sexual orientation . . . whether in a big city or a small town. . . . I had co-workers and 
supervisors harassing me because I am a lesbian. . . . [I’ve] been turned down food service 
because I have a rainbow bracelet that my kids made for me for Mother’s Day . . . and so 
much more.”
Asian American cisgender lesbian from South Carolina
Some employees reported that they were verbally harassed by customers. Reports of these 
experiences include: 
“It is mostly the customers calling me slurs. Only a few times have I heard co-workers say such 
things, but they weren’t towards me.”
White cisgender gay man from New York
“A couple of years ago while working [at a restaurant] a customer told me that she didn’t 
want me to serve her food because I was lesbian.”
Asian American cisgender lesbian from Florida
“I was working at [a national burger chain] when a customer called me and a couple friends 
‘its’ when referring to us . . . preparing her food.
 White cisgender lesbian from North Carolina
Similarly, one in four (25.9%) LGBT employees reported sexual harassment at work because of 
their sexual orientation or gender identity. When asked to provide an account of the worst unfair 
treatment, harassment, or discrimination that they had encountered at work because of their sexual 
orientation or gender identity, many respondents wrote about sexual harassment specifically. These 
experiences include: 
“I was out back on break and a male employee physically forced me to give him oral sex 
outside behind the building.” 
Latinx cisgender gay male from Pennsylvania
“I was sexually abused by my ex-boss and co-workers to ‘prove I’m not into guys’. . . . They 
were never charged with anything.”
Asian American nonbinary bisexual person from Texas
“I had a manager pin me into a freezer at [a national fast-food chain] while I was working 
and demand sex.”
White cisgender bisexual woman from Arkansas
“I’ve had male co-workers . . . touch me [and] then follow up by saying ‘[i]f you let me, I can 
turn you straight’ which is obviously very offensive and creepy.”
Black cisgender sexual minority woman from Pennsylvania7
7 See supra note 4.


LGBT People’s Experiences of Workplace Discrimination and Harassment   |   10
“The chairman of the last place I worked would always make lewd remarks about [the] sex I 
may have been having with my wife, and sex he wanted to have with two women. He would 
also come up behind me and massage my shoulders or rub my head whenever I shaved it 
‘because it felt nice.’ I filed multiple complaints.”
White nonbinary sexual minority person from Colorado
Several of these reports were from bisexual people. Bisexual people, particularly bisexual women, 
were presumed to be “promiscuous,” “insatiable,” into “threesomes” or just needing the “right man” to 
make them straight. Experiences of sexual harassment reported by bisexual employees include: 
“My boss would consistently ask me to participate in threesomes with him and his wife just 
because I’m bisexual.” 
Black cisgender bisexual woman from Oklahoma
“I was often referred to as a slut because of being bisexual. It was the assumption that meant 
I was promiscuous because I’m attracted to all genders.”
White cisgender bisexual woman from Louisiana
“Once another woman slapped me on my butt at work and I reported it as sexual harassment. 
My supervisor swept it under the rug because ‘since I’m bisexual I may have enjoyed it.’ The 
co-worker who slapped me then laughed about it with all my co-workers. I became a walking 
joke and after the incident other female co-workers started slapping my butt.”
American Indian cisgender bisexual woman from Michigan
“I was in the navy, it was awful. I was raped, assaulted, called slurs . . . I never want it to 
happen again.”
Asian American cisgender bisexual woman from Florida
“At my old job I used to get called slurs fairly often. Most of it occurred behind my back, but I 
always found out about it in some way. The worst was probably just hearing the whole, ‘just 
pick one’ argument. I know that’s not nearly as bad as slurs and threats, but I’ve heard that 
argument ever since I was 13 and it’s really been damaging to my self-esteem and has made 
me question if I really am bisexual or not. Bisexual erasure is so normalized, and it has taken 
a toll on how I view myself.”
White cisgender bisexual woman from Michigan
In addition to reporting instances of discrimination and harassment, many LGBT employees reported 
that their workplace environments were unsupportive of LGBT people. Two-thirds (67.5%) of LGBT 
employees reported that they heard negative comments, slurs, or jokes about LGBTQ people at work. 
Reports of these experiences include: 
“Snide comments about the LGBT community were constantly made both to my face and 
within ear shot of me, to the point that I went home crying sometimes.”
White nonbinary bisexual person from New York 


LGBT People’s Experiences of Workplace Discrimination and Harassment   |   11
“People were making jokes about transgender people and kept doing it deliberately even 
after I asked them not to.”
Black bisexual woman from New York
“The worst I’ve experienced so far is nonbinary genders being joked about.” 
White nonbinary bisexual person from Alabama
“Sometimes they make jokes about it, thinking it’s funny, and I laugh because I don’t want to 
get judged for not laughing but deep down it really does hurt.”
Asian American cisgender bisexual woman from Arkansas
“It wasn’t a situation where it was me who was directly targeted. I was sitting at the lunch 
table with a group of co-workers, who are entertaining a fairly new co-worker that I didn’t 
know well. This co-worker proceeded to tell a story about being hit on by a person of the same 
gender. The awful stereotypes that came out of this person’s mouth made me uncomfortable 
enough to get up and leave. The hardest thing was friends of mine at the table who know I’m 
gay didn’t say anything.”
White cisgender lesbian from Minnesota
LGBT employees of color were more likely to report some forms of discrimination and harassment. LGBT 
employees of color were more likely to say that they had not been hired based on their LGBT status at 
some point in their lives compared to white LGBT employees (29.0% compared to 18.3%). LGBT employees 
of color were also significantly more likely to report experiencing verbal harassment (35.6% compared to 
25.9%) at work because of their sexual orientation or gender identity than white LGBT employees. 
Figure 2. Experiences of discrimination and harassment against LGBT employees by race
Fired
Not hired
Bold text indicates statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence
Verbally 
harassed
Any 
discrimination
Any 
discrimination
or harassment
Any 
harassment
Physically 
harassed
Sexually 
harassed
25.7%
19.9%
29.0%
18.3%
33.2%
26.3%
25.9%
23.8%
18.0%
35.6%
25.9% 25.9%
40.6%
34.8%
48.6%
41.8%
White
People of color


LGBT People’s Experiences of Workplace Discrimination and Harassment   |   12
Transgender employees also reported higher rates of discrimination and harassment because of their 
sexual orientation or gender identity compared to cisgender employees. Transgender employees 
were significantly more likely to report that they had not been hired because of their LGBT status than 
cisgender LGB employees (43.9% compared to 21.5%). In addition, 43.8% of transgender employees 
reported experiencing verbal harassment at work compared to 29.3% of cisgender LGB employees.
Figure 3. Experiences of discrimination and harassment against LGBT employees by gender 
identity
We also analyzed whether patterns of discrimination and harassment against LGBT people varied by 
U.S. region.8 We found no statistically significant differences, but note that our geographic analysis 
was limited because we were unable to determine with certainty where each incident of harassment 
or discrimination occurred. Rather, our data only provided information about where respondents 
currently live and whether they had experienced discrimination or harassment in the past year or at 
some earlier point in their lives. 
8 States were broken down into four regions defined by the U.S. Census Bureau: West, South, Northeast, and Midwest. 
U.S. Census Bureau, Census Regions and Divisions and United States (last visited Aug. 20, 2021), https://www2.census.
gov/geo/pdfs/maps-data/maps/reference/us_regdiv.pdf. 
Cisgender
Transgender
Fired
Not hired
Bold text indicates statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence
Verbally 
harassed
Any 
discrimination
Any 
discrimination
or harassment
Any 
harassment
Physically 
harassed
Sexually 
harassed
30.9%
21.9%
43.9%
21.5%
48.8%
27.8%
29.3%
28.2%
20.0%
43.8%
26.3%25.9%
45.8%
36.9%
65.7%
43.0%


LGBT People’s Experiences of Workplace Discrimination and Harassment   |   13
RECENT EXPERIENCES OF DISCRIMINATION AND HARASSMENT 
Most employees who experienced discrimination and harassment had these experiences recently—
within the past five years. Nearly one-third (31.1%) of LGBT employees said they experienced 
discrimination or harassment within the past five years; an additional 14.0% said that the only 
discrimination or harassment they experienced was over five years ago.
LGBT employees continue to experience discrimination even after the U.S. Supreme Court held 
in Bostock v. Clayton County that discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity 
are forms of sex discrimination prohibited by Title VII.9 The decision extended non-discrimination 
protections to LGBT employees nationwide as of June 2020. Nine percent (8.9%) of LGBT employees 
report being fired or not hired in the past year. 
LGBT employees of color reported more recent experiences of discrimination (not hired or fired) than 
white LGBT employees. Thirty-seven percent of LGBT employees of color reported experiencing some 
form of employment discrimination (being fired or not hired) within the past five years compared to 
25.3% of white LGBT employees. 
While transgender employees were not more likely than cisgender LGB employees to report 
experiencing sexual harassment at some time in their lives, they were twice as likely to report 
experiencing sexual harassment in the past five years than cisgender LGB respondents (22.4% 
compared to 11.9%). 
Figure 4. Any lifetime discrimination or harassment against LGBT employees by timing of most 
recent experience
9 140 S. Ct. 1731 (2020).
Discrimination
Harassment
21.7%
8.1%
24.3%
13.4%
More than ﬁve years ago
Within past ﬁve years


LGBT People’s Experiences of Workplace Discrimination and Harassment   |   14
RELIGION AS A MOTIVATING FACTOR FOR DISCRIMINATION 
Over half (57.0%) of LGBT employees who experienced discrimination or harassment because of 
their sexual orientation or gender identity at work said that their employer or co-workers did or said 
something to indicate that this unfair treatment was motivated by religious beliefs. LGBT employees 
of color were more likely to say that religious beliefs motivated the unfair treatment compared to 
white LGBT employees. Of those employees who experienced discrimination or harassment, 63.5% of 
LGBT employees of color said that religion was a motivating factor compared to 49.4% of white LGBT 
employees. 
We analyzed whether patterns of perceived religiously motivated discrimination and harassment 
against LGBT people varied by U.S. region. We found no statistically significant differences.
Figure 5. Perceived religious motivation for unfair treatment, among LGBT employees who 
experienced discrimination or harassment
Many of the 256 LGBT employees who believed the workplace discrimination against them was 
religiously motivated provided further detail about their experiences via an open-ended question:
Please explain what happened when you felt that someone’s religious beliefs were a factor in 
the unfair treatment, harassment, or discrimination that you experienced at work because of 
your sexual orientation or gender identity.
57.0%
63.5%
49.4%
All employees
White
People of color


LGBT People’s Experiences of Workplace Discrimination and Harassment   |   15
After excluding responses that were clearly unrelated to work (e.g., stories about family rejection) or 
were solely about the respondent’s feelings or response (e.g., “[w]ell, I am a Christian too, covered by 
the blood of Christ for past, present and future sins. So, my reply was, ‘Let he who is without sin cast 
the first as stone.’”), 183 remaining responses were included in content analyses.10 Examples of these 
accounts include:
“My boss . . . made it clear that his problem with people with other sexual orientations was 
based on his religious beliefs and that if it weren’t for those beliefs, I would have had no 
problems at all with him.”
White cisgender gay man from Missouri
“I was told I was going to hell during a job interview for liking women.”
Black cisgender bisexual woman from Texas 
“I worked for [a national craft store] as a cashier and was repeatedly overlooked for promotions 
within the store because I was not married and living with my partner. The company is very 
religious. . . . The only people getting promoted were Christians and I was openly not. Jokes 
were made about me ‘living in sin’ on a regular basis.”
White cisgender bisexual woman from Nevada 
“I have been verbally harassed, dismissed, and degraded by co-workers who used religious 
justifications for their behavior.”
Latinx transgender bisexual person from Florida
“I was assaulted by a co-worker who told me he was enacting ‘God’s will’ on me.”
White transgender bisexual woman from Virginia
“They were calling me an abomination while [sexually assaulting me] and said that because 
I was an abomination, they could do whatever they wanted and God would be ok with it.”
Latinx cisgender gay man from Pennsylvania
While most of the discrimination that was reported came from supervisors or co-workers, 
respondents also reported religiously motivated harassment and discrimination from customers, 
members of the public, and students who they encountered while doing their jobs:
“Customers have told me I am going to hell because I am gay. They’ve also said [they] did not 
want me to help them out of fear that they will go to hell.”
White cisgender gay man from New York
“I was forced by a customer to pray the sinners’ prayer before he would let me leave the store. 
I was with my little sister and her baby. He thought we were lesbians.”
White cisgender bisexual woman from Florida 
10 Michael Quinn Patton, Qualitative Research and Evaluation Methods (3d ed. 2001).


LGBT People’s Experiences of Workplace Discrimination and Harassment   |   16
Among these 183 open-ended accounts of discrimination and harassment, some patterns emerged. 
The word cloud below shows the most commonly used words across these responses:
The most frequent type of comment that respondents received involved being told that they were 
“going to hell,” would “burn in hell,” or were not going “to heaven.” Over 20% (38) of the 183 responses 
contained such references: 
“I’ve been judged by co-workers for being pansexual and the most common excuse is ‘God 
said it’s a sin and you will burn in hell for it.’”
Black cisgender pansexual woman from North Carolina
“When I worked at [a national discount department store], I had a manager tell me all gay 
people are going to hell.”
American Indian transgender bisexual person from Michigan
When describing specific instances of discrimination or harassment where the respondent felt that 
someone’s religious beliefs were a factor in the treatment that they experienced, many respondents 
mentioned the specific religion held by the person discriminating against them and/or referenced 
same during the incident of discrimination or harassment. “Christianity”11 was referenced in 80% (44) 
of the 55 accounts that identified a specific religion. Catholicism was mentioned four times, including 
in three additional accounts, and Methodism in one additional account. “Fundamentalists” or 
“Evangelicals” were mentioned four times, including in two additional accounts. Accordingly, in total, 
11 This includes references to “Christian” and “Christians.” 
BELIEVE
AGAINST
BIBLE
LIKE
TOLD
GOD
JUST
GOING
MANY
ONE
GAY
WAY
WRONG
MADE
BELIEFS
ALWAYS
SAY
GO
SIN
WORKED
COWORKERS
RELIGION
WORK
ALL
ABOUT
PERSON
RELIGIOUS
BURN
CHURCH
TELL
CHRISTIANS
HELL
SAID


LGBT People’s Experiences of Workplace Discrimination and Harassment   |   17
Christian religions were referenced in 90% (50) of the 55 accounts that mentioned specific religions. In 
contrast, Mormonism and Islam were each referenced twice and Judaism refenced once.12 No other 
religions were specifically identified. Examples of these references to specific religions include: 
“The woman who called me the slur was a devout Christian and tried to tell me I was going to 
hell for liking girls and I was an abomination.”
White cisgender bisexual woman from Florida
“They talked about how true Christians would never fall for their own gender.”
Black cisgender lesbian from Texas
“My supervisor who started my harassment would constantly talk about his faith as a 
Christian without following any of the tenets of Jesus.”
Black cisgender gay man from New York
“A lot of my co-workers are LDS [Latter Day Saints] and they say that because of this, they 
can’t support LGBTQ people. It makes me really sad, because I like my co-workers, and I 
thought they were my friends until this.”
White cisgender bisexual woman from Utah
The Bible13 was specifically referenced in 28 of these accounts, with some reporting that they were 
directly quoted specific Bible verses in the workplace. Terminology from the Bible and/or common to 
Christianity was also referenced, including “sin”14 (27), “abomination” (6), “unnatural”15 (4), references 
to “Adam and Eve”16 (3), “shame”17 (2), the “devil”18 (3), and “unholy” (1). 
“They would quote the Bible and tell me how much God would despise me if I didn’t ‘change 
my ways’ and join the local church.”
Latinx cisgender bisexual man from Texas
“I was explicitly told, by a Christian, that the Bible states that I shouldn’t be allowed to be 
‘publicly gay’.”
White cisgender bisexual woman from Maine
“They said that the Holy Bible stated that gays are not welcome to heaven so that means that 
all gays on earth . . . are going to go to hell. They quoted . . . verse and said it is ‘their God 
given right to treat any[one] who is gay badly.’”
Asian American cisgender lesbian from South Carolina
12 All “Abraham religions” were referenced in one additional account not included in the analysis in the text.
13 Including the term “Biblical,” “scripture,” “verses” and one reference to the “holy texts” of “Abrahamic religions.”
14 Including the term “sinner” or “sinners.”
15 Including the term “not natural.” 
16 Including the terms “Adam’s rib” and “Adam and Steve.” 
17 Including the terms “shameful” and “ashamed.”
18 Including the terms “Satan” and “demon.” 


LGBT People’s Experiences of Workplace Discrimination and Harassment   |   18
“She blatantly said, ’the Bible says lying with a man is a sin. And you’re ok with that? You’re 
willing to be a disgrace to God just to see another man’s penis?’”
Latinx cisgender bisexual man from New Mexico
Similarly, many respondents reported that their supervisor’s or co-workers’ comments were based on 
how “God” felt about LGBT people. In almost one in four (21.9%) (40) of the 183 accounts of religiously 
motivated discrimination, employees were told something that God believed in or required. Only 
three of these accounts, all of which are included above, also referenced the Bible. These comments 
included that LGBT people were “against God’s plan;” and that God “didn’t love” LGBT people, “hates” 
LGBT people, “only made two genders,” was against marriage equality, wants people “to have babies,” 
and “didn’t want LGBTQ people at work.” Two transgender respondents reported that they were told 
by co-workers that “God doesn’t make mistakes” and, therefore, they should not transition. Examples 
of these accounts include: 
“My worst experience was when a man who I worked with followed me into the parking lot at 
work, when I was leaving, mind you, and told me that I was going to hell because God didn’t 
like f****ts. Then he kept bothering me at work after until I went to Human Resources and 
they did nothing about it. I ended up suing the company and won against them.”
White cisgender gay male from New York
“A co-worker said thus during my worst harassment: ’God doesn’t love gay people, change 
yourself before it’s too late!’”
Asian American cisgender bisexual man from Missouri
“They told me that God doesn’t make mistakes and that by trying to change myself I was 
going against God’s work.”
White transgender sexual minority man from Ohio
Some employees also reported efforts by their co-workers to try to “save” them based on their co-
workers’ religious beliefs. These comments included respondents being told that they would be 
“prayed for,” being “asked to pray,” being “invited to church,” being given “pamphlets” or “religious 
literature” at work, and being recommended “conversion therapy” or otherwise to “change” their 
sexual orientation or gender identity. Examples of these accounts include: 
“I was told that I was a sexual deviant . . . and that it’s just a mental illness that has a cure 
and then she proceeded to give me the info for a Christian camp.”
American Indian nonbinary sexual minority person from Minnesota
“After my employers found out I was bisexual, they started approaching me differently. I 
would get invited to go to their church on the weekends, and occasionally they’d casually 
mention things about the Bible frowning on homosexuality. I felt as if I was a project for them 
to save and put on the path of Jesus.”
White cisgender bisexual woman from Maryland


LGBT People’s Experiences of Workplace Discrimination and Harassment   |   19
AVOIDING DISCRIMINATION AND HARASSMENT
LGBT employees often take steps to avoid experiencing discrimination and harassment.19 For 
example, LGBT employees may conceal their sexual orientation or gender identity at work, avoid 
talking about their personal lives with co-workers, and change their appearance to conform to gender 
norms. Engaging in these behaviors, sometimes referred to as “covering,” can be a source of stress for 
LGBT people and negatively impact their health and wellbeing.20 
Half (50.4%) of LGBT employees reported that they are not open about being LGBT to their current 
supervisor and one-quarter (25.8%) report that they are not out to any of their co-workers. Only 
29.5% of employees are out to all of their co-workers.
Figure 6. Openness about being LGBT at work

Not being out, in full or in part, is a way that many respondents protect themselves from 
discrimination and harassment. Those who are out to at least some people in the workplace were 
three times more likely to have experienced discrimination or harassment because of their sexual 
orientation or gender identity (53.3% v. 17.9%) than those who are not out to anyone at work.21 
19 See Christy Mallory & Brad Sears, LGBT Discrimination, Subnational Public Policy, and Law in the United States, in Oxford 
Res. Encyc. Pol. (2020), doi:10.1093/acrefore/9780190228637.013.1200. 
20 Ilan H. Meyer, Prejudice, Social Stress, and Mental Health in Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual Populations: Conceptual Issues and 
Research Evidence, 129 Psych. Bull. 674 (2003), doi:10.1037/0033-2909.129.5.674; Kenji Yoshino, Covering, 111 Yale L.J. 
769 (2001), https://digitalcommons.law.yale.edu/ylj/vol111/iss4/1. 
21 We are not able to determine from the data the degree to which employees were out to supervisors and co-workers 
when they experienced discrimination or harassment. We assume that employees who reported that they are currently 
out at work were out when they experienced unfair treatment and that those who are not currently out at work were not 
out when they experienced unfair treatment. 
50.4%
25.8%
15.0%
16.2%
13.4%
29.5%
Out to a few 
co-workers
Out to some 
co-workers
Out to most 
co-workers
Out to all 
co-workers
Not out to 
supervisor
Not out to any 
co-workers


LGBT People’s Experiences of Workplace Discrimination and Harassment   |   20
While approximately 7% of those who are not out to anyone in the workplace reported experiencing 
verbal (7.4%) or physical (7.4%) harassment because of their sexual orientation or gender identity, 
of those who are out to at least some in the workplace, about one in three (37.8%) reported verbal 
harassment and about one in four (25.0%) reported physical harassment. In terms of past-year 
discrimination—post-Bostock—those who are out to at least some co-workers were about five times 
more likely to report experiencing discrimination (including being fired or not hired) because of their 
sexual orientation or gender identity than those who are not out to anyone (10.9% compared to 2.2%). 
Still, even those who are not out in the workplace reported experiencing discrimination, negative 
comments, rumors, and verbal harassment. Others reported being “outed” at work by co-workers, 
and some reported being told to stay in the closet by their supervisors. Examples of these 
experiences include: 
“I’m not out at work and I keep my identity and sexuality private. But my colleagues do 
make homophobic jokes and the transphobia is off the charts. They go out of their way to 
misgender out trans people. I have no intention of coming out because I would not feel safe 
in the workplace then.”
White nonbinary bisexual person from South Carolina
“When a co-worker found out that I was bi, she told my boss that made her uncomfortable 
and he told me not to discuss my sexual orientation at work anymore. This was at a company 
that is famous for its inclusion and acceptance of all types of people.”
White cisgender bisexual woman from North Dakota
“My previous co-worker would constantly use every hateful word he could think of against 
me. He would . . . ‘out’ me to [customers and] everyone.’”
Latinx cisgender bisexual man from Texas
“I was ‘outed’ to my team by one of my team members, when he stalked my personal social 
media and found out that I had a girlfriend at the time.”
White cisgender bisexual woman from New York
“My supervisor asked me if I was gay at work and when I hesitated, he assumed that I was, 
and started making jokes at my expense over the course of weeks. Eventually, he shared that 
with my co-workers who proceeded to make snide remarks and jokes directly to me and to 
each other about me for being gay.”
Black cisgender sexual minority man from New York22 
22 While this respondent’s sexual orientation is unknown and his data is not included in the quantitative analysis for 
this paper because he does not identity as LGBT, see supra note 4, the example he provides would be covered by non-
discrimination laws such as the Equality Act as based on “perceived” sexual orientation or gender identity. 


LGBT People’s Experiences of Workplace Discrimination and Harassment   |   21
LGBT people and others with marginalized identities often adjust their behavior and conduct in order 
to avoid bringing attention to a stigmatized trait—a process that has been called “covering” by law 
professor Kenji Yoshino.23 Covering is not necessarily the same as concealing LGBT status.24 LGBT 
people who are open about their sexual orientation and gender identity may still engage in covering 
behaviors in order to minimize their LGBT identity.25 
Many LGBT employees reported engaging in covering behaviors at their current jobs to avoid 
harassment or discrimination related to sexual orientation or gender identity. About 40% of LGBT 
employees (40.7%) reported that they take steps to change how they present themselves at work, 
including 24.4% who said they have changed their physical appearance, 24.6% who have changed the 
way they dress, 16.1% who have changed where, when, or how frequently they used the bathroom, 
and 25.8% who have changed their voice or mannerisms. 
In addition, LGBT employees avoid talking about their families and lives outside of work to avoid 
discrimination and harassment. One-third (33.2%) of LGBT employees have avoided talking about 
their family at work, 29.3% have not displayed photos of their partner or family at work, and 23.9% 
have not brought family to work events to avoid discrimination and harassment. About 40% have 
avoided social events with co-workers (43.2%) and avoided talking about their social lives (39.3%) at 
their current jobs to avoid discrimination and harassment.
Covering behaviors related to how employees present themselves at work were significantly more 
common among transgender employees compared to cisgender LGB employees. Nearly sixty percent 
of transgender employees (57.7%) said that they engage in covering behaviors related to how they 
present themselves at work compared to 39.0% of cisgender LGB employees. More specifically, about 
one-third of transgender employees reported that they have changed their physical appearance 
(36.4%) or how they dress at work (35.4%) compared to 23.3% of cisgender LGB employees. 
Transgender employees were also more likely to say that they changed where, when, or how 
frequently they used a bathroom, locker room, or changing room at work compared to cisgender LGB 
employees (27.5% compared to 14.9%). 
23 Kenji Yoshino, Covering, Yale L. J. 837(2001).
24 Id.
25 Id. at 838.


LGBT People’s Experiences of Workplace Discrimination and Harassment   |   22
Figure 7. Covering behaviors at work among transgender and cisgender LGB employees
While covering behaviors are often initiated by LGBT people to prevent discrimination and 
harassment, some respondents also indicated that they have engaged in these behaviors in response 
to workplace experiences or because they were directly told to do so: 
“Even though I’m not ‘flamboyant’ and I am ‘straight-acting,’ a supervisor once told me to stop 
talking about my private life to other co-workers because hearing about my significant other, 
who was a male, was bothering other employees.”
White cisgender gay man from Indiana
“[It was] a very uncomfortable work environment . . . and people would get weird and try to 
change the conversation when my gayness was brought up in some way . . . and feeling like I 
had to keep quiet about my sexual orientation.”
Latinx cisgender lesbian from California
“I live in the Bible Belt. People have a been engrained that homosexuals are going to hell and 
they are evil. People look at you in a different way when you say ‘my girlfriend.’ I have been 
pulled aside and told you cannot discuss your personal life at work at all, even if was just 
say[ing] something as simple as ‘my girlfriend likes those chips too.’”
White cisgender lesbian from Tennessee
Change physical 
appearance
Change dress
Change bathroom use
Change voice or 
mannerism
36.4%
23.3%
35.4%
23.3%
14.9%
27.5%
30.0%
25.4%
Cisgender LGB
Transgender
Bold text indicates statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence


LGBT People’s Experiences of Workplace Discrimination and Harassment   |   23
“I was once told that because I am a lesbian, I could not be involved in any company functions.”
White cisgender lesbian from Texas
LGBT employees of color report engaging in covering behaviors in order to avoid sexual orientation 
or gender identity discrimination or harassment at work at least as often as white LGBT employees. 
LGBT employees of color were significantly more likely to say that they had ever changed their 
physical appearance (28.8% compared to 20.0%) or changed their voice or mannerisms (31.0% 
compared to 20.7%) at their current jobs than white LGBT employees. 
Figure 8. Covering behaviors at work among LGBT employees by race

IMPACT OF DISCRIMINATION AND HARASSMENT ON EMPLOYEE 
RETENTION
Discrimination and harassment, or fear of those experiences, negatively affects the wellbeing 
of employees, which, in turn, can negatively impact employers. Decades of research has linked 
unsupportive workplace environments for LGBT people to poorer health, decreased job satisfaction, 
and decreased job commitment, among other negative outcomes.26 These employee outcomes can 
have economic consequences for employers.27
26 See, e.g., M.V. Lee Badgett et al., Williams Inst., The Business Impact of LGBT-Supportive Workplace Policies (2013), https://
williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/wp-content/uploads/Impact-LGBT-Support-Workplace-May-2013.pdf. 
27 Id.
Change physical 
appearance
Change dress
Change bathroom use
Change voice or 
mannerism
28.8%
20.0%
27.7%
20.8%
14.4%
17.4%
31.0%
20.7%
White
People of color
Bold text indicates statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence


LGBT People’s Experiences of Workplace Discrimination and Harassment   |   24
One-third (34.2%) of LGBT employees reported that they have left a job at some point in their lives 
because of how they were treated by their employer based on their sexual orientation or gender 
identity. About 30 percent of LGBT employees (33.9%) said that they have looked for other jobs 
because of how they were personally treated by their employer based on their LGBT status and/or 
because the workplace environment was uncomfortable for LGBTQ people in general. 
Figure 9. Impact of discrimination and unsupportive environments for LGBT people on employee 
retention
Some of the respondents who left their jobs or thought about leaving because of harassment and 
discrimination shared these experiences. Others wanted to leave, but felt trapped by their job 
prospects: 
“I was repeatedly harassed by multiple male co-workers when they found out I was dating 
a man. They denied my lived experience as a bisexual male and insisted I was gay and in 
denial. They called me various homosexual slurs and belittled me and overall created a toxic 
work environment from which I became desperate to escape.”
White cisgender bisexual man from New Jersey
“A guy found out that I like both males and females and started to try and get me to go home 
with him and his wife. I honestly felt so uncomfortable after this situation that I quit my job 
and went to work online which has really been the best for me.”
White cisgender bisexual woman from Oklahoma
34.2%
33.9%
Left a job due to 
personal treatment
Looked for another job due to personal treatment 
and/or uncomfortable environment


LGBT People’s Experiences of Workplace Discrimination and Harassment   |   25
“I was working at a restaurant and on a night that I had to close I was cornered by two of my 
co-workers and harassed . . . they were calling me names and telling me that ’all I needed 
was a real man to show me the ropes.’ They even got physical, it was a horrible experience. I 
left and never went back.”
American Indian nonbinary sexual minority person from Minnesota
“I worked at a company for years because I couldn’t find a better job and everyday I was 
harassed daily by [the same] guy. I was grateful for the job so I just stuck with it.” 
Latinx cisgender bisexual man from Texas


LGBT People’s Experiences of Workplace Discrimination and Harassment   |   26
CONCLUSION
LGBT employees continue to face discrimination and harassment at work, in particular LGBT people 
of color. This discrimination is ongoing, with nine percent of LGBT employees saying that they had 
been fired or not hired because of their sexual orientation or gender identity within the past year. 
LGBT employees of color were more likely to report some forms of discrimination and harassment 
than white LGBT employees, including not being hired and verbal harassment because of their sexual 
orientation or gender identity. Transgender employees were also more likely to report several forms 
of discrimination and harassment than cisgender LGB employees. 
A large proportion—about half—of LGBT people reported that the discrimination and harassment 
they experienced was motivated by employer’s or co-workers’ religious beliefs. Employees who 
experienced religiously motivated discrimination and harassment most commonly reported that 
these incidents involved being told that they were “going to hell,” would “burn in hell,” or were not 
going “to heaven.”
Fear of discrimination and harassment can lead employees to engage in behaviors to hide who they 
are at work. Over half of employees are not “out” about being LGBT to their supervisors, and about 
70% are not out to all of their co-workers. Many LGBT employees, especially transgender employees, 
said that they have changed how they present themselves at work or have avoided talking about their 
lives and their families to avoid discrimination and harassment based on their sexual orientation or 
gender identity. Several employees reported engaging in these behaviors in response to workplace 
experiences or because they were directly told to do so.
Discrimination and harassment negatively impact both employees and employers. One-third of 
employees said they had left a job because of how they were personally treated based on their sexual 
orientation or gender identity.
More robust protections, including monitoring and enforcement, are needed to ensure that LGBT 
people—particularly transgender people and LGBT people of color—are fully protected from 
discrimination and harassment in the workplace. 


LGBT People’s Experiences of Workplace Discrimination and Harassment   |   27
AUTHORS
Brad Sears, J.D., is the David Sanders Distinguished Scholar of Law and Policy and Founding Executive 
Director at the Williams Institute. He is also the Associate Dean of Public Interest Law at UCLA Law. 
Christy Mallory, J.D., is the Renberg Scholar of Law and Legal Director at the Williams Institute.
Andrew R. Flores, Ph.D., is a Visiting Scholar at the Williams Institute and an Assistant Professor of 
Government at American University.
Kerith J. Conron, Sc.D., M.P.H., is the Blachford-Cooper Distinguished Scholar and Research Director 
at the Williams Institute.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Dakota Strode, doctoral student in the School of Public Affairs at American 
University, for his research assistance.
ABOUT THE WILLIAMS INSTITUTE
The Williams Institute is dedicated to conducting rigorous, independent research on sexual 
orientation and gender identity law and public policy. A think tank at UCLA Law, the Williams Institute 
produces high-quality research with real-world relevance and disseminates it to judges, legislators, 
policymakers, media, and the public. These studies can be accessed at the Williams Institute website.
FOR MORE INFORMATION
The Williams Institute, UCLA School of Law
Box 951476, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1476
williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu
RESEARCH THAT MATTERS


LGBT People’s Experiences of Workplace Discrimination and Harassment   |   28
APPENDIX 
METHODS
The Employment Experiences Survey was an anonymous cross-sectional survey conducted between 
May 5th and 16th 2021 with 1,007 U.S. sexual and gender minority adults ages 18 and up who were 
in the workforce the week of March 1, 2020—just before COVID-19 emerged and many states 
and localities shut down. Participants were selected by Morning Consult from the Lucid and Pure 
Spectrum survey panels28 using screening questions provided by the Williams Institute. Panelists 
were screened on sex assigned at birth, gender identity, sexual orientation identity and workforce 
participation and job type to recruit sexual and gender minority participants in three employment 
groups (state or local government, private or non-profit organization, or self-employed, military, 
federal, unemployed and looking for work, and working in a family business or farm). Eligible panelists 
reviewed an information sheet before opting to participate in an online English language survey. 
The Employment Experiences Survey was developed primarily to gather data about experiences of 
harassment and discrimination in various types of employment settings. Where possible, survey 
questions were modeled on prior questions used to assess employment discrimination and efforts 
to avoid discrimination. For example, some employment discrimination questions were informed by 
the Williams Major Lifetime Discrimination Scale.29 Some questions about concealment and avoidance 
are from a survey developed by the Center for the American Progress.30 Questions about outness 
at work were informed by the 2008 General Social Survey and questions about job commitment 
were informed by the Human Rights Campaign’s 2018 “A Workplace Divided” survey.31 Two open-
ended questions were also included in the survey to gather information about the participant’s 
worst experience of unfair treatment, harassment, or discrimination at work because of their sexual 
28 Prior to selecting the Lucid and Pure Spectrum panels for this study, and others, Morning Consult examined European 
Society for Opinion and Marketing Research (ESOMAR) documents that contain a uniform set of roughly 30 questions 
for survey panel providers on topics such as sample sources and recruitment, respondent profiling data, respondent 
privacy and data security, data quality and validation, and survey incentives. Non-probability panels are formed by 
recruiting panelists through loyalty and rewards programs, publisher partnerships, advertisements on mobile, tablet 
and desktop websites, and outreach to online gaming communities; snowball sampling or river sampling are excluded. 
In addition, Morning Consult examines panels for quality based on average survey completion time and correlations 
between dozens of variable pairs known to have high correlations (e.g., party identification and political ideology, 
education and income, country headed in the right direction and leader approval, vote and political party, and consumer 
confidence variables). In general, only panels that meet Morning Consult’s quality requirements are approved as sample 
providers. 
29 Williams, D. R. (2016). Measuring Discrimination Resource. https://scholar.harvard.edu/files/davidrwilliams/files/
measuring_discrimination_resource_june_2016.pdf. Accessed July 2021. 
30 Singh, S. & Durso, L. E. (2017). Widespread Discrimination Continues to Shape LGBT People’s Lives in Both Subtle 
and Significant Ways. Center for American Progress. https://www.americanprogress.org/issues/lgbtq-rights/
news/2017/05/02/429529/widespread-discrimination-continues-shape-lgbt-peoples-lives-subtle-significant-ways/ 
Accessed July 2021.
31 NORC at the University of Chicago. The General Social Survey. GSS Questionnaire 2008. Available at https://gss.norc.org/
get-documentation/questionnaires; Human Rights Campaign. (2018) A Workplace Divided: Understanding the Climate for 
LGBTQ Workers Nationwide. https://www.hrc.org/resources/a-workplace-divided-understanding-the-climate-for-lgbtq-
workers-nationwide. Accessed July 2021.


LGBT People’s Experiences of Workplace Discrimination and Harassment   |   29
orientation or gender identity, as well as experiences where the religious beliefs of others were 
believed to be a factor in how the respondent was treated. 
A total of 935 participants who self-identified as lesbian, gay, bisexual or were transgender (as 
determined by responses to questions about sex assigned at birth and current gender identity) were 
included in the analytic sample for this report. Participants who selected gender identity response 
options, including male, female, transgender, and nonbinary, that differed from their sex assigned 
at birth, were classified as transgender. Those who selected gender identity options that were the 
same as their sex assigned at birth were classified as cisgender. Cisgender participants who reported 
“something else” as their sexual orientation identity (n=72) were excluded from empirical analyses 
given uncertainly about whether they were sexual minorities or not. Descriptive analyses were 
conducted using Stata v15.1 statistical software and include design-based F-tests (Rao-Scott chi-
square tests) of differences in proportions to assess whether outcomes vary across demographic 
groups at an alpha of 0.05.32 Confidence intervals (95% CI) were included in Appendix tables to 
communicate the degree of uncertainty around an estimate due to sampling error. All analyses were 
weighted using sampling weights developed by Morning Consult. 
To construct the sampling weights for the entire sample, Morning Consult used the 2019 Population 
Assessment of Tobacco and Health (PATH) Public Use File.33 The 2019 PATH survey was conducted 
with a large nationally representative sample of U.S. adults and included measures of sexual 
orientation identity and transgender status. The PATH data were subset on LGBT respondents in 
the workforce (full-time employed, part-time employed, self-employed, or looking for work), and this 
subset was used to establish weighting targets for age (5 categories), sex (2 categories), race/ethnicity 
(4 categories), education (3 categories), and region (4 categories). Iterative proportional fitting 
(or “raking”) was then used to create the weight variable. Weights were calibrated to address the 
oversampling of LGBT adults in state and local government by using workforce sector targets from 
LGBT adult respondents to the nationally representative 2016 Gallup Daily Tracking survey. Weights 
were trimmed at 6 to avoid over-weighting a small number of respondents, and they were normalized 
to sum to the sample size, which is common practice.
Calculations for the uncertainty of the results (like all other uncertainty measures for non-probability 
samples) assumes that the weighted estimates are approximately unbiased. This approximate 
unbiasedness assumption is based on the assertion that any systematic differences between 
sample and population are corrected when the sample is adjusted via weighting to match the LGBT 
population in the workforce on key dimensions (age, race/ethnicity, education, region). 
32 J. N. K. Rao, A. J. Scott. (1984). On chi-squared tests for multiway contingency tables with cell proportions estimated 
from survey data. Ann. Stat. 12, 46–60.
33 United States Department of Health and Human Services. National Institutes of Health. National Institute on Drug 
Abuse, and United States Department of Health and Human Services. Food and Drug Administration. Center for Tobacco 
Products. Population Assessment of Tobacco and Health (PATH) Study [United States] Public-Use Files. Inter-university 
Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor], 2020-10-21. https://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR36498.v11


LGBT People’s Experiences of Workplace Discrimination and Harassment   |   30
While selection probabilities for non-probability samples are unknown, in practice probability panels 
face the same methodological challenges as non-probability panels34 that need to be addressed using 
statistical adjustment. While most non-probability panels themselves are not representative per se, 
statistical adjustments can be used to create unbiased and representative samples independently of 
the initial recruitment process.
The quotes from the respondents in this report were collected through two open-ended 
questions. The first asked “Tell us about your worst experience of unfair treatment, harassment, 
or discrimination at work.” The other asked “Please explain what happened when you felt that 
someone’s religious beliefs were a factor in the unfair treatment, harassment, or discrimination 
that you experienced at work because of your sexual orientation/ gender identity” (asked only of 
respondents who indicated that an employer’s or coworker’s religious beliefs were a factor in unfair 
treatment, harassment, or discrimination they experienced). Responses were selected for inclusion 
in this report to illustrate certain points while avoiding duplication in the content of the quotes and 
representing the full diversity of the sample in terms of sexual orientation, gender identity, sex, race, 
ethnicity, occupation, and current state of residence. The responses were edited to correct for typos, 
spelling, grammar, missing words, and other issues not impacting the substance of the response.   
Where words were otherwise changed (for verb tense, pronouns, clarity, to change information that 
could be used to identity the respondent, etc.) the changes are noted with brackets. Where words 
were cut (primarily to reduce the length of the quote or cut personally identifying information), the 
omission is marked with ellipses. Names of employers were removed and replaced with language 
describing the type of employment in brackets.
The study protocol was reviewed and approved by Institutional Review Board at UCLA.
34 Kennedy, C., Mercer, Al, Keeter, S., Hatley, N., McGeeney, K., & Gimenez, A. (2016). Evaluating Online Nonprobability 
Surveys. Pew Research Center. https://www.pewresearch.org/methods/2016/05/02/evaluating-online-nonprobability-
surveys/ Accessed July 2021.


LGBT People’s Experiences of Workplace Discrimination and Harassment   |   31
TABLES
Table 1. LGBT participant demographic characteristics (n = 935), Employment Experiences Survey, 
May 2021
LGBT EMPLOYEES (N = 935)
%
95% CI
Age 
18-34 
65.7
61.5, 69.7
35-44 
20.3
17.1, 23.9
45-64 
12.9
10.4, 15.9
65 and up
1.1
0.7, 1.9
Sex assigned at birth 
Male
44.0
39.4, 48.7
Female
56.0
51.3, 60.6
Gender identity
Man
40.9
36.3, 45.6
Woman
51.2
46.6, 55.9
Transgender
2.6
1.5, 4.5
Nonbinary
5.3
3.8, 7.4
Sexual orientation 
Gay or lesbian
34.4
30.1, 39.0
Straight
0.5
0.2, 1.3
Bisexual
62.3
57.7, 66.7
Something else
2.0
1.2, 3.3
Not sure
0.6
0.6, 1.0
Transgender and cisgender LGB35
Transgender
9.5
7.2, 12.3
Cisgender LGB
90.5
87.7, 92.8
Race/ethnicity
White, non-Hispanic
50.1
45.4, 54.7
Black, non-Hispanic
10.4
8.2, 13.2
Hispanic or Latinx
31.3
26.3, 36.7
All other racial/ethnic groups, non- Hispanic
8.2
6.2, 10.8
35 Participants who selected gender identity response options, including male, female, transgender, and nonbinary, that 
differed from their sex assigned at birth, were classified as transgender. Those who selected gender identity options that 
were the same as their sex assigned at birth were classified as cisgender.


LGBT People’s Experiences of Workplace Discrimination and Harassment   |   32
LGBT EMPLOYEES (N = 935)
%
95% CI
Education
Less than Bachelor’s degree
72.9
69.0, 76.5
Bachelor’s degree
16.0
13.5, 19.4
More than Bachelor’s degree
11.1
8.8, 13.7
Current employment 
For-profit business
51.8
47.1, 56.4
Non-Profit organization
6.2
4.2, 9.0
Government employee, including military
12.0
9.3 14.7
Self-employed
17.0
13.4, 20.6
Unemployed/out of workforce
12.0
8.9, 15.1
Region
Northeast
18.2
14.8, 22.1
Midwest
20.2
17.0, 23.8
South
37.8
33.4, 42.4
West
23.9
19.9, 28.4
CI: confidence interval
Table 2. Lifetime experiences of sexual orientation- or gender identity-based discrimination and 
harassment against LGBT employees (n=935), Employment Experiences Survey, May 2021
LGBT EMPLOYEES (N = 935)
%
95% CI
Any lifetime discrimination 
29.8
25.4, 34.1
Specific discrimination experience
   Fired
22.8
19.0, 27.1
   Not hired
23.7
19.8, 28.0
Any lifetime harassment 
37.7
33.1, 42.3
Specific harassment type
   Verbal harassment
30.7
26.4, 35.4
   Physical harassment
20.8
17.2, 25.0
   Sexual harassment
25.9
22.0, 30.3
Any lifetime discrimination or harassment
45.5
40.4, 49.8
CI: confidence interval


LGBT People’s Experiences of Workplace Discrimination and Harassment   |   33
Table 3. Negative comments, slurs, or jokes about LGBTQ people heard in the workplace by LGBT 
employees (n=935), Employment Experiences Survey, May 2021
LGBT EMPLOYEES (N = 935)
%
95% CI
Heard negative comments, slurs, or jokes about LGBTQ people in the workplace in general 
or direct at oneself
Yes
67.5
62.9, 71.8
No
32.5
28.2, 37.1
CI: confidence interval
Table 4. Lifetime experiences of sexual orientation- or gender identity-based discrimination and 
harassment against LGBT employees (n=932) by race/ethnicity, Employment Experiences Survey, 
May 2021
PEOPLE OF COLOR 
(N=318)
WHITE 
(N=614)
%
95% CI
%
95% CI
Any lifetime discrimination 
33.2
26.0, 40.5
26.3
21.4, 31.3
Specific discrimination experience
   Fired
25.7
19.6, 33.0
19.9
15.6, 24.9
   Not hired
29.0
22.6, 36.5
18.3
14.5, 22.9
Any lifetime harassment 
40.6
33.0, 48.3
34.8
29.7, 40.0
Specific harassment type
   Verbal harassment
35.6
28.4, 43.4
25.9
21.4, 31.0
   Physical harassment
23.8
17.8, 31.0
18.0
14.1, 22.6
   Sexual harassment
25.9
19.7, 33.2
25.9
21.4, 31.0
Any lifetime discrimination or harassment
48.6
40.7, 56.4
41.8
36.6, 46.9
CI: confidence interval
Bold text indicates statistically significant difference


LGBT People’s Experiences of Workplace Discrimination and Harassment   |   34
Table 5. Lifetime experiences of sexual orientation- or gender identity-based discrimination and 
harassment against LGBT employees (n=935) by gender identity, Employment Experiences Survey, 
May 2021
CISGENDER LGB (N=838)
TRANSGENDER (N=97)
%
95% CI
%
95% CI
Any lifetime discrimination 
27.8
23.3, 32.3
48.8
34.8, 62.8
Specific discrimination experience
   Fired
21.9
180, 26.5
30.9
18.9, 46.0
   Not hired
21.5
17.7, 26.0
43.9
30.4, 58.4
Any lifetime harassment 
36.9
32.0, 41.7
45.8
31.9, 59.7
Specific harassment type
   Verbal harassment
29.3
24.9, 34.3
43.8
30.7, 57.8
   Physical harassment
20.0
16.2, 24.5
28.2
17.2, 42.7
   Sexual harassment
25.9
21.7, 30.5
26.3
15.7, 40.5
Any lifetime discrimination or harassment
43.0
38.0, 47.9
65.7
53.6, 77.8
CI: confidence interval
Bold text indicates statistically significant difference 

Table 6. Experiences of sexual orientation- or gender identity-based discrimination and 
harassment against LGBT employees (n=935) by timing of most recent experience, Employment 
Experiences Survey, May 2021
LGBT EMPLOYEES (N = 935)
%
95% CI
Any discrimination within the past year
8.9
6.5 12.0
Specific discrimination experience
   Fired
6.1
4.2, 8.7
   Not Hired
6.2
4.2, 9.0
Any discrimination one to five years ago
12.8
9.8, 16.4
Specific discrimination experience
   Fired
11.1
8.4, 14.6
   Not Hired
11.2
8.5, 14.5
Any discrimination over five years ago
8.1
5.9, 11.1
Specific discrimination experience
   Fired
6.8
4.7, 9.8
   Not Hired
5.9
4.1, 8.5


LGBT People’s Experiences of Workplace Discrimination and Harassment   |   35
LGBT EMPLOYEES (N = 935)
%
95% CI
Any harassment within the past five years
24.3
20.5, 28.6
Specific harassment type
   Verbal Harassment
19.4
15.9, 23.4
   Physical Harassment
12.1
9.3, 15.5
   Sexual Harassment
12.9
10.2, 16.3
Any harassment over five years ago
13.4
10.4, 17.1
Specific harassment type
   Verbal Harassment
13.5
10.3, 17.5
   Physical Harassment
8.6
6.2, 11.9
   Sexual Harassment
13.4
10.35, 17.1
CI: confidence interval

Table 7. Past-year experiences of sexual orientation- or gender identity-based discrimination 
against LGBT employees (n=932) by race/ethnicity, Employment Experiences Survey, May 2021
PEOPLE OF COLOR 
(N=318)
WHITE 
(N=614)
%
95% CI
%
95% CI
Any discrimination within the past year
11.3
7.5, 16.6
6.5
4.1, 10.2
Specific discrimination experience
   Fired
7.9
4.8, 12.7
4.4
2.7, 7.1
   Not Hired
8.0
4.8, 13.0
4.4
2.4, 7.9
CI: confidence interval

Table 8. Religion as a motivating factor for sexual orientation- or gender identity-based 
discrimination or harassment against LGBT employees (n=471) by race/ethnicity and gender 
identity, Employment Experiences Survey, May 2021
ALL 
(N=471)
PEOPLE OF COLOR 
(N=179)
WHITE 
(N=290)
CISGENDER LGB 
(N=404)
TRANSGENDER 
(N=67)
%
95% CI
%
95% CI
%
95% CI
%
95% CI
%
95% CI
Religious beliefs were a factor in discrimination or harassment 
Yes
57.0
50.5, 63.2
63.5
53.1, 72.8
49.4
41.9, 57.0
55.6
48.6, 62.3
66.8
48.1, 81.3
No
43.0
36.8, 49.5
36.5
27.2, 46.9
50.6
43.0, 50.1
44.4
37.7, 51.4
33.2
18.7, 51.9
CI: confidence interval
Bold text indicates statistically significant difference


LGBT People’s Experiences of Workplace Discrimination and Harassment   |   36
Table 9. Openness about being LGBTQ at work among LGBT employees (n=932), Employment 
Experiences Survey, May 2021
LGBT EMPLOYEES (N = 932)
%
95% CI
Not out to supervisor
50.4
45.7, 55.1
Not out to any co-workers
25.8
22.0, 30.0
Out to a few co-workers
15.0
12.0, 18.8
Out to some co-workers
16.2
12.7, 20.4
Out to most co-workers
13.4
10.9, 16.5
Out to all co-workers
29.5
25.4, 34.0
CI: confidence interval

Table 10. Covering behaviors at current job among LGBT employees (n=935), Employment 
Experiences Survey, May 2021
LGBT EMPLOYEES (N = 935)
%
95% CI
Changed presentation at work
40.7
36.3, 45.4
Specific alteration of presentation
   Changed hairstyle, makeup, or appearance
24.4
20.5, 28.7
   Changed dress
24.6
20.7, 28.9
   Changed voice or mannerisms
25.8
21.8, 30.3
   Changed bathroom use
16.1
13.2, 19.6
Hid personal life 
Avoided work events/travel
22.8
19.2, 26.9
Avoided social events with co-workers
43.2
38.6, 47.9
Avoided talking about family
33.2
29.1, 37.7
Avoided talking about social life
39.3
34.9, 43.9
Hid family photos
29.3
25.3, 33.7
Not brought family to work-related events
23.9
20.3, 28.0
CI: confidence interval


LGBT People’s Experiences of Workplace Discrimination and Harassment   |   37
Table 11. Covering behaviors at work among LGBT employees (n=932) by race/ethnicity, 
Employment Experiences Survey, May 2021
PEOPLE OF COLOR 
(N=318)
WHITE 
(N=614)
%
95% CI
%
95% CI
Changed presentation at work
44.4
36.8, 52.2
36.9
32.2, 41.9
Specific alteration of presentation
   Changed hairstyle, makeup, or appearance
28.8
22.3, 36.3
20.0
16.3, 24.4
   Changed dress
27.7
21.2, 35.2
20.8
16.9, 25.3
   Changed bathroom use
17.4
12.6, 23.6
14.4
11.5, 18.0
   Changed voice or mannerisms
31.0
24.1, 38.7
20.7
16.9, 25.2
Hid personal life
Avoided work events/travel
23.2
17.5, 30.0
22.3
18.2, 27.1
Avoided social events with co-workers
45.4
37.8, 53.3
40.9
35.8, 46.2
Avoided talking about family
34.4
27.6, 42.0
31.9
27.4, 36.7
Avoided talking about social life
40.9
33.5, 48.7
37.6
32.9, 42.5
Hid family photos
29.8
23.3, 37.2
28.8
24.2, 33.8
Not brought family to work-related events
24.6
18.8, 31.6
23.1
19.1, 27.6
CI: confidence interval
Bold text indicates statistically significant difference
Table 12. Covering behaviors at work among LGBT employees (n=935) by gender and sexual 
orientation group, Employment Experiences Survey, May 2021
CISGENDER LGB 
(N=838)
TRANSGENDER 
(N=97)
%
95% CI
%
95% CI
Changed presentation at work
39.0
34.3, 43.9
57.7
43.1, 71.1
Specific alteration of presentation
   Changed hairstyle, makeup, or appearance
23.3
19.3, 27.9
36.4
24.7, 50.0
   Changed dress
23.3
19.3, 27.9
35.4
24.3, 48.4
   Changed bathroom use
14.9
11.9, 18.5
27.5
17.8, 39.9
   Changed voice or mannerisms
25.4
21.1, 30.1
30.0
19.8, 42.7
Hid personal life
Avoided work events/travel
21.6
17.9, 25.8
34.6
22.5, 49.1
Avoided social events with co-workers
42.4
37.5, 47.3
50.9
37.3, 64.4
Avoided talking about family
32.4
28.0, 37.1
41.1
28.4, 55.2
Avoided talking about social life
38.6
33.9, 43.5
45.8
32.9, 59.3
Hid family photos
29.6
25.3, 34.3
26.8
17.2, 39.2
Not brought family to work-related events
23.9
20.1, 28.2
24.2
14.8, 37.1
CI: confidence interval
Bold text indicates statistically significant difference


LGBT People’s Experiences of Workplace Discrimination and Harassment   |   38
Table 13. Impact of sexual orientation- or gender identity-based discrimination and unsupportive 
environments on employee retention among LGBT employees (n=935), Employment Experiences 
Survey, May 2021
LGBT EMPLOYEES (N = 935)
%
95% CI
Left a job due to personal treatment
34.2
29.8, 38.9
Looked for another job due to personal treatment
33.9
29.5, 38.5
Looked for another job due to uncomfortable environment
35.1
30.7, 39.7
CI: confidence interval

Table 14. Impact of sexual orientation- or gender identity-based discrimination and unsupportive 
environments on employee retention among LGBT employees (n=932) by race/ethnicity, 
Employment Experiences Survey, May 2021
PEOPLE OF COLOR 
(N=318)
WHITE  
(N=614)
%
95% CI
%
95% CI
Left a job due to personal treatment
38.7
31.4, 46.5
29.7
24.9, 35.0
Looked for another job due to personal treatment
37.5
20.3, 45.3
30.2
25.4, 35.4
Looked for another job due to uncomfortable environment
36.7
29.6, 44.4
33.4
28.5, 38.6
CI: confidence interval

Table 15. Impact of sexual orientation- or gender identity-based discrimination and unsupportive 
environments on employee retention among LGBT employees (n=935) by gender identity, 
Employment Experiences Survey, May 2021
CISGENDER LGB 
(N=838)
TRANSGENDER 
(N=97)
%
95% CI
%
95% CI
Left a job due to personal treatment
30.6
26.2, 35.2
43.7
31.0, 57.4
Looked for another job due to personal treatment
29.8
25.6, 34.4
45.6
32.7, 59.2
Looked for another job due to uncomfortable environment
31.4
27.2, 36.0
48.9
35.6, 62.4
CI: confidence interval
Additional analyses presented in this paper are on file with the authors.