The share of individuals identifying as LGBTQ+ in the United States has increased over time, rising from just 4% in 2012 to 8% in 2023. In addition, support for same-sex marriage has also grown (27% in 1996 v. 69% as of 2024) and fewer believe there should be less acceptance for LGBTQ+ people (26% in 2001 v. 8% in 2020). Increases in identity and acceptance have been punctuated by several Supreme Court decisions providing new civil rights for LGBTQ+ people. Still, widespread stigma and discrimination persist for many LGBTQ+ people, including in health care as well as across a range of social institutions. These experiences can fuel significant health care disparities among LGBTQ+ people, challenging well-being and affecting health outcomes. Further, LGBTQ+ rights and health care access have become increasingly politicized at the federal and state levels, especially when it comes to young people.
All people’s health and health care experiences are informed by the socioeconomic context in which they live, including the policy environment. Federal and state policy can facilitate or impede access to health care for LGBTQ+ people. At the federal level, there have been both expansions as well as restrictions in protections and access over time and across presidential administrations, including the second Trump administration. Starting on the first day of his second term, President Trump began to issue numerous executive actions, several of which directly address or affect health programs, efforts, or policies designed to meet the health needs of LGBTQ+ people. These include actions that seek to limit data collection, lessen civil rights protections, restrict access to care, and remove acknowledgement of diverse sexual and gender identities. At the state level, there has been a rapid increase in the number of laws and policies impacting LGBTQ+ people’s health, especially, though not exclusively, that of young people. An increasing number of legal challenges to federal and state laws may ultimately decide access to care and the extent to which protections remain. This chapter provides an overview of LGBTQ+ people’s identities, experiences with health and health care, and the related health policy landscape.
A Note on Language
Throughout this chapter, whenever possible, we use the term LGBTQ+ to represent the full spectrum of non-heterosexual, non-cisgender people. Additionally, people who are asexual, questioning, or intersex are sometimes included under the LGBTQ+ umbrella. However, at times, the reader may encounter differences in terminology (e.g., LGBT, LGB, etc.). In these circumstances, we use language to reflect the specific data being cited. It is important to note that the language used to describe LGBTQ+ people has evolved considerably over time and will likely continue to do so.