Shannon M. Monnat 
 
In 2014, 66 percent of working-age Hispanic 
adults in the U.S. were insured, the lowest 
health insurance rate of any racial/ethnic 
group. Hispanic insurance rates are lowest in 
counties that had few, if any, Hispanics prior 
to 1990 but that experienced significant 
Hispanic population growth between 1990 
and 2000 (1990s destinations). Hispanic 
insurance rates in these counties are low in 
large part because a larger percentage of 
Hispanic adults living in them are immigrants 
compared to Hispanics who are living in 
established destinations.  
 
Hispanics’ access to health insurance is 
important to overall U.S. population health 
and economic vitality due to the increasing 
size of the Hispanic population and their 
geographic dispersion across the U.S. Because 
the Hispanic population is younger, on 
average, than other racial/ethnic groups, a 
larger percentage of Hispanic women are in 
their prime child-bearing years relative to 
other racial/ethnic groups. Hispanic fertility is 
especially high among poor immigrants living 
in rural areas (Lichter et al. 2015). Large 
numbers of uninsured Hispanics in their 
prime child-bearing and working years has 
significant health care cost implications, 
especially for rural counties that are already challenged by health care funding shortages 
and hospital closures. Compared to individuals with health insurance, those without 
insurance have worse health outcomes, are at higher risk of premature mortality, and are 
less likely to utilize preventive care and more likely to utilize high-cost health care. High 
uninsured rates can contribute to overall poor community health, high and unsustainable 
collective unpaid health care costs, and reduced workplace productivity, all of which can 
August, 2016 
Brief: 2016-2 
A USDA supported multi-state research project on the causes 
and consequences of demographic change in rural America 
Hispanic Health Insurance Rates Differ between 
Established and New Hispanic Destinations 
 
 
 
•
Insurance rates among adult 
Hispanics are lowest in rural 
counties with historically small 
Hispanic populations but that 
experienced substantial Hispanic 
population growth between 1990 
and 2010. If this was all the reader 
read, they should get your main 
takeaways. 
•
Lower insurance rates in counties 
with recent Hispanic population 
growth are due to comparatively 
larger shares of immigrant non-
citizen Hispanics in those counties 
compared with older, more 
established Hispanic destinations. 
•
Lower Hispanic insurance rates 
prevail in counties with state 
policies that limit recent immigrant 
access to health insurance or 
cash/food assistance programs. 
KEY FINDINGS 


 
2 
 
place strains on local hospitals, governments, businesses, and communities.  
 
This brief describes spatial variation in county-level Hispanic adult (ages 18-64) health 
insurance coverage rates, focusing on differences in Hispanic coverage rates between 
metropolitan, large nonmetropolitan, and rural established Hispanic destinations, new 
destinations that formed during the 1990s (1990s destinations), new destinations that 
formed during the 2000s (2000s destinations), and non-destinations.  
 
Hispanic Population Growth in New Destinations  
Throughout the 1990s and 2000s, communities beyond the traditional Hispanic gateways 
experienced significant Hispanic population growth (Figure 1). Whereas established 
destinations are mostly concentrated in the southwest and southern Florida, new 
destinations are dispersed across the southeast, Midwest, northwest, and northeast.  
 
Hispanic immigrants arriving in the U.S. in the 1990s, along with previous generations of 
Hispanic immigrants who initially settled in traditional gateways in the urban southwest, 
were drawn to small cities and rural towns in the southeast and Midwest for jobs in 
construction, manufacturing, food processing, and the low-wage service sector. Following 
the economic boom of the 1990s, the first decade of the 2000s was characterized by 
economic recession and growing anti-immigrant sentiment, particularly against low-wage 
Mexican migrants perceived as “stealing” native jobs and pilfering taxpayer coffers. The 
1990s boomtowns with low-wage industries that attracted large shares of Mexican 
immigrants have been especially vulnerable to the negative consequences of globalization 
and economic restructuring, including population out-migration, job loss, wage deflation 
and economic precarity. Hispanics in the rural southeast and Midwest especially, occupy 
low-wage periphery jobs in industries that fared poorly during the late 2000s recession, 
particularly manufacturing. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Established and New Destinations 


 
3 
 
By the 2000s, many migrants to new destinations had considerable experience in the U.S., 
and flows of Hispanics to 2000s new destinations included both immigrants migrating 
directly from their origin countries (mostly Mexico) and domestic migrants moving from 
both established destinations and 1990s destinations. Given the declining economy and 
growing hostility toward racialized newcomers during the 2000s, Hispanics venturing into 
places without substantial Hispanic populations in the 2000s (compared to the 1990s and 
earlier) likely had to arrive with more education and/or job skills and experience to 
successfully compete for jobs that offer health insurance or wages sufficient to purchase 
insurance. The places that attracted and retained Hispanics during the 2000s likely also had 
better economic opportunities than the places hit hardest by the 2000s economic downturn. 
Otherwise, these places probably would not have experienced or maintained significant 
Hispanic population growth during the 2000s. Indeed, a significant share of counties (44 
percent) that experienced more than 150 percent Hispanic population growth during the 
1990s are concentrated in the south-Atlantic, whereas a greater percentage of counties with 
rapid Hispanic population growth during the 2000s are located in the northeast and 
Midwest (Figure 1). These places have drastically different labor markets, political and 
social contexts, and demographic composition, all of which influence Hispanics’ 
opportunities to acquire health insurance. Therefore, in addition to distinguishing between 
Figure 1: Established and New Destinations Established 1990s New 2000s New Destination 
Type established and new destinations, it is also important to distinguish between counties 
that experienced most of their Hispanic population growth in the 1990s versus those 
wherein most growth occurred in the first decade of the 2000s. 
 
Hispanic Insurance Rates are Lowest in 1990s Destinations and Rural 2000s 
Destinations 
 
A comparison with Figure 1 shows considerable overlap between counties with the lowest 
Hispanic insurance rates and counties classified as new destinations. The majority of new 
Figure 2: Hispanic Adult (ages 18-64) Insurance Rates are Lowest in the Southeast and Northwest 


 
4 
 
destinations, especially 1990s new destinations, are located in the south. Hispanic health 
insurance coverage rates are lowest in the south, especially in North and South Carolina, 
Georgia, Alabama, Tennessee, and much of Texas, Hispanic coverage rates are also low in 
southwestern Idaho, most of Washington, and central Oregon (Figure 2). 
Figure 3 shows that Hispanic health insurance rates are lowest in rural 2000s destinations 
and 1990s destinations across all three levels of metropolitan status (metropolitan, large 
nonmetropolitan, and rural). In the average 1990s destination and rural 2000s destination, 
fewer than half of Hispanic adults have health insurance. Gaps in insurance coverage rates 
between Hispanics and non-Hispanic Whites are also largest, on average, in 1990s 
destinations (Figure 4). The average Hispanic-White coverage gap exceeds 35 percentage 
points in 1990s destinations across all three categories of metropolitan status. 
Figure 3: Percentage of Hispanic Adults with Health Insurance 
Figure 4: Hispanic-White Insurance Rate Gap 


 
5 
 
 
If these differences were simply a function of differences in county labor markets or 
socioeconomic environments, the patterns we see for non-Hispanic White and Black 
insurance rates should be similar to those observed for Hispanics. This is not the case. Non-
Hispanic White and Black insurance rates vary little across the four types of destinations.1 
This suggests that the factors influencing Hispanic insurance coverage are different from 
the factors influencing insurance coverage for other racial/ethnic groups. The main factor 
contributing to lower Hispanic insurance rates in 1990s destinations and rural 2000s 
destinations is the much larger share of immigrants among the Hispanics living in these 
types of counties than in other counties. 
 
Differences in Immigrant Composition across Destinations 
Results from regression models that accounted for Hispanic economic well-being, 
immigrant composition, labor market factors, and state policies on immigrant eligibility for 
health insurance and other safety net programs show that comparatively low Hispanic 
insurance rates in 1990s destinations (at all three levels of metropolitan status) and in 
rural 2000s destinations are attributable to larger relative shares of immigrants living in 
these counties (Figure 5). Hispanic insurance rates are significantly lower in these new 
destinations simply because the majority of Hispanics living in them are immigrants and 
are not U.S. citizens. For example, in the average rural 1990s destination, 72 percent of 
Hispanic adults (ages 18 – 64) are immigrants, and of those, 82.5 percent are not U.S. 
citizens. In the typical metropolitan 2000s destination, only 44 percent of Hispanic adults 
are immigrants, and in the typical rural established destination, only 32 percent of Hispanic 
adults are immigrants. 
 
 
 
 
1 Average Non-Hispanic White and Black insurance rates by destination type and metropolitan status are 
available from the author upon request. 
Figure 5: Percentage of Hispanic Adults who are Foreign-Born, 2009-2013 


 
6 
 
Multiple forces interacted to drive Hispanic immigrants from established gateways in the 
U.S. southwest to new destinations in the 1990s, including the militarization of the 
Mexico/U.S. border; anti-immigrant legislation in traditional gateways (e.g., California’s 
Proposition 187 in 1994); growing U.S. and international demand for pre-packaged foods 
that led to industry restructuring and relocation; and the resultant growing demand for 
low-wage and non-union labor in services, manufacturing and agriculture. Although these 
jobs often provide better wages than immigrants might secure in their home countries, 
they rarely come with health insurance. Even when they do, there are typically waiting 
periods before benefits take effect.  
 
Across all destination types, average Hispanic insurance rates are lowest in farming-
dependent counties, but they are especially low in 1990s destinations. In the average 
farming-dependent 1990s destination, only 35 percent of Hispanic adults have health 
insurance, compared to 53 percent in the average farming-dependent established 
destination. New destinations are also comparatively more reliant on manufacturing than 
established destinations, and Hispanic health insurance rates in manufacturing-dependent 
1990s destinations are substantially lower than Hispanic insurance rates in manufacturing-
dependent established destinations. It is possible that the farming and manufacturing jobs 
available to Hispanics in 1990s destinations are of lower quality (in terms of wages and 
access to employer-sponsored health insurance) than the farming and manufacturing jobs 
available to Hispanics in established destinations. 
Differences in state Medicaid eligibility also influence Hispanic health insurance rates. 
Hispanics have disproportionately high reliance on Medicaid; in 2014, 33 percent of 
nonelderly Hispanics were covered by Medicaid, the highest rate of all major racial/ethnic 
groups. Unauthorized immigrants are ineligible for federally-funded Medicaid. The 
Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act (PRWORA) of 1996 
further eliminated Medicaid access for immigrants with less than five years of qualified 
status in the U.S. States can choose to cover authorized immigrants during the five-year 
waiting period using state-only funding, but only 15 states currently do so. States that are 
home to the overwhelming share of 1990s destination counties (North and South Carolina, 
Alabama, Georgia, Tennessee, Arkansas, Oklahoma, Maryland and Oregon) do not cover 
immigrants with a state plan during this five-year waiting period. As shown in Figure 6, 
1990s destinations are less likely than the other destination types to be located in states 
Figure 6: Authorized Immigrant Eligibility for State-Only Medicaid and/or Cash  
or Food Assistance during the Federal 5-Year Waiting Period 


 
7 
 
where immigrants are eligible for state-only insurance plans and cash/food assistance 
programs during the five-year ban. This means that 1990s destinations, where the Hispanic 
population is composed of comparatively larger shares of immigrants, especially poor 
recent immigrants, will have lower Hispanic insurance rates simply because most poor 
Hispanics in those places are not eligible for Medicaid. 
 
The disadvantages associated with lower access to Medicaid and cash/food assistance 
programs in 1990s destinations are compounded by higher Hispanic poverty rates and 
lower Hispanic educational attainment in these same counties (Figure 7). Hispanic poverty 
rates are highest in 1990s destinations (across all three levels of metropolitan status) and 
nonmetropolitan 2000s destinations. Although Hispanic educational attainment is higher 
in metropolitan 1990s destinations compared to established destinations, this education 
advantage does not protect against higher Hispanic poverty rates and lower Hispanic 
insurance coverage rates in metropolitan 1990s destinations. Although not shown here, 
Hispanic employment rates are similar across all destination types. 
 
 
 
Conclusions 
Hispanic adult health insurance rates vary considerably between new and established 
destinations and by metropolitan status. 1990s destination counties have lower Hispanic 
adult health insurance rates than other counties, with the very lowest rates in rural 1990s 
destinations. Coverage rates are also comparatively low in rural 2000s destinations. Lower 
Hispanic insurance rates in these new destinations are due in large part to comparatively 
larger concentrations of immigrants among the Hispanics who live in them.  
 
On the one hand, these findings suggest reasons to be cautiously optimistic about future 
trends in Hispanic health insurance coverage in new destinations. Despite higher Hispanic 
Figure 7: Hispanic Poverty Rates and Educational Attainment by Destination Type and 
Metropolitan Status 


 
8 
 
poverty rates and less access to Medicaid and cash/food assistance programs, Hispanics in 
metropolitan, large non-metropolitan, and rural 1990s destinations and rural 2000s 
destinations have insurance rates that are comparable to established destinations once 
differences in immigrant concentrations are held constant. As the current cohorts of 
Hispanic immigrants are succeeded by second and future generation U.S-born Hispanics in 
these places, insurance rates should climb. In addition, the most recent metropolitan new 
destinations (2000s destinations) have Hispanic insurance rates, poverty rates, and 
employment rates that are comparable to established destinations.  
 
On the other hand, the findings presented here also support concerns that the migration of 
low-income Hispanic immigrants to small towns has driven the emergence of “rural 
immigrant ghettos” characterized by concentrated poverty, social isolation, and limited 
mobility (Lichter and Brown 2011; Lichter et al. 2015). This is worrisome given the young 
Hispanic age structure and the fact that Hispanic fertility is high in rural areas, especially 
among the poorest and most disadvantaged immigrants. Individuals without insurance are 
at risk of poor health, which may negatively affect their current and future children. 
Counties with low Hispanic insurance rates may also face economic burdens of unpaid 
health care costs, emergency departments may experience greater demand for services, and 
employers who rely on Hispanic immigrant labor may be faced with unhealthy workforces, 
potentially resulting in lower productivity. This is especially problematic for rural new 
destinations that already suffer from limited health care infrastructure, small tax bases, 
hospital closures, and competitive disadvantage due to prior decades of industrial 
restructuring and social safety net dismantling.  
 
Placed-based (destination-specific) policy interventions may be more effective at increasing 
Hispanic insurance rates than broad sweeping policies. Universal Medicaid for immigrants 
would improve Hispanic insurance rates the most in 1990s destinations, but such a policy is 
unlikely to garner widespread public or political support. In counties with larger shares of 
U.S.-born Hispanics and eligible immigrants, the Affordable Care Act (ACA) should increase 
Hispanic insurance rates, especially in states that expanded Medicaid. Most undocumented 
immigrants are not eligible for Medicaid or marketplace subsidies under the ACA, and legal 
permanent residents are eligible only after a five-year wait. Therefore, the ACA is unlikely to 
immediately increase insurance rates among poor Hispanics in 1990s destinations and rural 
2000s destinations, wherein the majority of Hispanics are immigrants, but it should improve 
coverage for future generations of Hispanics born in these places. Although improving 
access to Medicaid would increase insurance rates among poor Hispanics, the majority of 
insured Hispanic adults obtain their insurance through their employers. In established 
destinations and metropolitan 2000s destinations, improving Hispanic college completion 
rates could facilitate entry into occupations that provide health insurance. Finally, farming-
dependent 1990s destinations may benefit from federal or state incentives to farm 
employers to provide employer-subsidized insurance. 
Data and Methods  
This research used the county as the unit of 
analysis because county governments 
provide political and economic structure, 
counties represents the context within which 
most social and health services are delivered, 
and county governments often administer 
 
2 ACS data are estimates with sampling error. Some counties have larger margins of error, and thereby less 
reliable estimates, than others. Analyses are limited to counties with ≥100 Hispanics ages 18-64 and to 
state-level social programs. County 
boundaries also remain relatively consistent 
over time, allowing for straight-forward 
comparisons of Hispanic population size in 
1990, 2000, and 2010. Data are from the 
2009/2013 American Community Survey 
(ACS) estimates.2 Insurance refers to any 


 
9 
 
type of coverage (i.e., public, private). 
Analyses focus on working-age adult (18-64) 
insurance rates. Most Hispanics aged 65+ (95 
percent) have health insurance. Different 
federal and state policies apply to children’s 
insurance, and a greater percentage of 
Hispanic children are U.S.-born compared to 
Hispanic adults, making them eligible for 
public insurance programs. Metropolitan 
status categories are defined using the 2003 
USDA Economic Research Service (ERS) 
Rural-Urban Continuum Codes (RUCC). The 
three metropolitan codes (RUCCs 1-3) are 
collapsed into metropolitan. Large 
nonmetropolitan counties are those with 
urban populations of 20,000 or more (RUCCs 
4 and 5). Rural counties are those with urban 
populations of less than 20,000 (RUCCs 6-9). 
Hispanic destinations are defined based on 
Hispanic population size and growth. 
Established destinations are counties with a 
Hispanic population composition of at least 
10 percent in 1990 (Lichter and Johnson 
2009). 1990s new destinations are counties 
with <10 percent Hispanic population in 
1990 but that experienced Hispanic 
population growth of ≥150 percent and 
≥1,000 Hispanics from 1990 to 2000 (for 
counties ≥20,000 residents), or experienced 
Hispanic population growth of ≥150 percent 
and exceeded the national average percent 
Hispanic in 2000 (12.5 percent) (for counties 
with populations <20,000). 2000s new 
destinations are counties that did not meet 
the requisite Hispanic population growth  
threshold in the 1990s but experienced 
Hispanic population growth of ≥150 percent 
and ≥1,000 Hispanics between 1990 and  
2010 (for counties ≥20,000 residents) or 
experienced Hispanic population growth of 
≥150 percent between 1990 and 2010  
and exceeded the national average percent 
Hispanic in 2010 (16.3 percent). All other 
counties were classified as nondestinations. 
This resulted in 329 established destinations 
(representing 66.9 percent of Hispanic adults 
[ages 18-64], 310 1990s destinations 
(representing 11.3 percent of Hispanic 
adults), 571 2000s destinations (representing 
14.7 percent of Hispanic adults), and 1,925 
non-destinations (representing 7.0 percent of 
Hispanic adults). Results were robust to 
various destination definitions. 
 
For more details on data and methods and 
more comprehensive analyses, see: Monnat, 
Shannon M. forthcoming. “The New  
Destination Disadvantage: Disparities in 
Hispanic Health Insurance Rates in 
Metropolitan and Nonmetropolitan New and  
Established Destinations.” Rural Sociology. 
 
References  
1. Lichter, D.T. and D.L. Brown. 2011. 
“Rural America in an Urban Society: 
Changing Spatial and Social 
Boundaries.” Annual Review of 
Sociology 37:565-592.  
2. Lichter, D.T. & K.M. Johnson. 2009. 
“Immigrant Gateways and Hispanic 
Migration to New Destinations.” 
International Migration Review 
43:496-528.  
3. Lichter, D.T., S.R. Sanders, & K.M. 
Johnson. 2015. “Hispanics at the 
Starting Line: Poverty among 
Newborn Infants in Established 
Gateways and New Destinations.” 
Social Forces 94(1):209-235. 
 
Acknowledgments  
Dr. Monnat acknowledges funding from the 
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation New 
Connections grant and support from the 
Population Research Institute at Penn State, 
which receives center core funding from 
NICHD (R24-HD041025). The W-3001 
committee is funded by the Western 
Association of Agricultural Experiment 
Directors (WAAESD). 
 
About the Author  
Shannon Monnat (smmonnat@syr.edu) is the 
Lerner Chair for Public Health Promotion, 
Professor of Sociology, and Co-Director of the 
Policy, Place, and Population Health (P3H) 
Lab in the Maxwell School at Syracuse 
University. 
 
 
counties with acceptable reliability values for 
Hispanic insurance rate, defined as having a 
coefficient of variation (CV) <40 percent (source). 
CVs were calculated in line with the U.S. Census’s 
derived ratios formula (source). All analyses were 
weighted by the inverse of the CV to give less 
weight to less reliable estimates. 


 
10 
 
Suggested Citation: Monnat, Shannon. 2016. “Hispanic Health Insurance Rates Differ between Established and 
New Hispanic Destinations.” Brief #2. Rural Population Research Network. 
 
The Rural Population Research Network is a USDA NIFA supported network of scholars who conduct 
research on the most pressing demographic, economic, social, and environmental challenges faced 
by rural communities in the United States. The project for 2012-2017 is titled ‘W3001: The Great 
Recession, Its Aftermath, and Patterns of Rural and Small Town Demographic Change’. 
https://www.nimss.org/projects/14576.