Blog
For homeless people of color, “it’s a pileup of inequities.”
David Hewitt, director, Hennepin County, Housing Stability
The face of homelessness is disproportionately Black or brown.
- Thirty-seven percent of Minnesota adults experiencing homelessness identified as African American in the most recent triennial (2018) study by Wilder Research, although they comprise only six percent of the state’s adult population.
- American Indian adults were 12% of the homeless population; they comprise one percent of the state’s adult population.
- Hispanics are overrepresented at eight percent of the state’s adult homeless population versus four percent of the total adult population.
- Forty-seven percent of women with children experiencing homelessness identified as African American.
There is general agreement among researchers studying homelessness that this disproportionality is no accident. While the underlying factors of homelessness often include poverty, adverse childhood experiences, or mental illness, this disproportionality appears to be due to a long history of structural racism in the United States.
Researchers at Supporting Partnerships for Anti-Racist Communities (SPAC) identified five key domains influencing homelessness for people of color. It is a useful framework for understanding the disproportionality attributed to structural racism and how Family Promise in Anoka County (FPAC) addresses it.
SPAC identified these five key domains influencing homelessness for people of color.
- Economic Mobility: Lack of economic capital within social networks
- Housing: Unavailability of safe and affordable housing options
- Criminal Justice: Involvement in the criminal justice system
- Behavioral Health: Traumatic stress, mental health issues, or substance abuse
- Family Stabilization: Multigenerational involvement in the child welfare and foster care systems and exposure to individual and community level violence
ECONOMIC MOBILITY
White workers in Minnesota have median earnings 1.7 times that of their Black counterparts. The unemployment rate of Minnesota’s Black and Latino workers has been higher than that of the state’s white workers for at least twenty years. In 2020, it was 17% for Blacks, 10% for Latinos, and seven percent for whites.
Black Americans have disproportionately less wealth than the white population--$24,100 versus $188,200 in 2019. Even white families living near the poverty line have about $18,000 in accumulated wealth compared to near zero wealth for similar Black families. Redlining in Black communities and restrictive covenants in white communities contribute to the wealth gap and intergenerational poverty because homeownership is one of the most effective ways to build generational wealth.
The lack of wealth provides little to no safety net for an unexpected job loss, car repair, illness or another bump in the road. People who experience homelessness may also have fragile social networks with little economic resources of their own. For example, family members may be willing to offer temporary shelter but may lack financial resources to support extended family’s food, transportation, and other daily needs.
HOUSING
$792 per month for a two-bedroom rental unit, including tenant-paid utilities, is the Metropolitan Council’s definition of “affordable housing” for people making $35,200 annually ($16.92/hour) or 30% of area median income (AMI). For those earning $58,650 annually, or 50% of AMI, the monthly rent of $1,320 is considered affordable. In April 2022, the median rent for a two-bedroom apartment in the Twin Cities was $1,355, making it unaffordable for families earning less than $58,650. At the lower end of the affordability scale, a family working full-time at $16.92 per hour could not afford even the median rent of $1,075 for a one-bedroom apartment.
In April 2022, only three percent of rental vacancies in the metropolitan Twin Cities were affordable for families earning 30% of AMI. Sixteen percent of rental vacancies were affordable for families earning 50% of AMI.
Once housed, stability may be fragile and easily interrupted by a financial setback, family dynamics (separation from partner or domestic violence), unsafe housing, eviction, foreclosure, incarceration, or neighborhood violence.  
CRIMINAL JUSTICE
involvement in the criminal justice system is a substantial barrier to employment and stable housing. Over 50% of Minnesota adults experiencing homelessness have been incarcerated. Nationwide, Black men comprise about 13% of the male population but about 35% of those incarcerated. One in 18 Black women born in 2001 is likely to be incarcerated during her lifetime compared to one in 111 white women.  
Having any criminal record, even without incarceration, is an obstacle to housing stability. And it affects Black Minnesotans disproportionately. Thirty-five percent of whites with a misdemeanor arrest record received callback interviews compared to only 24% of Blacks with a similar record according to an analysis by the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis completed in 2020.
BEHAVIORAL HEALTH
Eighty-one percent of Minnesota adults experiencing homelessness have a chronic health condition, serious mental illness, or substance abuse disorder. While the rate of mental illness does not vary significantly by race, Black Americans have more difficulty accessing treatment—by one measure, the percentage of Blacks receiving mental health services is half that of the white population. This may be attributed in part to the lower rate of health insurance for Black people and a lack of culturally relevant services.
FAMILY STABILIZATION
Trauma within the family is a weighty predictor of homelessness. Seventy-three percent of Minnesota’s adult homeless population report at least one adverse childhood experience (ACE). The most common ACEs reported are parent or guardian’s substance abuse, witnessing the abuse of a family member, parent or guardian with mental health issues, and physical abuse or mistreatment. Domestic violence contributes not only to behavioral health issues within the family, but often leads directly to homelessness. Nationwide, it is estimated that more than 80% of women with children who experience homelessness are victims of domestic violence.
| FAMILY PROMISE IN ANOKA COUNTY ADDRESSES KEY DOMAINS INFLUENCING HOMELESSNESS FOR PEOPLE OF COLOR |  |  | 
| Issue | FPAC Program/Service | FPAC Partner | 
| ECONOMIC MOBILITY |  | Participating congregations Donations Anoka County Human Services Anoka-Hennepin Schools: Homeless Outreach, Prevention and Education Exodus Lending Cars for Neighbors Minnesota Assistance Council for Veterans Lutheran Social Services Financial Counseling The Salvation Army Anoka County food shelves Anoka County Community Action Program Anoka County Traveler Transit Link | 
| HOUSING |  | Participating congregations Donations Anoka County Housing Specialist Minnesota Assistance Council for Veterans Lutheran Social Services Financial Counseling My Very Own Bed The Salvation Army Bridgelink Bridging Private landlords and property managers | 
| CRIMINAL JUSTICE |  | MARS HousingLink Beyond Backgrounds | 
| BEHAVIORAL HEALTH |  | Participating congregations Donations Anoka County Human Services | 
| FAMILY STABILIZATION |  | Anoka County Human Services Anoka-Hennepin Schools Early Childhood Family Education MARS Anoka County Parenting Support Outreach Program Anoka County Partnership for Family Success Program. Minnesota Department of Health housing navigators Minnesota Department of Human Services, Housing Stability Services | 
Learn more:
‘A Pileup of Inequities’: Why People of Color Are Hit Hardest by Homelessness. The PEW Charitable Trusts. March 29, 2019
Homelessness and Racial Disparities. National Alliance to End Homelessness. October 2020
Homeless in Minnesota, Detailed Findings from the 2018 Minnesota Homeless Study. Wilder Research. March 2020
Phase One Study Findings. Supporting Partnerships for Anti-Racist Communities. March 2019
People of Color Face Systemic Disparities in Minnesota’s Labor Market. Federal Reserve Bank of Minnesota. November 13, 2020