21
Addressing Traditional Credit 
Scores as a Barrier to Accessing 
Affordable Credit
By Ying Lei Toh
Ying Lei Toh is an economist at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. This article 
is on the bank’s website at www.KansasCityFed.org
This article was revised in October 2024 to correct calculations in Table 1 and Chart 2.
A
ccess to affordable credit is vital to consumers’ economic well-
being and to inclusive economic growth. Affordable credit 
 enables consumers to better manage their finances and cope 
with unexpected emergencies. Further, affordable credit may em­
power consumers to pursue opportunities such as entrepreneurship or 
higher education, which can build wealth and increase socioeconomic 
mobility. However, many consumers continue to face difficulties ob­
taining the credit they need. According to the 2019 Survey of Con­
sumer Finances (SCF), about one-quarter of consumers who desired 
credit reported that they did not obtain any credit or as much credit 
as they requested. 
A major impediment to obtaining affordable credit is lenders’ reli­
ance on traditional credit scores—specifically, the FICO score and Van­
tageScore—to assess consumers’ creditworthiness. These credit scores 
affect not only loan approval decisions but also the interest rates con­
sumers pay on their loans. And while these credit scores are intended 
to help lenders make informed decisions about consumers’ risk of de­
fault, they do not always accurately reflect a borrower’s ability to repay. 
For instance, traditional credit scores persistently penalize borrowers 
who have experienced derogatory credit events such as delinquencies, 
even when those events are no longer indicative of their ability to pay. 


22	
FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF KANSAS CITY
Traditional credit scores may also disproportionately punish consum­
ers from economically disadvantaged groups, who tend to experience 
greater difficulties obtaining their first line of credit as both account 
age and length of payment history are major factors in the scores. Bet­
ter understanding the obstacles these scores pose to consumer credit 
access—as well as potential ways to address them—is thus of critical 
importance to both efficient credit allocation and economic mobility. 
In this article, I examine the barrier traditional credit scores pose 
to obtaining affordable credit in the United States and discuss efforts 
to address this barrier. Using data from the 2019 SCF, I find that tra­
ditional credit scores may indeed hinder a sizeable share of consum­
ers from obtaining the credit they desire. Further, disparities in credit 
access across several sociodemographic groups match the disparities 
in their likelihood of having high traditional credit scores, suggesting 
lenders’ reliance on traditional credit scores may drive disparities in 
credit access. Although using alternative data or more sophisticated 
statistical techniques in credit scoring and underwriting could allevi­
ate these disparities, clearer regulatory guidance and more research will 
likely be necessary to promote the development and adoption of alter­
native credit-scoring models. 
Section I reviews how traditional credit scores affect credit access in 
the United States. Section II examines disparities in credit scores across 
several sociodemographic groups and discusses their implications. Sec­
tion III discusses efforts to address the barrier that traditional credit 
scores pose to credit access. 
I.	
Traditional Credit Scores and Access to Credit
Mainstream lenders (banks and credit unions) have traditionally 
been the main source of affordable credit—often defined as a loan with 
an annual interest rate below 36 percent—for consumers (Saunders 
2021). To assess the creditworthiness (or risk of default) of potential 
borrowers, these lenders have typically relied on credit scores. In theory, 
credit scores provide lenders with a standardized metric for evaluating 
consumers’ credit risks objectively, consistently, and cheaply, helping 
to increase the overall availability of credit and the efficiency of credit 
allocation in consumer credit markets (Board of Governors of the Fed­
eral Reserve System 2007). Lenders deem consumers with lower credit 


ECONOMIC REVIEW • THIRD QUARTER 2023	
23
Box 
FICO Score and VantageScore
To obtain a FICO score or VantageScore, consumers need sufficient 
credit history. Consumers must have opened at least one credit account 
to be eligible for a VantageScore and must have at least one account that 
has been open for six months or longer to be eligible for a FICO score. If 
a consumer meets these requirements, their score is calculated based on 
data from their credit bureau files. The chart below shows the categories 
of data and their relative weighting in FICO Score 8 and VantageScore 
3.0, the most commonly used versions of the two scores.
Factors that Determine a Consumer’s Credit Score
Sources: FICO and VantageScore.
Payment history. A consumer’s payment history is the most influential 
factor in determining both their FICO Score 8 (35 percent) and Van­
tageScore 3.0 (40 percent). A good (and long) track record of on-time 
payments is critical for a high credit score. 
Amount owed. A lower level of credit usage—as measured by factors such 
as total balance, number and type of accounts with balances, unused or 
available credit, and credit utilization (specifically, the balance-to-credit-
limit ratio)—increases a consumer’s credit score. 
Age of credit accounts and credit mix. Older accounts and a greater diver­
sity of account types increase a consumer’s credit score. 
Recent credit. Fewer recent credit accounts and applications are associ­
ated with higher credit scores. 
Both the FICO score and VantageScore range from 300 to 850. A 
FICO score or VantageScore above 660 is considered “prime,” while a FICO 
score below 620 or a VantageScore below 600 is considered “subprime.” 
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
FICO Score 8
Vantage Score
3.0
Payment history
Payment history
Amount owed (utilization rate, 
balances, and so on) 
Age of accounts
Credit 
mix
Recent 
credit
Utilization rate
Balances
Available credit
Age of accounts and 
credit mix
Recent credit
Percent


24	
FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF KANSAS CITY
Table 1
Reasons Borrowers Were Denied or Granted Less Credit Than 
Requested in Their Most Recent Loan Application 
Reasons provided by lender
Percent
Lack of credit history / credit references
9.5
Credit bureau reports / credit ratings
36.4
Other credit records 
8.2
Too much debt
21.6
Income / assets / other financial characteristics
10.0
No reason given / bank policy
6.3
Notes: Table is constructed by grouping similar reasons contained in variable X7585 of the 2019 SCF. “Lack of 
credit history / credit references” corresponds to reason codes 62 and 67; “credit bureau reports / credit ratings” 
corresponds to reason 63; “other credit records” corresponds to reason code 64; “too much debt” corresponds to 
reason code 66, “income / assets / other financial characteristics” corresponds to reason codes 65, 71, 72, 73, 76, 
and 79; “no reason given / bank policy” corresponds to reason code −1. 
Sources: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and author’s calculations.
Table 2
Average Annual Percentage Rates (APRs) for Consumer Loans 
by FICO Score 
FICO score
General-purpose credit card
(percent)
Personal loan
(percent)
30-year fixed rate mortgage
(percent)
Used car loan
(percent)
760 and above
17.5
10.73–12.50
5.99
3.68
720
6.21
690
21.0
13.50–15.50
6.39
5.53
630
22.6
17.80–19.90
7.58
10.33
580
23.3
28.50–32.00
‒
16.85
Below 580
23.9
‒
20.43
Notes: APRs for general-purpose credit cards are based on data from 2020. The personal loan rates are accurate as 
of February 1, 2023. Mortgage rates are calculated based on a loan size of $300,000 and are accurate as of February 
7, 2022. Used car loan rates are accurate as of 2022:Q2.
Sources: Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), Bankrate, myFICO, and Experian.
scores to be less creditworthy and are thus more likely to deny credit to 
these consumers or charge them higher interest rates.1
Traditional credit scores—particularly, the FICO score and Van­
tageScore—are derived solely from consumers’ credit history and are the 
type of credit scores lenders most commonly use to evaluate consumers’ 
creditworthiness today.2  See the Box for an overview of these two scores, 
including the minimum requirements for obtaining them. 
Data suggest that lenders rely heavily on traditional credit scores 
to determine whether and at what price consumers can obtain credit. 


ECONOMIC REVIEW • THIRD QUARTER 2023	
25
Table 1 shows that according to the 2019 SCF, which is conducted by 
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, almost half of 
consumers who applied but failed to obtain the credit they desired were 
unsuccessful because of reasons related to their credit bureau records 
(35.9 percent) or lack thereof (9.4 percent). Moreover, Table 2 shows 
that consumers with lower FICO scores face higher rates when obtain­
ing various types of consumer loans. For example, a consumer with a 
FICO score under 580 faces a nearly 17 percentage point higher aver­
age rate for a used car loan than a consumer with a FICO score of 720 
or above. 
II.	 Implications of Relying on Traditional Credit Scores 
to Determine Access and Cost of Credit
Lenders’ heavy reliance on traditional credit scores for credit un­
derwriting may prevent some consumers from obtaining affordable 
credit—or discourage them from applying in the first place. Accord­
ing to the 2019 SCF, 9.3 percent of consumers age 18 and above were 
either denied credit or granted less credit than they requested—and 
about 45.3 percent of these consumers report being denied or granted 
less credit than requested because of their credit score.3 Additionally, 
7.4 percent of consumers report that they did not apply for credit either 
because the interest rates were too high or because they did not think 
they would be approved; both reasons may be related to the lack of a 
high traditional credit score. In all, up to 11.6 percent of consumers 
(9.3 × 0.453 + 7.4) may have credit needs that were unmet or undermet 
due to no or low credit scores. 
From both a lending and consumer protection perspective, denying 
some consumers credit may be desirable to the extent that it prevents 
them from overborrowing; however, a low or nonexistent credit score 
may not always reflect a lack of creditworthiness. Instead, it may reflect 
that a consumer is new to the credit market or that they had a disadvan­
tageous start to their credit history—for example, by not having access 
to a co-borrower or by having their credit histories established as a result 
of a third-party debt collection. Evidence suggests these reasons are espe­
cially relevant for younger consumers, low- and moderate-income (LMI) 
consumers, and Black or Hispanic consumers—placing populations that 


26	
FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF KANSAS CITY
may especially benefit from access to affordable credit at a particular dis­
advantage in obtaining it.
Consumers new to the credit market
 Consumers who lack credit scores are often those who are new to 
the credit market, such as young adults. These consumers’ creditwor­
thiness cannot be observed through traditional credit-scoring methods 
because they have no or insufficient credit history to generate a credit 
score.4 Moreover, even after becoming scorable, these consumers have 
lower credit scores on average because they tend to have younger ac­
counts, shorter payment histories, higher credit utilization rates (due to 
lower credit limits), and a larger number of recent account applications. 
Thus, lending decisions based solely on traditional credit scores may 
inefficiently deny credit for consumers new to the credit market.
 Indeed, young adults appear to be at a particular disadvantage for 
this reason. Brevoort, Grimm, and Kambara (2015) estimate that in De­
cember 2010, 35.5 percent of consumers between the ages of 20 and 24 
had no or insufficient credit history to be scorable compared with 19.3 
percent of the overall population. Moreover, Chart 1 shows that when 
younger consumers are scorable, they have lower credit scores on average.
Consumers with a disadvantageous start to their credit history
Traditional credit-scoring models also tend to persistently assign 
lower scores to consumers with less advantageous starts to their credit 
history, even when the disadvantages they faced did not or no longer 
reflect their true creditworthiness (Bach and others 2023).5 Consum­
ers typically establish their credit history by obtaining their first line of 
credit. Although most consumers do so alone, some leverage the credit­
worthiness of others—for example, by having a co-borrower with good 
credit history or by becoming an authorized user on someone else’s (of­
ten a parent’s) credit line. The latter approach is more advantageous 
because it not only increases the likelihood of approval but may also 
help consumers boost their credit scores by acquiring the credit history 
of the established borrower (Bach and others 2023).6 However, many 
consumers are unable to obtain credit this way. For example, Brevoort 
and Kambara (2017) find that individuals from LMI neighborhoods 
are less likely to leverage the creditworthiness of others in applications 
than individuals from higher-income neighborhoods.


ECONOMIC REVIEW • THIRD QUARTER 2023	
27
Chart 1
Younger Consumers, Black and Hispanic Consumers, and Con­
sumers Living in Lower-Income Neighborhoods Have Lower 
Credit Scores on Average
600
620
640
660
680
700
720
740
760
780
800
600
620
640
660
680
700
720
740
760
780
800 Average FICO score
Average FICO score
18–24
25–40
41–56
57–75
76+
Low income
Moderate income
Middle income
High income
Black
Hispanic
White
Asian
Note: A neighborhood is classified as “low income” if its median family income is under 50 percent of the area median 
family income, “moderate income” if its median family income is between 50 and 80 percent of the area median 
income, “middle income” if its median family income is between 80 and 120 percent of the area median income, and 
“high income” if its median family income exceeds 120 percent of the area median income. 
Sources: Horymski (2022); Kramer-Mills, Landau, and Scally (2020); and ShiftProcessing.com.
A less common but more disadvantageous way of establishing one’s 
credit history is through bankruptcy or third-party debt collection. 
Credit-scoring models consider these events to be derogatory, mean­
ing consumers who establish their credit scores this way are likely to 
start off with lower credit scores. Further, because records remain on 
consumers’ credit bureau files for seven years, derogatory events may 
continue to weigh on consumers’ credit scores even when they are no 
longer indicative of consumers’ creditworthiness. Again, Brevoort and 
Kambara (2017) find that individuals from LMI neighborhoods are 
more likely to have their credit histories established through these de­
rogatory events than individuals from higher-income neighborhoods.
Given that LMI neighborhoods also tend to have higher shares of 
Black and Hispanic consumers, we may expect Black and Hispanic 
consumers to disproportionately experience disadvantages in establish­
ing their credit history (Goodman and others 2022). Indeed, stud­
ies have found that the share of consumers without a credit score is 
higher among both LMI consumers and Black or Hispanic consumers 


28	
FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF KANSAS CITY
compared with higher-income and white consumers (Brevoort, 
Grimm, and Kambara 2015; Hepinstall and others 2022). Further, 
Chart 1 shows that LMI consumers and Black and Hispanic consum­
ers have lower credit scores compared with higher-income consumers 
and white consumers, on average. 
Moreover, Blattner and Nelson (2021) find that while credit scores 
are generally predictive of default risks, they are less predictive for con­
sumers with “noisier” credit bureau files—that is, those that contain 
fewer records, lack diversity in account types, or include past deroga­
tory events. These factors also tend to lower credit scores, suggesting 
lower credit scores may not always be indicative of lower creditworthi­
ness—especially for consumers who are new to the credit market or 
had less advantageous starts to their credit histories.7 
Indeed, data from the 2019 SCF suggest that disparities in credit 
scores across age, income, and racial and ethnic groups have contrib­
uted to similar disparities in credit access. Chart 2 shows that around 
60 percent of consumers desired credit in the 12 months preceding the 
2019 SCF.8 This share does not vary widely by consumer characteristic, 
except for age—consumers under the age of 35 were 28.7 percent­
age points more likely to desire credit than those 65 years or older. 
In contrast, the share of consumers who desired credit but had credit 
needs that went unmet or undermet—either because they did not ap­
ply (blue bars) or because they applied but were denied or granted less 
credit than requested (green bars)—varied widely across age, income, 
and racial and ethnicity groups. Consumers who were below age 65, 
earned less than $75,000 a year, or were Black or Hispanic were sub­
stantially more likely to have their credit needs unmet or undermet. 
Lower-income consumers and Black or Hispanic consumers were less 
likely to have applied for credit and more likely to be denied condi­
tional on applying compared with consumers earning $75,000 or more 
a year and white consumers. And although consumers under the age of 
65 were not substantially less likely to have applied for credit compared 
with older individuals, they were more than twice as likely to be denied 
credit either partially or fully.


ECONOMIC REVIEW • THIRD QUARTER 2023	
29
Chart 2
Disparities in Credit Access Mirror Disparities in Credit Scores 
across Income, Age, and Race and Ethnicity Groups
Sources: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and author’s calculations.
All
White
Black
Hispanic
Other
Income
Age
Race/ethnicity
Did not apply
Applied but denied / not granted full amount
Applied and obtained full amount
Less than $30,000
$30,000–$49,999
$50,000–$74,999
$75,000 and above
15–34
35–64
65+
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Percent
The data in this section suggest that traditional credit scores pose 
critical barriers to accessing affordable credit. In addition, traditional 
credit scores are less predictive of creditworthiness for consumers with 
lower or no credit scores, implying that some of these consumers may 
be inefficiently denied access to credit or charged higher prices. While 
barriers to access may be transitory for young consumers, they are likely 
to be persistent for lower-income and Black or Hispanic consumers, 
who have lower credit scores on average.9 These consumers would likely 
benefit the most from access to lower-cost credit, as both lower-income 
and Black or Hispanic consumers tend to lack savings that could help 
them cover unexpected emergencies. Access to lower-cost credit could 
help these groups avoid taking on high-cost debt and could enhance 
their economic mobility by allowing them to purchase homes, invest in 
the education of their children, and pursue other economic opportuni­
ties such as entrepreneurship. As such, addressing the barriers that tra­
ditional credit scores pose to credit access may be critical in enhancing 
economic mobility and financial inclusion. 


30	
FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF KANSAS CITY
III.	 Efforts to Address the Barrier of No or Low 
Traditional Credit Scores
Although the barriers to credit access are pervasive for consumers 
with no or low credit scores, federal agencies and lenders have, un­
til recently, done relatively little to address them. Lenders traditionally 
addressed these barriers by offering credit-building products to con­
sumers seeking to establish or improve their traditional credit scores, 
while federal agencies primarily focused on financial education. In more 
recent years, however, lenders (particularly, fintech lenders) and federal 
agencies have begun developing credit-scoring models that leverage 
alternative data sources and exploring the use of more advanced ma­
chine learning techniques in credit scoring. These efforts could expand 
the share of consumers who are scorable and improve the accuracy of 
credit risk prediction (particularly for underserved consumers), thereby 
improving overall access to credit. 
Traditional credit-building products
One way financial institutions have traditionally helped consumers 
with low or no credit scores access low-cost credit is by offering products 
designed to help them build or improve their credit history. Although 
these products are reported to credit bureaus as standard credit prod­
ucts, they do not, in fact, offer consumers additional liquidity. Instead, 
these products require consumers to either secure the credit line with a 
deposit or pre-pay for the loan. This feature minimizes the default risks 
that lenders face, making them more willing to extend these “loans” to 
consumers of unknown or possibly high default risk. By obtaining and 
making timely payments on these products, consumers can establish or 
improve their credit scores. 
Two common types of credit-building products are credit-builder 
loans (CBLs) and secured credit cards. CBLs are reported as installment 
loans to credit bureaus. However, unlike regular installment loans, lend­
ers do not provide borrowers with funds upfront; instead, they require 
borrowers to pre-pay for their loans. Specifically, the loan is disbursed 
to borrowers with each installment payment that they make. For ex­
ample, if a borrower took out a 12-month CBL for $600, which im­
plies a monthly payment of $50 plus interest, the lender would deposit 
$50 into the borrower’s account each time they made their monthly 


ECONOMIC REVIEW • THIRD QUARTER 2023	
31
payment. A secured credit card is an “alternative” credit card that works 
like a regular credit card but requires cardholders to post a security de­
posit (typically, equal to the credit limit) to reduce lenders’ exposure to 
default risk (White 2022).
Research on credit-building products is relatively scant, and previ­
ous studies find that the adoption of these products has mixed effects 
on consumers’ credit scores. Studies on CBLs generally find that tak­
ing out a CBL both increases the probability of having a credit score 
and increases credit scores for those with existing scores who also have 
little to no existing debt. However, studies also find that taking out a 
CBL can actually hurt the credit scores of consumers with a higher 
level of existing debt (see, for example, Burke and others 2022; CFPB 
2020).10 Opening a secured credit card likewise benefits some consum­
ers while hurting others. Santucci (2016) finds that secured cardholders 
who kept their cards open over the course of two years experienced an 
increase of about 24 points in their credit scores. CFPB (2017) suggests 
that secured cardholders who maintain a good payment history may 
even have their cards converted into unsecured credit cards and their 
deposits returned after a period. However, secured credit cardholders 
who closed their accounts within two years—whether their accounts 
were in good standing or otherwise—saw their credit scores decline 
by over 40 points (Santucci 2016). Those whose accounts were in de­
fault at the time of closure experienced an especially sharp drop in their 
credit scores of around 60 points.  
Moreover, although credit-building products can help some con­
sumers obtain and improve their credit scores, they are likely to have 
limited effects on expanding access to lower-cost credit overall. Sur­
veys consistently find that many U.S. consumers—particularly, lower-
income and younger consumers—lack basic knowledge about credit 
scores (see, for example, Capital One 2022, Quinn 2021, and Con­
sumer Federation of America 2020). Thus, consumer awareness of 
credit-building products is likely to be low. Even when consumers are 
aware of these products, they may face barriers obtaining them, includ­
ing insufficient funds to fulfill the deposit requirement of secured credit 
cards, a lack of trust in the lender, and an inability to pass the ability-to-
pay (ATP) test (CFPB 2017; Levy and others 2016).11 


32	
FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF KANSAS CITY
Fintech credit-building products
In recent years, some financial technology (“fintech”) firms have also 
begun offering credit cards that do not require consumers to have a tra­
ditional credit score to apply, providing consumers with an alternative 
product for building credit.12 Instead of relying on security deposits or pre-
payments, these fintech lenders minimize their exposure to default risks by 
only lending to consumers whom they determine to be creditworthy based 
on alternative metrics, such as bank account data.13 To help consumers 
build their credit scores, these credit cards also have features that help main­
tain good payment behaviors. For instance, one fintech credit card does 
not allow consumers to carry a balance and offers a seven-day automatic 
repayment feature, which helps cardholders to make timely payments and 
keep their credit card utilization level low. And another rewards cardholders 
by increasing their credit limit if they make consistent, timely payments.
Outside studies on the effectiveness of these fintech products are 
limited, though data shared by the representatives of one fintech credit 
card provider suggest that these products have helped some consumers 
establish and obtain high credit scores.14 According to this provider, 
consumers who opened a credit card with them without a traditional 
credit score obtained a VantageScore of 681—a prime score—on aver­
age, 12 months after opening the card. In addition, these cards appear 
to help provide credit to consumers who are underserved by mainstream 
lenders. In particular, 40 percent of the consumers this fintech provider 
approved for a card in 2022 had previously been denied credit by a 
mainstream lender. Fintech credit cards are likely to have a small effect 
on expanding credit access to consumers (both directly and indirectly) 
at present, given that these cards are relatively new and many consum­
ers may still not be aware of them.15 That said, these fintech credit cards 
have the potential to reach more consumers than secured credit cards, 
as they are both more accessible and provide real liquidity to cash-flow-
constrained consumers.  
Financial education and credit counseling 
Traditionally, agencies in both the public and private sectors have 
engaged in efforts to improve consumers’ personal finance knowledge, 
including their knowledge about credit scores, borrowing, and debt man­
agement. Many consumers lack a basic understanding of credit scores; 


ECONOMIC REVIEW • THIRD QUARTER 2023	
33
surveys also indicate that many consumers lack financial knowledge 
more generally, including knowledge about borrowing (Contretras and 
Bendix 2021). To improve general financial literacy, many federal agen­
cies have developed dedicated financial education websites that provide 
educational materials and financial management tools to consumers 
(Toh 2022). State and local governments have also worked to promote 
the inclusion of financial education in school curriculums (Contretras 
and Bendix 2021). In addition, various nonprofit organizations, such 
as the National Foundation for Credit Counseling or American Con­
sumer Credit Counseling, offer credit counseling services that can help 
consumers improve their financial knowledge and better manage their 
debts, thereby improving their credit scores (Roll and Moulton 2016).16  
Relatively little is known about the effectiveness of the various public 
sector financial education efforts on financial literacy, and subsequently, 
consumer credit behaviors and credit scores, as these efforts often lack 
measurable goals (GAO 2006). However, research on financial educa­
tion in general suggests that these efforts may have limited effects. Fi­
nancial literacy surveys consistently find that many U.S. consumers lack 
the financial knowledge needed to make sound financial decisions—on 
average, consumers only answer around half of the financial literacy ques­
tions in these surveys correctly (Contretras and Bendix 2021). Moreover, 
depending on the survey, the share of questions that consumers answer 
correctly has either been relatively stagnant or declining over time, sug­
gesting that financial education efforts may not have been effective at 
improving consumers’ financial knowledge.17 Studies on financial educa­
tion generally find little to no effect on consumer financial behaviors, 
implying financial education may not help consumers obtain and im­
prove traditional credit scores (Fernandes, Lynch, and Netemeyer 2014). 
However, some evidence suggests that credit counseling may improve 
consumers’ credit scores. For example, Roll and Moulton (2016) find 
that consumers who underwent credit counseling reduced their debts 
and experienced larger increases in their credit scores compared with 
those who did not undergo credit counseling. 
Promoting the use of alternative data in credit scoring and underwriting
More recently, lenders and federal agencies have turned their ef­
forts to developing and promoting the use of alternative data in credit 


34	
FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF KANSAS CITY
scoring. Because traditional credit scores are generated solely from cred­
it records from the three main credit bureaus, their predictiveness of a 
consumer’s default risk is limited by the availability and quality of the 
consumer’s credit bureau data. As discussed in Section II, traditional 
credit scores may not be as informative about the creditworthiness of 
consumers with no credit history or noisier credit bureau data. More­
over, past credit history may not always be a good predictor of future 
creditworthiness (Di Maggio, Ratnadiwakara, and Carmichael 2022). 
One way to address the limitations of credit bureau data is by using 
alternative data in credit scoring. These alternative data may include 
data on bill payments (for example, rent and utilities), transactions or 
cash flow (for example, bank accounts), and income or assets (for ex­
ample, employment history and property ownership). They may also 
include non-financial data—for example, on social media use or type of 
mobile device (FinRegLab 2020). Studies find that credit-scoring mod­
els that use alternative data (particularly, cash flow data)—either alone 
or as a supplement to traditional credit bureau data—are not only able 
to score more consumers but also perform as well as or better than tra­
ditional credit scores at predicting consumers’ default risks (see, for ex­
ample, Di Maggio, Ratnadiwakara, and Carmichael 2022; FinRegLab 
2020; Turner and others 2006).
Both the public and private sectors have been actively developing 
credit-scoring models that use alternative data in recent years. In 2020, 
the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) launched Project 
REACh (Roundtable for Economic Access and Change) to promote 
financial inclusion by improving access to credit and capital. One objec­
tive of Project REACh is to help develop an alternative credit-scoring 
system that can serve as a safe and fair tool for underwriting.18 Tra­
ditional credit score creators and credit bureaus have been developing 
new scoring models that include alternative data such as bill payment 
data (for example, Experian Boost) and transaction data (for example, 
UltraFICO).19 Additionally, fintech firms Petal Card and Nova Credit 
have developed cash-flow-based credit-scoring models—CashScore and 
Cash Atlas, respectively—that use permissioned transaction data to pre­
dict credit risk. 
Although using alternative data in credit scoring may, in theory, ex­
pand access to low-cost credit, its effects may be limited at present due 


ECONOMIC REVIEW • THIRD QUARTER 2023	
35
to its low adoption by mainstream lenders (FinRegLab 2020). Many 
mainstream lenders may lack the motivation to use alternative data since 
they do not lend to subprime consumers, for whom alternative data is 
more predictive of credit risks. Technology or resource constraints, regu­
latory uncertainty, higher compliance risks associated with the use of 
alternative data, and a lack of data on the performance of underwriting 
models that incorporate alternative data are a few other factors that may 
hinder mainstream lenders from using alternative data in underwriting 
(GAO 2021). 
Recent developments in both the regulatory and market spaces may 
encourage broader adoption of alternative data in credit underwriting, 
though their effects remain to be seen. In recent years, federal financial 
regulators have taken steps to reduce regulatory uncertainty surround­
ing alternative data in credit underwriting. In 2019, for example, federal 
financial regulators issued a joint statement encouraging responsible use 
of alternative data such as cash flow data in credit underwriting (Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and others 2019). And in 
2021, the CFPB modified its definition of “qualified mortgage” under 
the Truth in Lending Act (Regulation Z) to allow for greater use of 
alternative data in mortgage lending. To further incentivize the use of 
alternative data, federal regulators have also stated that they may con­
sider lenders’ use of alternative data in underwriting mortgages for LMI 
consumers to be an innovation, potentially helping lenders to meet 
Community Reinvestment Act goals (GAO 2021).20 More off-the-shelf 
credit-scoring models that incorporate alternative data have also become 
available in the market in recent years; their availability may facilitate 
mainstream lenders’ use of alternative data in credit underwriting by 
addressing challenges in obtaining and integrating alternative data into 
their in-house underwriting models. 
Exploring the use of machine learning in credit underwriting
In recent years, lenders, researchers, and regulators have also been 
exploring the use of advanced machine learning models in credit under­
writing. These models use sophisticated algorithms that can help un­
cover complex relationships between numerous data points, enabling 
lenders to leverage massive amounts of alternative consumer data to im­
prove credit risk prediction and access (FinRegLab 2022). Indeed, stud­
ies have found that the credit-scoring models of some fintech firms that 


36	
FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF KANSAS CITY
leverage both machine learning and alternative data result in higher 
rates of credit approvals or lower interest rates for underserved consum­
ers compared with models using traditional credit scores (Di Maggio, 
Ratnadiwakara, and Carmichael 2022; Jagtiani and Lemieux 2019).
Even when using only traditional credit data, most studies agree 
that sophisticated machine learning models generally outperform lo­
gistic models (which are commonly used for credit risk assessments) 
in predicting default risks of borrowers; however, studies differ on 
whether these improved predictions benefit underserved consumers. 
Some studies find that machine learning can help score a larger num­
ber of consumers even when using only traditional credit data, which 
may improve credit access among consumers who are not scoreable 
with the traditional credit-scoring model (Albanesi and Vamossy 2019; 
VantageScore 2021). However, other studies find that machine learn­
ing may have little to no benefit for populations that tend to have 
lower traditional credit scores, as it does not eliminate—and may even 
worsen—disparities in the accuracy of default risk predictions for con­
sumers who are underserved relative to those who are not (Blattner and 
Nelson 2021; Mersault and others 2021; Wang and Perkins 2019). For 
example, Fuster and others (2022) find that the use of machine learn­
ing marginally improves loan approval rates for Black and Hispanic 
consumers but substantially increases the range of interest rates these 
consumers face, which may make them worse off overall. MacCarthy 
(2019) and Klein (2020) have also warned of machine learning’s poten­
tial to perpetuate or worsen existing disparities in credit access or en­
able discrimination by proxy. More research is needed to examine the 
implications of using machine learning methods in credit underwriting 
on credit access for underserved populations and to inform regulation, 
particularly as the technology continues to evolve. 
Conclusion 
The lack of a high traditional credit score is a barrier to accessing 
affordable credit for many consumers in the United States. A lower 
ability to obtain affordable credit as needed may adversely affect con­
sumers’ financial well-being and impede economic mobility, particu­
larly among economically disadvantaged consumers. In this article, I 
discuss the barrier traditional credit scores pose to credit access and 


ECONOMIC REVIEW • THIRD QUARTER 2023	
37
highlight that traditional credit scores not only hinder many consumers 
from obtaining credit, they may also drive disparities in credit access 
across socioeconomic groups. I then review both public- and private-
sector efforts to address this barrier. Earlier efforts largely focused on 
helping consumers establish or increase their traditional credit scores 
(for instance, by providing consumers with credit-building products, 
financial education, and credit counseling), while more recent efforts 
have concentrated on developing credit-scoring models that can better 
predict default risks by leveraging alternative data and more advanced 
machine learning techniques.
Although these efforts may improve consumers’ access to afford­
able credit, they are currently limited by low adoption rates. Consumer 
adoption of credit-building products has thus far been low due to both 
a lack of data and lack of awareness. Once more data on the effica­
cy of credit-building products are available, more consumer outreach 
and promotion efforts may be needed to boost adoption of the best-
performing products. Lenders’ adoption of alternative credit-scoring 
models, too, may be limited due to regulatory uncertainty, resource 
constraints, and inadequate data and research demonstrating their ef­
fectiveness. More research—especially on the use of machine learning 
methods for credit scoring—is needed to help establish the benefits and 
risks of alternative credit-scoring models.
Moreover, credit-building products and alternative credit-scoring 
models mostly serve to improve the accuracy of credit scores in pre­
dicting consumers’ underlying creditworthiness (or default risks) and 
do not address consumers’ lack of creditworthiness itself (except for 
credit counseling). These measures will only improve consumers’ access 
to credit to the extent that their repayment behavior and the alternative 
data on consumers reflect low default risks. Measures to address con­
sumers’ lack of creditworthiness will likely be necessary to ensure that 
all consumers are able to access the credit they need. 


38	
FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF KANSAS CITY
Endnotes
1Lenders may be especially reluctant to lend to subprime borrowers, as sub­
prime lending subjects lenders to stricter lending standards and thus to higher com­
pliance costs and risks. Examples of regulations that impose stricter requirements on 
subprime lending include the Credit Card Accountability and Disclosure (CARD) 
Act of 2009 and the Dodd-Frank Act of 2010. Studies have found that the CARD 
Act and Dodd-Frank Act led, respectively, to a decline in subprime credit card lend­
ing and a decline in mortgage lending in the mainstream credit markets (Elliehausen 
and Hannon 2017; Kramer-Mills, Landau, and Scally 2020).
2The FICO score was created in 1989 by FICO, while VantageScore was 
jointly created in 2006 by the three main credit bureaus—Equifax, Experian, and 
Transunion. Of the two scores, the FICO score is used more widely; according to 
FICO, over 90 percent of top lenders use the FICO score in credit underwriting.
3I assume the first two groups of reasons listed in Table 1 to be credit-score 
related. 
4A consumer may also be unscorable if they have stale credit records, with no 
recent credit activities.  
5Bach, Campa, and Giorgi (2023) find that consumers’ initial credit scores 
are highly persistent and underpin the evolution of their credit scores. Higher ini­
tial credit scores tend to lead to better credit access, higher credit limits, and lower 
utilization rates, which result in high credit scores.
6In contrast, those who apply for credit alone may face a Catch-22 situation, 
in which they are unable to obtain a loan because they do not have a credit score 
and are unable to obtain a credit score because they are unable to get their first 
line of credit. Although most of these consumers eventually become scorable, they 
may take longer to obtain a credit score and have lower credit scores when they 
do, both because their accounts are younger and their credit utilization rates are 
higher (due to lower credit limits). 
7Traditional credit scores may either under- or over-predict default risks for 
consumers with noisier credit files, leading to inefficient approval or rejection of 
credit applications, respectively. Blattner and Nelson (2021) find inefficient rejec­
tions (that is, rejections of consumers who are creditworthy) are more common 
among LMI and minority consumers. 
8I consider any consumers who did not apply for credit for reasons other than 
not needing additional credit or preferring not to use credit as having a desire for 
credit. 
9Race or ethnicity is time-invariant, and income mobility in the United States 
is limited, especially over the short term (Congressional Research Service 2021).
10Although each principal payment that a CBL borrower makes is returned 
to them in the form of a bank deposit they can withdraw almost immediately, 
taking out a CBL appears to worsen their ability to manage their other existing 


ECONOMIC REVIEW • THIRD QUARTER 2023	
39
debt obligations. Burke and others (2022) find that borrowers who had a high 
level of existing debt (in the form of other installment loans) experienced higher 
non-CBL delinquencies when taking out CBLs. 
11Although consumers effectively pre-pay for their loans through the security 
deposit they post when obtaining a secured credit card, secured credit card lenders 
are still required to perform the ATP test as stipulated by the CARD Act of 2019. 
CFPB (2017) finds that about 12 percent of secured card applicants were denied 
because they did not pass the ATP test.
12Examples of such fintech firms include Petal and TomoCredit.
13By not requiring consumers to post a security deposit, these fintech credit 
cards are likely to be more accessible to consumers with cash flow constraints than 
secured credit cards. 
14I am thankful to Petal’s CEO, Jason Rosen, and Petal’s vice president of 
communications, Matt Graves, for sharing this information with me.
15As of February 2023, Petal had over 350,000 cardholders. No data on the 
number of Tomo cardholders are available, though TomoCredit’s CEO disclosed 
in 2022 that they have received over 2.5 million applications over time (Azevodo 
2022).
16Some employers have also recognized the importance of employees’ finan­
cial well-being on their engagement and productivity and have introduced or 
expanded their employee financial wellness programs, providing services such as 
financial counseling (CFPB 2014).
17The share of questions that consumers answered correctly, on average, in 
the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority Investor Education Foundation’s 
National Financial Capability Study fell from 59.8 percent in 2009 to 51.6 per­
cent in 2021. The share of questions that consumers answered correctly for the 
TIAA Institute-GFLEC Personal Finance Index has fluctuated at around 50 per­
cent from 2017 to 2022 (Urban and Valdes 2022; Yakoboski, Lusardi, and Hasler 
2022). 
18Project REACh’s alternative credit assessment workstream has so far col­
laborated with financial institutions to explore integrating permissioned deposit 
account data, shared across participating financial institutions, with traditional 
credit bureau data to assess consumer’s creditworthiness. The workstream also 
plans to further explore the use of other permissioned alternative data, particu­
larly for consumers without a deposit account for credit scoring (OCC 2023).
19Due in part to additional compliance requirements and data accuracy is­
sues, these products are available to consumers only on an opt-in basis. As of 
January 2022, nearly 9 million consumers have signed up for Experian Boost 
(Boundy 2022).
20The 2021 GAO report provides other examples of initiatives and efforts to 
expand the use of alternative data in mortgage lending, including incorporating 
rental payment data into Fannie Mae’s underwriting model.


40	
FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF KANSAS CITY
References
Albanesi, Stefania, and Domonkos F. Vamossy. 2019. “Predicting Consumer De­
fault: A Deep Learning Approach.” National Bureau of Economic Research, 
working paper no. w26165, August. Available at https://doi.org/10.3386/
w26165
Bach, Helena, Pietro Campa, Giacomo De Giorgi, Jaromir Nosal, and Davide 
Pietrobon. 2023. “Born to Be (Sub)Prime: An Exploratory Analysis.” AEA 
Papers and Proceedings,  vol. 113, pp. 166–171. Available at https://doi.
org/10.1257/pandp.20231096
Blattner, Laura, and Scott Nelson. 2021. "How Costly Is Noise? Data and Dis­
parities in Consumer Credit." Cornell University, arXiv, May 17. Available at 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2105.07554
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2007. “Report to the Con­
gress on Credit Scoring and Its Effects on the Availability and Affordability 
of Credit.” Submitted to Congress pursuant to section 215 of the Fair and 
Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003, August.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Consumer Financial Pro­
tection Bureau (CFPB), Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National 
Credit Union Administration, and Office of the Comptroller of the Cur­
rency. 2019. “Interagency Statement on the Use of Alternative Data in Credit 
Underwriting.” Press release. December 3.
Boundy, Craig. 2022. “Experian Go: The Next Step in Our Commitment to Con­
sumers.” Experian Global News Blog, January 26. 
Brevoort, Kenneth P., and Michelle Kambara. 2017. “CFPB Data Point: Becom­
ing Credit Visible.” Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, June. 
Burke, Jeremy, Julian Jamison, Dean Karlan, Kata Mihaly, and Jonathan Zinman. 
2022. “Credit Building or Credit Crumbling? A Credit Builder Loan’s Effects 
on Consumer Behavior and Market Efficiency in the United States.” Review 
of Financial Studies, vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 1585–1620. Available at https://doi.
org/10.1093/rfs/hhac060
Capital One. 2022. “Americans Top Misconceptions about Credit Scores.” Capi­
tal One Insights Center, December 14. 
CFPB (Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.) 2020. “Targeting Credit Builder 
Loans: Insights from a Credit Builder Loan Evaluation.” Committee on Fi­
nancial Services of the U.S. House of Representatives, “Diversity and Inclu­
sion: Holding America’s Large Banks Accountable,” 116th Congress, Second 
Session, February. 
———. 2017. “The Consumer Credit Card Market,” December.
———. 2014. “Financial Wellness at Work: A Review of Promising Practices and 
Policies,” August.
Consumer Federation of America. 2020. “Annual Survey Reveals That Low-In­
come Consumers Are Most Likely to Seek Credit Yet Know the Least about 
Credit Scores: Dissemination of CreditScoreQuiz.org Will Prioritize This 
Population.” Press release, July 20.
Contretras, Oscar, and Joseph Bendix. 2021. “Financial Literacy in the United 
States.” Milken Institute, August 17.


ECONOMIC REVIEW • THIRD QUARTER 2023	
41
Di Maggio, Marco, Dimuthu Ratnadiwakara, and Don Carmichael. 2022. “In­
visible Primes: Fintech Lending with Alternative Data.” National Bureau of 
Economic Research, working paper no. 29840, March. Available at https://
doi.org/10.3386/w29840 
Elliehausen, Gregory E., and Simona M. Hannon. 2017. “The Credit Card Act 
and Consumer Finance Company Lending.” Board of Governors of the Fed­
eral Reserve System, Financial and Economics Discussion Series, no. 2017-
072, June.
Fernandes, Daniel, John G. Lynch, Jr., and Richard G. Netemeyer. 2014. “Fi­
nancial Literacy, Financial Education, and Downstream Financial Behaviors.” 
Management Science, vol. 60, no. 8, pp. 1861–1883.
FinRegLab. 2022. “Machine Learning Explainability and Fairness: Insights from 
Consumer Lending.”
———. 2020. “The Use of Cash-Flow Data in Underwriting Credit: Market 
Context & Policy Analysis.” 
Fuster, Andreas, Paul Goldsmith‐Pinkham, Tarun Ramadorai, and Ansgar Wal­
ther. 2022. “Predictably Unequal? The Effects of Machine Learning on Credit 
Markets.” Journal of Finance, vol. 77, no. 1, pp. 5–47. Available at https://doi.
org/10.1111/jofi.13090
GAO (Government Accountability Office). 2021. “Mortgage Lending: Use of 
Alternative Data is Limited but Has Potential Benefits.” Report to Congres­
sional Requesters, no. GAO-22-104380, November.
———. 2006. “Financial Literacy and Education Commission: Further Progress 
Needed to Ensure an Effective National Strategy.” Report to Congressional 
Committees, no. GAO-07-100, December.
Hepinstall, Mike, Chaitra Chandrasekhar, Peter Carroll, Nick Dykstra, and Yigit 
Ulucay. 2022. “Financial Inclusion and Access to Credit.” Oliver Wyman.
Horymski, Chris. 2022. “What Is the Average Credit Score in the U.S.?” Ex­
perian, February 22. 
Jagtiani, Julapa, and Catharine Lemieux. 2019. “The Roles of Alternative Data 
and Machine Learning in Fintech Lending: Evidence from LendingClub 
Consumer Platform.” Financial Management, vol. 48, no. 4, pp. 1009–1029. 
Available at https://doi.org/10.1111/fima.12295
Klein, Aaron. 2020. “Reducing Bias in AI-Based Financial Services.” Brookings 
Center for Technology Innovation, July 10.
Kramer-Mills, Claire, Rebecca Landau, and Joelle Scally. 2020. “The State of Low-
Income America: Credit Access and Debt Payment.” Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York, November.
MacCarthy, Mark. 2019. “Fairness in Algorithmic Decision-Making.” Brookings 
Institution’s Artificial Intelligence and Emerging Technology Initiative, De­
cember 6.
Mersault, Vitaly, Daniel Moulton, Larry Santucci, and Nathan Schor. 2021. “One 
Threshold Doesn’t Fit All: Tailoring Machine Learning Predictions of Con­
sumer Default for Lower-Income Areas.” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadel­
phia, Research Department Working Paper no. 22-39. Available at: https://
doi.org/10.21799/frbp.wp.2022.39
OCC (Office of the Comptroller of the Currency). 2023. “Alternative Credit As­
sessment Workstream.” OCC. 


42	
FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF KANSAS CITY
Quinn, Tom. 2021. “How Much Do People Know About Credit Scores?” Credit 
News & Current Events, myFICO, April 29. 
Roll, Stephen, and Stephanie Moulton. 2016. “The Impact of Credit Counsel­
ing on Consumer Outcomes: Evidence from a National Demonstration Pro­
gram.” Working paper. 
Santucci, Larry. 2016. “The Secured Credit Card Market.” Federal Reserve Bank 
of Philadelphia, Payment Cards Center Discussion Paper no. 16-3. Available 
at https://doi.org/10.21799/frbp.dp.2016.nov
Saunders, Lauren. 2021. “Why Cap Interest Rates at 36%?” National Consumer 
Law Center, Issue Brief, August 4. 
Toh, Ying Lei. 2022. “Promoting Payment Inclusion in the United States.” Feder­
al Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Payments System Research Briefing, October 7. 
Turner, Michael A., Alyssa S. Lee, Ann Schnare, Robin Varghese, and Patrick D. 
Walker. 2006. “Give Credit Where Credit Is Due: Increasing Access to Af­
fordable Mainstream Credit Using Alternative Data.” Brookings Institution 
Urban Markets Initiative, Political and Economic Research Center.
Urban, Carly, and Olivia Valdes. 2022. “Why Is Measured Financial Literacy De­
clining and What Does It Mean? Maybe We Just ‘Don’t Know.’” Financial 
Industry Regulatory Authority Investor Education Foundation, Insights: Fi­
nancial Capability, August.
VantageScore 2021. “Credit With a Conscience: Driving Financial Inclusion with 
Data and Analytics.” VantageScore. 
Wang, J. Christina, and Charles B. Perkins. 2019. “How Magic a Bullet Is Ma­
chine Learning for Credit Analysis? An Exploration with FinTech Lending 
Data.” Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, working paper no. 19-16. Available 
at https://doi.org/10.29412/res.wp.2019.16
Yakoboski, Paul J., Annamaria Lusardi, and Andrea Hasler. 2022. “How Financial 
Literacy Varies Among U.S. Adults: The 2022 TIAA Institute-GFLEC Per­
sonal Finance Index.”