Factors Affecting Recruitment
 There are various factors that influence recruitment.
  They are as follows:
 Internal factors
 External factors
 Internal factors :
1. Recruitment policy
2. Size of the firm
3. Cost of recruitment
4. HRP
5. Growth and expansion
 1. Recruitment policy:
       The policy of recruitment by the organization,
 whether recruitment is from internal source (from
 own employees) or from external sources also affect
 the recruitment process. Generally, recruiting through
 internal sourcing is preferred in view of cost
 consideration, familiarity and in easily finding the
 most suitable one.
 2. Size of the firm:
        The organizational size is an influencing factor.
 Larger organizations find recruitment less problematic
 than smaller size units.
 3. Cost of recruitment:
   Cost of recruitment has to be considered. Recruiting
 costs are calculated per new hire and recruiters must
 operate within budget. Careful HRP and forethought
 by recruiters can minimise recruitment costs.
 4. HRP:
       In most cases, a company cannot attract
 prospective employees in sufficient numbers with
 required skills overnight. Effective HRP greatly
 facilitates the recruiting efforts.
 5. Growth and expansion:
                 Organisations registering growth and
 expansion will have more recruiting than one which
 finds its fortunes declining.
 External factors:
1.   Labour market conditions
2.   Unemployment rate
3.   Political and legal
4.   Sons of soil
5.   Image
 1 . Labour market conditions:
     Labour market conditions, that is, supply of labour
 is of particular importance in affecting recruitment
 process.
       If the demand for a particular skill is high relative
 to the supply, an extraordinary recruiting effort may be
 needed. For example, the demand for programmers
 and financial analysts is likely to be higher than their
 supply, as opposed to the demand-supply relationship
 for non-technical employees.
 2. Unemployment rate:
  when unemployment rate in a given area is high, the
 company’s recruitment process may be simple. When
 unemployment rate drops, recruiting efforts must be
 increased to find new sources.
 3. Political and legal:
      Reservation of SCs, STs, minorities and OBCs is a
  political decision and Supreme Court also agreed upon
  50 % reservation of seats and jobs.
         There are several labour laws and regulations
  passed by the central and state Governments that
  govern different types of employment.
 4. Sons of soil:
       Preferences to sons of the soil is another political
  factor. Political leaders clamor that preference must be
  given to the people of their respective states in matter
  of employment.
 5. Image :
        Image of the company also matters in attracting
  large number of job seekers. Blue chip companies
  attract large number of applications.
Recruitment process
 Process comprises of 5 stages –
 1. Planning
 2. Strategy development
 3. Searching
 4. Screening
 5. Evaluation and control
 1. Planning:
        Planning involves the translation of likely job
 vacancies and information about the nature of these
 jobs into a set of objectives or targets that specify the -
 1. number of applicants to be contacted and
  2. type of applicants to be contacted.
Number of contacts: Organisations nearly always plan
 and attract more applicants than they will hire. Some
 of them will be uninterested, unqualified or both.
 Organisations calculate yield ratios (yRs) which
 express the relationship of applicant inputs and
 outputs at various decision points.
The Recruiting Yield Pyramid.
  Stages of Recruiting                 Yield Ratio
  process
   New Hires/offers accepted.    20
                                           3:2
  Offers Made                   30
                                           4:3
  Candidates Interviewed        40
                                           5:1
   Candidates Invited           200
                                           10 : 1
   Applicants                   2000
 Type of contacts refers to the type of people to be
 informed about job openings. The type depends on the
 tasks and responsibilities involved and the
 qualifications and experience expected.
 2. Strategy development: Once it is decided how many
    and what type of recruits are required, serious
    consideration needs to be given to –
   (a) Make or buy
   (b) Methods used in recruitment and selection
   © Where to look (geographic location)
   (d) How to look (sources of recruitment)
 3. Searching: Searching involves –
 (a) source activation
 (b) selling
 4. Screening – can be regarded as an integral part of
 recruitment process.
           Screening is done on the basis of
 qualification, knowledge, skills, abilities, interest and
 experience mentioned in job specification.
 5. Evaluation and control :
       Evaluation and control in recruitment is needed as
    considerable cost is involved in the process. This includes -
   a. Salary of the recruiters
   b. Cost of time spent for preparing job analysis,
    advertisement etc.,
   c. Administrative expenses
   d. Cost of outsourcing or overtime while vacancies remain
    unfilled and
   e. Cost incurred in recruiting unsuitable candidates.
Effectiveness of Recruitment
Programme
 Following are the pre-requisites-
 A well defined recruitment policy.
 A proper organizational structure.
 A well-laid down procedure for locating potential job
  seekers.
 A suitable method and technique for tapping these
  candidates.
 Continuous assessment of effectiveness of recruitment
  programme.
 Ethical practice in recruitment policy and procedure.