Issues in Hispanic 
Education: Equity and 
Access  
Dr. Nick Smith 


US Population of Hispanics - 
57.5 million  (51.9 in 2011) 
The Hispanic population of the United 
States as of July 1, 2016, making people 
of Hispanic origin the nation’s largest 
ethnic or racial minority. Hispanics 
constituted 17.8 percent of the nation’s 
total population. (Vintage 2016 population 
estimate) 


Hispanics - A Unidimensional Group? - 
Within this larger group are people from more than 20 Spanish-
speaking nations. The U.S. born Latino population has grown at a very 
fast pace, while the share of foreign-born Latinos in the United States 
is in decline. The U.S. economic downturn, stricter border 
enforcement, dangers associated with unauthorized border crossings, 
and demographic and economic changes have influenced the 
slowdown of foreign-born immigrants to the United States. 
 Generational status is important to consider because third-generation 
students are most likely to have parents who are fluent in English and 
less likely to live in poverty. 
Regardless of their generational status, Latino children are 
disproportionately poor, with one-third living in poverty and two-
thirds living in low-income households. These living conditions are 
commonly characterized by larger household sizes, smaller residential 
units, and more crowded housing when compared to non-Latino 
children. 


Educational Outcomes - 
Latino students in the United States are 
showing far different educational outcomes 
than their white peers and are facing 
inequitable opportunities that lead to 
inequitable lifelong outcomes. This 
educational gap has been long-standing and 
differences in test scores—particularly in 
math, reading, and graduation rates—are 
found at state and national levels.  (Alvarez 
de Davila, S. and Michaels, C., 2016) 


Some Issues - 
At the elementary grade levels (K–5), educational 
inequality results from both; 
 between-school segregation - a disproportionate 
representation of one racial/ethnic group in one 
school or district over another and 
 within-school segregation through tracking that 
limits students’ access to challenging curriculum. 
Latino students are disproportionately more likely 
to attend segregated schools of lower quality and 
more likely to be tracked into less challenging 
classes. 


Some issues (cont) - 
Successful completion of high school is perhaps the single 
most significant educational challenge for Latinos. At 
present, Latino students drop out before completing high 
school at significantly higher rates than any other 
racial/ethnic group in the United States. In the states 
with the largest Latino populations, California and Texas, 
only 55% and 56%, respectively, of Latino students 
graduate from high school. Gaps in high school completion 
rates between Latinos and other groups remain even after 
controlling for the students’ social class background, 
language proficiency, and immigrant status. (ETS White 
Paper, 2012) 


Factors Influencing Achievement Gap - 
English Language Learners – Of 3.7 million ELL 
students in fall 2015, Latino students represented 
77.1 percent of all ELL students and 7.6 percent of 
all public K–12 students (National Center for 
Education Statistics, 2018).  
According to data collected by the U.S. Department 
of Education in 2009, 37 percent of Latino students 
in grade four and 21 percent of students in grade 
eight were English language learners, one of the 
many factors influencing the achievement gap 
between young Latino and white students.  


Gaps: Achievement & Opportunity 
Achievement - describe outcomes, specifically differences in scores on 
state and national achievement tests between various student 
demographic groups. The achievement gap is demonstrated by 
differences in proficiency rates as revealed in math, science and 
reading scores, as well as graduation rates, of children of color and 
other disadvantaged children compared with graduation rates of white 
children. 
Opportunity - disparities in experiences and access to education 
among different populations. Measuring those disparities can be 
difficult. While there are assessments designed to measure student 
performance and identify factors associated with it, these exams are 
not designed to identify or explain the causes of differences in 
students’ performance, causes that include disparities and patterns of 
educational inequities in the United States formed around race, class 
and ethnicity. 


Factors in the Opportunity Gap - 
Economic - More Latino children are living in poverty—6.1 million in 
2010—than children of any other racial or ethnic group. Two-thirds 
(4.1 million) of the 6.1 million Latino children living in poverty in 2010 
were the children of immigrant parents, while the other third (2 
million) were children of parents born in the United States. (Pew 
Hispanic Center) 
Language Barriers - The challenges that children who speak little or no 
English encounter in their early school years are many and are more 
likely to interfere with their school adjustment.  Students who have 
limited English-language skills receive fewer opportunities to learn 
than students who are fully bilingual, or speak only English well. 
Acculturation -  includes facing the new experiences and challenging 
events that require immediate attention, such as to how to navigate 
the school system, communicate with teachers, acquire knowledge 
(absorb what they’re taught), and participate in sports and other 
extra-curricular activities. 


Actions schools can take - 
Language –  
Provide on site interpretation in quick, efficient manner 
advertising availability at entrance to school.  Train personnel in 
use of interpretation services and use in all situations where 
understanding is paramount (discipline, special education, 
interpretation of scores and grades. 
Provide all written materials in simple, direct format.  Websites 
with interpretation embedded. 
Economic –  
Ensure free access to educational opportunities (preschool, field 
trips, after school tutoring, after school enrichment, after school 
sports, etc.) 
Ensure that all students eligible for free or reduced meals receive 
them by removing barriers (help parents complete forms, explain 
needed and accepted documentation, etc.) 


Actions schools can take (cont) - 
Acculturation – (the process of adopting the cultural traits or social 
patterns of another group) 
Awareness - that some Latinos are facing new experiences and 
challenging events that require immediate attention. (how to 
navigate the school system, communicate with teachers, acquire 
knowledge and participate in school culture and other extra-
curricular activities) 
Sensitivity - that Latino students may be learning a new language 
and adjusting to a new culture in addition to experiencing the 
everyday challenges of growing up. 
Understanding – that students may be balancing their cultural 
value, that emphasizes family closeness and loyalty, with 
conflicting values in US society as well as pressure to fulfill family 
obligations that may keep them (girls in particular) from devoting 
time to studying and succeeding in school. 


School Support - 
Cultural Responsiveness – 
Provide training in Culturally Responsive Teaching to all 
teachers and staff involved with instruction.   Note 
possible difference in learning styles and areas of 
interest. 
Provide training in unconscious bias and micro-
aggressions to all staff. 
Encourage continued use of Spanish through dual 
language programs. 
Highlight Latino history and contributions and involve 
Latino role models on an ongoing basis rather than 
simply Latino History Month. 


School Support cont - 
Parent Engagement – 
Empower parents to be more involved through flexible 
meeting times and places. (offer transportation if 
necessary). 
Offer and provide translation services. (Don’t use child) 
Invite and encourage parents to visit their child at 
school 
Educate parents about processes, procedures, and 
rights to obtain support or have concerns heard. 
 


School Support cont - 
Academic – 
Start students in school as early as possible with 
enrichment support to develop a strong vocabulary. 
Encourage students to pursue more challenging 
classes and provide them with support, if 
necessary.  
Teachers plan lessons considering differences in 
history, learning styles, and interests which engage 
Latino students. 
Focus on a growth mindset. (e.g., “you haven’t 
mastered that yet but you have learned …”)  


School Support cont - 
Administrative – 
Provide equitable and adequate funding so all 
schools can provide resources and training for 
teachers. 
Provide professional development in Culturally 
Responsive Teaching (CRT), Unconscious Bias and 
Micro-aggressions, Stress and Trauma, and creating 
a “safe” classroom which is responsive to students’ 
social, emotional, and academic needs. 
Administrators encourage and expect regular 
teacher contact with parents. 


School Support cont - 
Eliminate/ Reduce Barriers – 
Clear communication - Provide all notices to parents in 
“plain language”, simplifying vocabulary and explanations as 
much as possible.  Explain, or eliminate, educational jargon. 
Offer a “pre-meeting” to review with parents the purpose of 
and procedures in the upcoming meeting.   Support parents 
in thinking through and putting into words any questions 
and/ or concerns. 
Make parents aware they can bring an advocate, if they 
desire. 
Brainstorm with parents barriers to involvement such as 
time, place, child care, and transportation.   Offer 
technology options for meeting, if necessary (Facetime, 
Skype, teleconference, etc.