Exploring the Factors Contributing Towards Teacher Workplace Bullying Across the Teaching Ranks: Focus on Selected South African Public Schools 
36 
 
 
 
Exploring the Factors Contributing Towards Teacher Workplace Bullying Across 
the Teaching Ranks: Focus on Selected South African Public Schools 
Michael Moreti Mahome 
Post-Doctoral Fellow, Department of Primary Education, Tshwane University of Technology (TUT), Soshanguve 
North Campus, South Africa  
E-mail: : mahomemike15@gmail.com; MahomeMM@tut.ac.za 
 http://dx.doi.org/10.47814/ijssrr.v7i2.1942        
                                                        
 
 
Abstract  
Teachers are among those professional groups that are at the substantial risk of becoming victims 
of workplace bullying, yet the knowledge base on why they turn upon one another remains scantily 
explored. The present qualitative paper, positioned within an interpretivist paradigm, set out to give 
adequate attention to Teacher Workplace Bullying (TWB) by empirically exploring its contributory 
factors in South African public schools. To attain the aim, convenient and purposive sampling techniques 
were used to identify the 16 participants from whom primary data were collected through separable face-
to-face interviews. Data were analysed through a Qualitative Content Analysis (QCA) process, by means 
of an inductive reasoning. Steered by Johnson’s ecological model of workplace bullying, data revealed 
that greatest number of the participants confirmed various factors triggering bullying across the teaching 
ranks, namely, a lack of mutual respect, and competition for promotional teaching posts was a prominent 
factor in most of the nine researched schools. The findings further signalled the vulnerability of   
temporary and newly appointed teachers in comparison to the long serving staff members, and thus 
present TWB as a territorial phenomenon. In contemplation of preventing TWB, it is recommended that 
principals take the lead in changing the organisational culture from top down, where mutual respect is 
normalised, since a change in behaviour and practice may yield desirable results. Principals and teachers’ 
trade unions should refrain from interfering in the promotion appointments processes as their undue 
influence perpetuates TWB. This paper augments the restricted knowledge base on TWB and hope to 
create alertness to the educational policy-makers, scholars, and practitioners about this disparaging form 
of bullying. 
Keywords: Teacher Workplace Bullying; Teaching Ranks; Interpretivist; Ecological; Public Schools; 
South African 
 
 
 
International Journal of Social  
Science Research and Review 
http://ijssrr.com 
editor@ijssrr.com 
Volume 7, Issue 2 
February, 2024 
Pages: 36-64 


 
 
Exploring the Factors Contributing Towards Teacher Workplace Bullying Across the Teaching Ranks: Focus on Selected South African Public Schools 
37 
 
International Journal of Social  
Science Research and Review 
Volume 7, Issue 2
 
February, 2024
 
Introduction 
The factors contributing towards teacher workplace bullying are multifaceted and complex, and 
the consequences of this type of violence are strikingly dire since they demoralise and paralyse the 
affected teacher. Teachers are among those professional groups that are at the substantial risk of becoming 
victims of workplace bullying (World Health Organisation, WHO, 2019), yet the knowledge base on why 
they turn upon one another remains scantily explored. This is due to vast literature focuses on bullying 
between the learners, (e.g., Longobardi, Badenes-Ribera, Fabris, Martinez, & McMahon, 2018; Espelage, 
Anderman & Brown, 2013; Espelage, Low & De la Rue, 2012). For the same reason, (Jacobs & De Wet, 
2018; Coetzee & Steyn, 2017; McMahon, Reeves, McConnell, Peist, Ruiz and APA, 2017) maintain that 
bullying among teachers has been studied in different settings, but it is still rife globally. The widespread 
may be attributed to the insufficient empirical data that tackle its root causes, hence it is the objective of 
the present paper to address that lacuna. A stance backed by (Bernstein & Batchelor, 2022; Solomon, 
2021; De Wet, 2020; Batchelor, 2019; Jacobs & De Wet, 2018; Mollema, 2018; De Wet & Jacobs, 2013) 
who acknowledged a need for further exploration of bullying among teachers within the South African 
setting.  
Bullying is one of the supreme disparaging forms of behaviour which any teacher can undergo in 
the workplace, but in the past, it was overlooked as a research topic. Yet teachers are emotionally tearing 
down one another, rather than working together for the splendid good. (De Wet & Jacobs, 2013). At this 
stage on the international front, there is considerable research evidence available with regard to bullying 
among teachers (e.g. Prpic, 2021; Sitoyi, 2020;  Ariza-Montes, Muniz, Leal-Rodriguez, & Leal-Millan 
2016; Sorrell, 2015; Talentino, 2016; Sinha & Yadav, 2017; Fahie, 2014; Malahy, 2015; Mazzarella, 2018; 
Kleinheksel, 2018), but very few pay attention to the factors contributing towards TWB, (e.g. Scheeler, 
Markelz, Taylor, Deshpande, & Wolfe, 2022; Čech, Kvintova, & Cakirpaloglu, 2018; Orange; 2018; 
Čech, Cakirpaloglu & Kvintova, 2017; Sasson and Somech, 2014).  
With specific reference to South Africa and the teaching profession, studies have indicated that 
SA teachers are three times more likely to experience workplace bullying than their peers in other parts of 
the world, (Solomon, 2021; Jacobs & De Wet, 2018; Mollema, 2018; De wet & Jacobs, 2013). This 
assertion is alarming and makes the present paper well-timed and more significant to explore the factors 
contributing towards TWB in South African public schools and suggest preventive measures. Moreover, 
(Mollema, 2018; Sorrell, 2015) purported the scarcity in the number of research studies done regarding 
the phenomenon in public schools. Concurring with this observation is Santos and Tin (2016) who 
observed that there is a limited but growing number of studies that have shown that teacher-targeted 
bullying is a grave issue worldwide. The recent example is the research conducted by Bernstein and 
Batchelor (2022) who found excessive demands with ever increasing workloads and a lack of supportive 
resources escalating the perpetration of teacher workplace bullying acts among teachers in South African 
schools.  
Authors hold opposing views regarding the classification of bullying taking place among 
teachers, Jacobs and De Wet, (2018) labelled it, teacher-targeted workplace bullying, (De Wet, 2020; 
Santos &  Tin, 2016; Jacobs & Teise, 2019; De Wet, 2010a), regard it as teacher-targeted bullying, 
Martinez, McMahon, Espelage, Anderman, Reddy and Sanchez (2015) , labelled it  colleague-generated 
bullying, (Sasson & Somech, 2014; De Wet, 2011) branded it teacher-on-teacher bullying, and 
(Kleinheksel & Geisel, 2019; Kleinheksel, 2018; Mazzarella, 2018) classify it as adult-to-adult bullying. 
The above array of classifications was one of the hurdles stumbled upon in the review of literature on 
bullying among teachers. Conversely, several authors have also attempted to define bullying among 
teachers but at the time of authoring the present paper there is still no consented definition, but a 
respectable number of authors concur that it is detrimental to the successful teaching and learning process.  


 
 
Exploring the Factors Contributing Towards Teacher Workplace Bullying Across the Teaching Ranks: Focus on Selected South African Public Schools 
38 
 
International Journal of Social  
Science Research and Review 
Volume 7, Issue 2
 
February, 2024
 
As a result, throughout the present paper, bullying among teachers is classified as teacher 
workplace bullying (TWB). The South African Occupational Health and Safety Amendment Act 181 of 
1993(Subsection (1)(iv) defined a workplace as any premises or place where a person performs work in 
the course of employment. Since the bullying is confined within the school as the workplace for teachers, 
the classification was deemed appropriate. Furthermore, the definition of TWB is drawn from (Einarsen, 
Hoel, Zapf, & Cooper, 2003 & 2011) as, ‘a series of negative offensive behaviours carried out regularly 
and over a lengthy period, mostly against an individual employee by his or her colleagues or supervisor’. 
Offensive behaviours may include, humiliation, excessive monitoring, rumours, and gossip, being 
ostracised and openly undermined. All conducted to harm and gain power (Gradinger, Strohmeier & 
Spiel, 2017). In the context of this paper, the employee refers to the teacher and their colleagues on the 
same level, and supervisors are members of the School Management Team (departmental heads, deputy 
principal and principal). Afterall, teachers experience TWB from other school staff members, rather than 
just other teachers. 
Bearing in mind the need for research on the factors contributing towards TWB across the 
teaching ranks, the present paper looked into two main questions. 
1. What are the factors contributing towards TWB across the teaching ranks? 
2. How can TWB be prevented across the teaching ranks? 
 
The two specific aims of this study were to: 
i) Investigate the factors contributing toward TWB across the teaching ranks. 
ii) Identify measures to prevent TWB across the teaching ranks. 
 
The present paper drew on Johnson’s (2011) ecological model of workplace bullying, as a 
roadmap for developing arguments on TWB, and as a basis for interpreting and analysing the results, 
(Vinz, 2022).    
 
Theoretical Framework 
The ecological model by (Johnson, 2011) is a useful model that was adopted as a theoretical 
framework to guide the exploration of factors contributing towards TWB. Even though the model was 
developed for the nursing profession to guide among others, intervention, and empirical research on 
workplace bullying, it was deemed appropriate because workplace bullying cuts across various 
occupations.  
The model is heavily underpinned by Bronfenbrenner’s (1979) ecology of human development, a 
theory which states that human development is shaped by factors in a nested layer of hierarchical systems. 
Relatedly, this model depicts the work environment as a series of nested, interconnected layers that exist 
within society as a whole. These layers are society (macrosystem), the organisation (exosystem), the co-
workers and supervisors of the bully and target (mesosystem), and the bully and target (microsystem), 
(Bronfenbrenner, 1994). Therefore, understanding factors that contribute towards TWB behaviour in 
school necessitates a closer examination of the complex inter-relationships between the individual and the 
environment, (Hong & Espelage, 2012). Moreover, causes or antecedents of workplace bullying can be 
found at societal, organizational, departmental, and individual levels, (Johnson, 2011).  
However, throughout this paper factors contributing towards TWB will be explored concentrating 
on the microsystem, mesosystem, and the exosystem. The reason being that the focus is on elements that 
are in direct contact with the individual (micro & meso), precisely the personal traits of targets and 
perpetrators, and factors linked to the working environment (exosystem). Afterall, interrelated socio-


 
 
Exploring the Factors Contributing Towards Teacher Workplace Bullying Across the Teaching Ranks: Focus on Selected South African Public Schools 
39 
 
International Journal of Social  
Science Research and Review 
Volume 7, Issue 2
 
February, 2024
 
ecological factors can vary across multiple levels, from three to five layers, (Sato, Inoue, Du, & Funk 
2019). Factors emanating from the community and the society (macrosystem) at large are excluded since 
the focus is on the workplace. Rowe, Shilbury, Ferkins, and Hinckson (2013) are in accord and maintain 
that, although certain factors at some levels can be conceptually included or omitted, the three basic 
environmental factors that should be considered are individual (age, gender, and self-efficacy), social 
(family, peers, and social support) and environmental (safety and community design). The layers of 
influence are briefly explained below. 
Microsystem  
The microsystem is composed of the bully and the target, or in some cases multiple bullies and 
targets, (Johnson, 2011). TWB does not happen in seclusion, hence at the microsystem, the individual 
teacher’s traits will be explored. The reason being, the micro-level recognises biological and personal 
factors that influence how individuals behave and thus increase their chances of becoming a target or a 
perpetrator of TWB, (Johnson, 2011). For example, individuals in leadership positions are often accused 
of bullying when they simply conduct reasonable instructions to their subordinates.  
Equally, some leaders label active teachers who normally question their authority as being 
disrespectful and bullies. It is through these dynamics at a micro-level that a target or perpetrator of 
bullying emerges. Rendering bullying in the workplace as a serious ethical issue, which impacts the 
personality of the teacher-victim and the teacher’s work performance and private life, (Cech et al., 2018) 
Mesosystem  
In the context of the present paper, the mesosystem refers to the relationships between the 
teachers at the same level and their supervisors (departmental heads, deputy principals and principals). 
Perpetrators of bullying are also a diverse group, ranging from coworkers, supervisors, and subordinates, 
either from the same or a different department (Johnson & Rea, 2009). These individuals can also attempt 
to intervene to prevent TWB or make it flourish by being bystanders. Managerial style is a key 
contributing factor of bullying at the mesosystem level, (Johnson, 2011). Principal’s leadership styles 
characterised by a lack of consistency in settling conflict among colleagues and playing favourites may 
contribute to the realisation of TWB. Research further shows that individuals in stressful environments 
with little support often are at elevated risk of committing or experiencing school bullying (Tolentino, 
2016; De Wet & Jacobs, 2013); thus, the present paper seeks to explore the factors contributing towards 
TWB and produce preventive measures.  
Exosystem 
The exosystem includes the school as an organisation as a whole as well as teacher unions that 
represent workers within the school, (Johson, 2011). It is the social context within which the individual 
does not have direct contact, but which affects him or her indirectly through the micro-systems, Espelage 
et al.  (2013). Furthermore, Bronfenbrenner demonstrated that this ecosystem includes not just elements 
that are in direct contact with the individual (represented by the microsystem and mesosystem in 
Bronfenbrenner’s model) but also elements that are external to the individual’s immediate environment, 
(Newman, & Newman, 2020). These elements within the setting of the present paper are specific 
government and school policies, and social support systems that the school can offer to the teacher-victim. 
The exosystem represents all such elements that though not intimately connected to the individual, exert a 
determining influence on their psycho-social development, (Newman, & Newman, 2020). 
Literature revealed that some forms of workplace bullying relate to the organisation and 
organisational work culture, (Jacobs & Teise, 2019), and the authors further argue that organisational 
culture can either inhibit or promote bullying (Jacobs & Teise, 2019). Hence within the exosystem, the 


 
 
Exploring the Factors Contributing Towards Teacher Workplace Bullying Across the Teaching Ranks: Focus on Selected South African Public Schools 
40 
 
International Journal of Social  
Science Research and Review 
Volume 7, Issue 2
 
February, 2024
 
school remain the focal point in exploring on how some of the environmental factors such as nepotism 
and favouritism contribute to the promotion of TWB. It is worth noting that all the layers of the model are 
interconnected and as a whole shape the human behaviour, their inter-linkage make it difficult to address 
bullying behaviour without encompassing most of the layers of influence. De Wet (2020), is of the view 
that, the rarity of qualitative inquiries on TWB results in a one-dimensional understanding of the 
phenomenon. Consequently, employing a qualitative approach, and located within the interpretivist 
paradigm, the paper presents the literature review.  
 
Literature Review  
Executing the literature review was useful in that the author acquired an array of theories and 
empirical studies bearing on TWB. Conducting a review of literature, the author was able to demonstrate 
knowledge in information-seeking, which concerns searching for and identifying only relevant sources 
which are applicable to the study; and critical assessment, which involves analysing, summarising, and 
integrating the sources so as to identify reliable, valid, and credible material, as suggested by Howard 
(2014).  
Teachers in South African public schools experience remarkable levels of bullying across post 
levels, school size and diverse settings (Solomon, 2021; Jacobs & De Wet, 2015), that is considered an 
extreme type of social stressor at work (Tolentino, 2016). This is in addition to school-based violence that 
has become widespread resulting in far too many teachers experiencing their workplace as unsafe. The 
rampant violence has rendered TWB a lesser-known phenomenon despite it being an equally debilitating 
problem (Scheeler et al., 2022). Hence, the present qualitative paper set out to give adequate attention to 
TWB by empirically exploring its contributory factors since less attention has been devoted to this type of 
bullying let alone its triggers. Public schools are not immune from this type of bullying and the 
contributory factors may vary depending on the culture and the relationship dynamics across the teaching 
ranks. As a result, in examining literature, the contributing factors cannot be considered separately, but 
multifaceted factors need to be considered (Cech et al., 2018), given the various layers of influence 
(microsystems, mesosystems, and exosystems) adopted by the present paper. 
Expounding on the international front, two separate studies shed light on TWB in the Cech 
Republic. The first study by Čech, Cakirpaloglu and Kvintova, (2017) reported that 43.3% of teachers 
were subjected to bossing for a period exceeding a year. The subsequent study (Čech, Kvintova, & 
Cakirpaloglu, 2018) established that about thirteen teachers in the elementary schools had been exposed 
to regular bullying by their colleagues or senior executives for at least 6 months. Feeling of threat and 
competition were among the major factors. After deploying a sample of 517 Kaunas (Lithuania) teachers 
from thirteen secondary schools, findings from (Bernotaite & Malinauskiene, 2017) study revealed 
workplace bullying was prevalent among the Kaunas teachers, 8.3 % occasional and 2.9 % severe, with 
low social support at work identified as the main factor. Similarly, from the United States, unsatisfactory 
administrative support was also established as the most significant factor contributing to workplace 
dissatisfaction (Scheeler, et al, 2022), after surveying 173 general and special education teachers to 
determine the extent that teachers report workplace bullying by other teachers and administrators. 
Additionally, Ariza- Montes et al. (2016) study described workplace bullying prevalence rate of 4.4 % 
among education employees. The low frequencies may be misleading given that TWB tends to remain 
hidden and as by its very nature it is subtle and difficult to identify as argued by (Mahome, 2021; De Wet, 
2011).  
Furthermore, Sorrell (2015) examined the lived experiences of elementary school teachers facing 
workplace bullying within the public school system settings from various States in America. Results 
revealed that all the six participants from the study experienced bullying after taking medical leave due to 


 
 
Exploring the Factors Contributing Towards Teacher Workplace Bullying Across the Teaching Ranks: Focus on Selected South African Public Schools 
41 
 
International Journal of Social  
Science Research and Review 
Volume 7, Issue 2
 
February, 2024
 
pre-existing health issues. The participants felt that nepotism and favouritism served as environmental 
factors contributing to workplace bullying. Still, new research from Dublin Anti-Bullying Centre has 
found that over one-third of teachers and senior management have been targets of bullying from time to 
time by other teachers and staff members, with exclusion and being ignored the most common 
experiences, (Sargioti, Kuldas & Foody, 2023). Though subtle and covert in nature, the author posits that 
TWB has far-reaching consequences for the school as an organisation, for the teachers, and for the culture 
of teaching and learning, thus warranting an investigation. 
Probing deeper on the local front, only a few studies attempted to delve into the phenomenon, 
more precisely the factors that contribute towards TWB perpetrated by colleagues on the same level, and 
School Management Teams (SMTs). For example, De Wet (2011) only dealt with bullying of teachers 
from the same level and Binduko (2013) examined bullying of teachers, by the SMT. This is despite 
literature revealing that teachers may be bullied on one or more levels, which may include horizontal 
bullying such as colleague-on-colleague bullying, and vertical bullying such as principal-on-teacher 
and/or a member of a school management team-on-teacher bullying, among others (Jacobs & De Wet, 
2018; Bradshaw, 2015; Crawshaw, 2009). As far as the author could ascertain, Mahome’s (2021) study 
incorporated all the levels when investigating the perpetrators of staff victimisation within the teaching 
ranks in one of Gauteng provincial district. Again, De Wet’s (2014) study considered all the post levels 
when she investigated teachers’ understanding of workplace bullying involving fifty-nine participants 
furthering their educations at the University of Free State, South Africa. It is worth noting that both 
studies did not address the factors that contribute towards TWB. Other factors contributing towards TWB 
are elucidated below. 
Power and the Rank of the Perpetrators  
The bullying of teachers by their colleagues and superiors is a reality in South Africa despite the 
country’s liberal constitution entrenching human rights (Rutherford, 2009). Mazzarella (2018) found that, 
in spite of the focus on learner bullying in schools, little attention is paid to bullying among school adults 
and that there were few, if any persons to whom the target could safely speak; and the power of the bullies 
was a significant factor. Regardless of how this power is exercised, bosses and others who inflict 
psychological abuse on their co-workers constitute one of the most common and serious problems facing 
employees in today’s workplace (Kleinheksel & Geisel, 2019: 92; Sinha & Yadav, 2017). The school as a 
workplace for teachers is also not insusceptible from this colleague-on-colleague bullying. The varying 
ranks make TWB to prevail where teachers are not working as unit, thus, a happy school can only be 
realised if all members of staff work together towards that common goal (Fahie, 2014). 
Reporting on the experiences of adult-to-adult bullying in New Jersey’s public high schools in the 
United States of America, Mazzarella (2018) noted that most bullies used their rank and position to 
undermine individuals who had demonstrated work success by countering their opinions, ignoring their 
efforts, challenging their responsibilities, and frequently writing negative observation and evaluation 
reports which were in contrast to highly positive earlier reports. Such findings resonate with Orange’s 
(2018) study where supervisors displayed jealousy by not appreciating the successes of the teacher 
targets. The individuals occupying high ranking positions are the principal and the deputy, while teachers 
at the lowest level across the rankings do not hold any position and are at the bottom of the hierarchy and 
are mostly at the receiving end of TWB. This is supported by (Bernstein & Batchelor, 2022) study where 
new teachers felt that the perpetrators who targeted them where more often senior teachers, and this is 
further reinforced by (Fahie & Devine (2014; Vveinhardrt, Zukauskas & Rivera, 2014) who identified 
large employer-employee status gaps as contributory factors. Bringing to the assertion that, the rank of the 
perpetrator is one of the personal factors that influence how individuals behave and ultimately contribute 
to TWB, as identified by the microsystem. In the view of Lutgen-Sandvik and Tracy (2012), it is in such 
organisations where leaders disregard or minimise the mistreatment of workers, often leading to the 


 
 
Exploring the Factors Contributing Towards Teacher Workplace Bullying Across the Teaching Ranks: Focus on Selected South African Public Schools 
42 
 
International Journal of Social  
Science Research and Review 
Volume 7, Issue 2
 
February, 2024
 
intensification of TWB. Given the framework adopted by the present paper, it is at the meso-level where 
those in power and long serving make bullying flourish by downplaying it as the problem. Consequently, 
when teacher-supervisor relationship is not conducive bullying may flourish further and the teacher would 
bar the brunt given the power gaps that characterises the nature of the relationship. 
Work Overload 
Reporting on their mixed methods study, De Wet and Jacobs (2013) revealed that South African 
teachers are working in toxic environments characterised by disgruntled, overworked, and stressed 
teachers. This is despite the Personnel Administrative Measures (PAM,2016) policy document clearly 
outlining the workload of each and every teacher, from the lowest to the apex position. Literature further 
exposed that the work overload factor is not peculiar to the South African shores, but a worldwide factor 
contributing to TWB. 
The online survey conducted by Bently, Catley, Forsyth and Tappin (2014) involving 86 New 
Zealand organisations found that rates of workplace bullying in New Zealand were notably higher among 
employees working in education, health, public transport, and postal services. Skogstad, Torsheim, and 
Einarsen (2011) identified factors such as time pressure, work overload and communication are key 
factors in the risk of violence, suggesting that poorly organised workplaces may be more prone to 
experiencing psychosocial problems such as violence and bullying. Work overload was also a finding in 
the qualitative study by Sasson and Somech (2014) on 29 subject-related departments in schools in 
northern Israel. The study identified perceptions of injustice and a sense of work overload as major 
factors contributing to TWB. A south African study by De Wet’s (2014), further corroborated the findings, 
her results indicated that teachers complained about work overload, as well as harsh demands (De Wet, 
2014). 
The factor of work overload, amongst others was later corroborated by Fahie and Devine (2014) 
and Vveinhardrt, Zukauskas and Rivera (2014). The studies found that work overload, and a tension-laden 
organisational climate, contribute to the bullying of workers by their employers. Using telephonic semi-
structured interviews on a sample of voluntary bullied teachers, De Vos and Kirsten (2015) found that 
principals also purportedly made prejudiced alterations to a victim’s workload, initiating a harsher 
workload or one assigning meagre duty to targeted teachers. The provision of workload to teachers in 
South African public schools it is a function designated to the departmental heads, however, in most 
instances their (DHs) decision is not final until the principal approves. Therefore, the author argues that 
the involvement of principals who are in most cases not having the subjects knowledge precipitate 
disagreements and tension in various departments where departmental heads are bullied to alter and infuse 
changes imposed by the principal. 
The principals are required to be impartial and treat all staff members as equals. The author of the 
present paper holds the view that the unfairness emanates from the power that principals possess and use 
to settle scores against teacher targets where the latter are also assigned subjects that they are not qualified 
to teach. However, Jacobs and Teise, (2019) presented a different view and argue that autocratic 
management style pressure on principals seems to force them to revert to autocratic management styles 
upon their subordinates. Suggesting that at the exosystem, TWB may spill over to the workplace from 
various avenues connected to the schools, such as the district and provincial offices, as elements that are 
external to the individual’s immediate environment.  
Job Competition 
In a cross-sectional study conducted by Martinez, McMahon, Espelage, Anderman, Reddy, and 
Sanchez (2015) in the United States, it was found that colleague-generated bullying may be goal-oriented 
(e.g., job competition), and individuals who are less likely to respond behaviourally may become 


 
 
Exploring the Factors Contributing Towards Teacher Workplace Bullying Across the Teaching Ranks: Focus on Selected South African Public Schools 
43 
 
International Journal of Social  
Science Research and Review 
Volume 7, Issue 2
 
February, 2024
 
susceptible targets that can give colleague perpetrators an advantage. This is not surprising because at 
microsystem the personal traits of targets and perpetrators determine the existence of TWB. More above 
that, (Pahad & Graham,2012; Sasson & Somech, 2015) studies, confirmed that teachers often fight to gain 
positions of power or promotions by sabotaging one another, destroying each other’s reputations, and 
making them really unpopular. Such evidence is supportive of the view that teachers on the same level, 
(horizontal) from the same school do bully and sabotage one another (i.e., bad-mouthing each other) to 
gain positions. These findings are corroborated by the basic education Ministerial Task Team (MTT) 
(2016) report, which also found teachers fighting for promotional vacancies across some of the South 
African provinces. In a view of (Sasson & Somech, 2015), they (teachers) vilify and belittle each other 
especially when there is a promotional vacancy. At the centre of these infightings are learners whom their 
education is compromised. Promotion should be regarded as an opportunity for growth for deserving 
individuals, it should not be a contestation for power. Hence The author further argues that TWB is 
embedded in school politics and used as a mechanism for upward mobility.  
Literature further revealed that the bullying may escalate further when a stranger or outsider is 
appointed, and Fahie (2014), is in accord and contended that a dominant discourse may be displayed 
through the interconnection of a group which is threatened by the appointment of an outcast to the school. 
Further affirming that when the rewards are high, and a certain group is disgruntled TWB may be 
discharged in a ‘besieging’ format. A concept coined by Mahome (2021) as “mass victimisation and 
mistreatment of an individual with the intention of intimidating and disempowering the targeted 
individual”. New appointees should be assisted during the transition period instead of being embroiled 
into territorial battles of job competition. 
Conversely, Lind, Glaso, Pallesent and Einarsen (2009), maintained that colleagues may target 
those who perform well at work so that they stop over performing. However, (Tepper, Moss, and Duffy 
(2011) presented a different view and found that low-performing workers are more at risk for bullying 
from their superiors. The contrasting views clearly indicate that TWB has no boundaries, and it may be 
regarded as a display of power to the targeted teachers irrespective of their performance levels.  Thus, the 
present paper advocates for its prevention, and further purport that TWB affect the teaching and learning 
culture negatively, where good and hardworking teachers are demoralised and discouraged to excel, by 
first, their colleagues and supervisors. 
Communication Breach 
Khunou (2006) purported that conversation helps to create a context within which ideas can be 
shared to improve teaching and learning practices in the school. Therefore, communication plays a 
meaningful role not only in improving the schools’ achievement, but also in shaping a healthy 
professional relationship of the SMT and the teachers. However, communication may be used as a tool by 
some leaders to practise unfair means of selectively disseminating information to the colleagues, resulting 
in communication breach. In Cemaloglu (2007) view, communication breach can lead to bullying 
amongst teachers, fond of incompetent and unprincipled managers abusing formal, bureaucratic structures 
to entrench TWB. Such an environment is not conducive for learning and teaching, and it is for this 
reason the author maintains that; the teachers within their workplace share space with young children in 
the name of learners, thus it becomes meaningfully paramount to identify the sources of TWB amongst 
the teaching staff, so that they are curtailed before bullying is witnessed by the learners and negatively 
affect the already tainted image of the teaching profession. Klein and Bentolila (2018) suggested that 
when internal communication is effective and positive interaction is evident amongst all parties, the 
organisation remains healthy, and employees are protected from external pressures that include TWB. The 
following segment pay attention to the preventive measures.  
 


 
 
Exploring the Factors Contributing Towards Teacher Workplace Bullying Across the Teaching Ranks: Focus on Selected South African Public Schools 
44 
 
International Journal of Social  
Science Research and Review 
Volume 7, Issue 2
 
February, 2024
 
Prevention of Teacher Workplace Bullying 
At the micro-system layer, teachers’ behaviour plays a critical role in preventing violence from 
any source within the school community, in particular TWB. Sharing this view is Netshitangani (2014) 
who suggested that the manner in which teachers conduct themselves in and outside the school premises 
can encourage violence in schools or the positive effects of violence reduction measures employed in 
schools. Suggesting preventive measures, McMahon, et al. (2017) recommended the exploration of the 
division between the principals and teachers and their perspectives regarding the issues in their 
relationships. They suggested that support and policies would facilitate shared understanding and 
resolution of issues.  
Consequently, the SACE Code of Professional Ethics expects and advocates for teachers to 
behave in a professional manner that seek to uphold the profession, (SACE, 2000). It is for this reason 
that Kollapen (2006) and Fahie (2014) urged the DBE to provide reporting mechanisms for teachers who 
feel they are at risk of violence from learners, other school staff or individuals from outside schools, 
because, in the majority of cases, there was no formal mechanism for recording and reporting cases, or for 
feeding data back to the districts and provincial authorities (Burton, 2008).  
In regard to the prevention of TWB, Le Roux, Rycroft and Orleyn (2010) reasoned that existing 
legal remedies to deal with workplace bullying, for instance, the Employment Equity Act (55 of 1998), 
the Labour Relations Act (66 of 1995), and the Compensation for Occupational Injuries and Diseases Act 
(130 of 1993) do not protect employees from bullying. This could be one of the reasons why teachers are 
not reporting bullying. Conversely Fox and Stallworth (2010) proposed that the following approaches 
may lead to the prevention of bullying of teachers by their colleagues: individual solutions (e.g., therapy, 
turnover); organisational solutions (e.g., internal policies and programmes, alternative dispute solutions); 
and union intervention and public policy solutions (e.g., legislation prohibiting violence and harassment). 
However, literature indicates that in South Africa, there is no law dealing with workplace bullying in 
particular nor is there any clarity on the continuum of which the matter is placed (Smit, 2014). Coinciding 
with Smit’s view, Le Roux et al (2010) maintained that South African labour legislation lacks an explicit 
definition of workplace bullying. This has resulted in the situation where South Africa does not have a 
code of good practice dealing with bullying as such as can be found in England (Smit, 2014).  
The above narrations highlight the need for a clear policy that can be used to address the 
challenge of TWB. Thus, (Martinez, McMahon, Espelage & Anderman, 2015) suggested comprehensive 
policies that promote a positive school climate and address different forms of violence across multiple 
levels are needed. They emphasised that these policies should be clear and communicated to all members 
of the school (e.g., learners, parents, teachers, staff, and administrators). It is important for any policy or 
regulation that is suggested to be clearly worded. Vagueness might create confusion during the 
implementation phase; in addition, the author suggests that any policy that speaks to TWB should be 
context-related, due to the larger environmental systems within the mesosystem, with which the teacher 
interacts, directly or indirectly. As a consequence, this study pushes towards the creation and sustenance 
of a positive work culture where people are treated with respect by management and co-workers, where 
good work is recognised, and where conflict is dealt with as it arises, as accentuated by Dillon (2012).  
The exceeding depositions highlight the attempts that have been made locally and abroad to 
expose TWB and further exhibit the relevance and the significance of the present paper. There is a need to 
explore the phenomenon within the South African public schools setting so that institutions of learning 
become safer spaces for everyone. Therefore, the present paper aimed to explore the factors contributing 
toward TWB to create a greater understanding of the phenomenon and come up with preventive 
measures. Most of the South African public schools are embedded in communities where violence has 
become a daily occurrence and bullying can range from extremes such as violence, and manifest into 


 
 
Exploring the Factors Contributing Towards Teacher Workplace Bullying Across the Teaching Ranks: Focus on Selected South African Public Schools 
45 
 
International Journal of Social  
Science Research and Review 
Volume 7, Issue 2
 
February, 2024
 
TWB and in the view of (Tolentino, 2016) that negatively affect all facets of the teachers’ lives, their 
physical, psychological, and social health. It is therefore essential that teachers are protected from all 
forms of bullying because they are multi-targeted persons (De Vos & Kirsten, 2015; Martinez et al. 
(2015). The research strategy to explore the factors contributing towards TWB is outlined in the following 
segment. 
 
Materials and Methods 
Using primary data collected by the author, this paper is positioned within an interpretivist 
paradigm (which is also known as the humanistic, constructivist, or naturalistic paradigm). It is the lens 
through which the author viewed and analysed the inquiry, as supported by Jacobs (2012) who observed 
that stating a research paradigm in any publication allows the reader to read and understand the work 
through the lens that is provided. Thus, deploying interpretivist paradigm, the author engrossed 
themselves in the participants’ real world in order to understand their varying realities and experiences 
pertaining to the phenomenon under study.  
The present paper used the qualitative approach to explore the factors contributing towards TWB. 
One of the reasons behind the choice of the qualitative approach is that it allows for the inductive 
interpretation of data. Given the interpretive nature of the study, the discussion focused on the personal 
viewpoints of the teachers, whose assessment of the factors contributing to bullying at work was based on 
their subjective perception of interpersonal relationships in school and not on an objective analysis of the 
situation, as purported by Klein and Bentolila (2018). Therefore, a case study design comprising nine 
public schools from District No. 10 (D10) was adopted to investigate TWB. The author decided to use a 
case study, since, according to De Vos, Strydom, Fouche, and Delport (2011), qualitative researchers are 
primarily interested in the meaning subjects give to their life experiences by immersing themselves in the 
activities of a single person or small number of people.  
Population and Sampling  
The target   population of this study consisted of all principals, deputy principals, departmental 
heads and Post Level 1 teachers from all ordinary, public primary and secondary schools within the 
Johannesburg North District. Bless, Higson-Smith and Sithole (2013) caution that; It is essential to 
describe target population accurately, and in attaining that, the Gauteng Department of Education (GDE) 
2018 statistics revealed that the JN district comprises 94 ordinary public schools, 65 being primary and 29 
secondary. The total number of officially appointed teachers is 3 461. That translates to, 94 principals, 141 
deputy principals, 470 departmental heads and 2756 Post Level 1teachers. Significantly, the population 
was identified before selecting the sample. 
The sampling techniques that are mostly used when conducting qualitative research, namely, 
convenient, and purposive sampling were adopted. Subsequently, the study’s sample consisted of 16 
participants, (eight females and eight males), made up of three school principals, one deputy principal, 
two departmental heads, nine PL1 teachers and a lone clinical psychologist. The nine schools and the 
sampled 16 participants in this study are not a representative of a larger population since the aim of this 
qualitative study was not to generalise the findings but intended to inductively explore the factors 
contributing to TWB from the interpretations and the lived experiences of the participants.    
 
 
 


 
 
Exploring the Factors Contributing Towards Teacher Workplace Bullying Across the Teaching Ranks: Focus on Selected South African Public Schools 
46 
 
International Journal of Social  
Science Research and Review 
Volume 7, Issue 2
 
February, 2024
 
Table: 1.1 Biographical data of the sample of the study 
CATEGORY NUMBER PERCENTAGE CATEGORY 
NUMBER PERCENTAGE 
GENDER 
HIGHEST ACADEMIC QUALIFICATION 
Women  
7 
47% 
Diploma 
(e.g., 
Teaching Diploma) 
2 
13% 
Men 
8 
53% 
Degree (e.g., B.A. or 
B.A. 
Honours, 
Masters) 
13 
87% 
AGE 
YEARS 
OF 
TEACHING 
EXPERIENCE 
(TEACHERS) 
30-39 
5 
33% 
5-9 years 
6 
40% 
40-49 
3 
20% 
10-14 years 
1 
7% 
50+ 
7 
47% 
15+  
8 
53% 
 
RACE 
 
POST LEVEL OF PARTICIPANTS 
Africans  
11 
73% 
Post level-1 Teachers 
9 
60% 
Whites 
4 
27% 
Departmental Heads 
2 
13% 
Deputy Principal 
1 
7% 
Principals 
3 
20% 
SCHOOL LOCATION 
SCHOOL TYPE 
Township 
6 
67% 
Primary (Grade 1-7) 
6 
67% 
Urban 
2 
22% 
Secondary (Grade 8-
12) 
3 
33% 
Farm 
1 
11% 
PRACTICE 
EXPERIENCE 
(CLINICAL 
PSYCHOLOGIST) 
 
 
 
0-9 years 
1 
 
 
Data Collection 
After identifying the sample, the researcher commenced the data collection with primary aim of 
responding to the research questions. As stated earlier, the nature of the study is qualitative, and with this 
approach, interviews were used as a method of data collection. Sharing the same view, Greeff (2013) 
stated that interviewing is the predominant mode of data or information collection in qualitative research. 
Data were collected from a total of 16 participants through separable face-to-face interviews, which were 
audio-recorded and transcribed verbatim by the author. The interviews were conducted at various 
locations chosen by the participants and ranged from 45 to 65 minutes depending on the delivery of each 
participant. Considering the sensitivity of the topic, the author established a rapport of reciprocal 
confidence and deference by asking unbiased questions that made participants feel at ease and able to 
share their experiences in relation to TWB, whether as victims or perpetrators.  
Ethical Considerations 
Research ethics is fundamental to the research process, with many variables involved. Such 
variables may include seeking permission to research participants and/or institutions and upholding the 
integrity of the research process (Okeke, Omodan & Dube, 2022). In upholding the research process, the 
first step was to seek consent from the gatekeepers. Subsequently, ethical clearance was obtained from the 
university’s ethic committee and official permission to conduct the research was requested and also 
obtained from the Gauteng Department of Basic Education. The other predominant aspects of research 


 
 
Exploring the Factors Contributing Towards Teacher Workplace Bullying Across the Teaching Ranks: Focus on Selected South African Public Schools 
47 
 
International Journal of Social  
Science Research and Review 
Volume 7, Issue 2
 
February, 2024
 
ethics that were followed included, informed consent, freedom of participation and protection of 
identities. After selecting participants informed consent was obtained by using a conventional form that 
contains information such as the purpose of the study and the benefit for the participants among other 
things (Nijhawan et al., 2013). Through the freedom of participation, the participants were further 
informed of their right to or not to participate in the research study. A valid consideration was taken to 
protect the identities of participants, by not identifying their schools and names.  
Data Analysis 
Data were analysed through a Qualitative Content Analysis (QCA) process, by means of an 
inductive reasoning. Qualitative content analysis is a valuable alternative to more traditional quantitative 
content analysis, when a researcher is working in an interpretive paradigm (Patton, 2002). As a result, 
recorded data were transmuted into written text and read to obtain the sense of the whole on the factors 
contributing to TWB. Data were clustered together into large piece and then allocated them to larger 
categories of connected meanings such as ‘constantly belittled’ and ‘always disrespectful’. Subsequently 
thorough careful preparation data were structured into codes which were inductively merged and 
categorised. In doing so, similar categories were collapsed into one, and sufficiently different from each 
other remained as stand alone. QCA is usually supported by a computer program that provide a measure 
of convenience and efficiency and increasing the overall level of organisation of a qualitative project 
(Bassett, 2004). Based on that, throughout this process, ATLAS qualitative data analysis software was 
used in the analysis. As a result, comprehensive themes were generated and applied to all the text, as 
heightened by Bezuidenhout and Cronje (2014). 
 
Results and Discussion 
The study explored the factors contributing towards TWB, and largely qualitative collected data 
revealed that greatest number of the participants confirmed various factors triggering bullying across the 
teaching ranks. The bullying is unleashed by all the members of the teaching staff, depending on the 
contraposition of each individual teacher. As a result of the QCA process, the factors brought forward 
generated twofold comprehensive themes, to be precise: i) Teachers’ thoughts on predictors of TWB 
across the teaching ranks; and ii) The identified measures to prevent TWB across the teaching ranks. They 
are discussed alongside the sub-themes that arose since TWB is a multi-layered phenomenon. The 
segment mirrors participants’ views and are discussed, interpreted, and analysed in congruence with the 
adopted framework of the study, that is; Johnson’s (2011) ecological model of workplace bullying. As 
stated at the outset, the discussion depicts the three layers of the model, that include aligning the 
respective themes and sub-themes to the three factors adopted by the present paper, which are, the 
personal factors (micro), the environmental factors (meso), and the organisational factors (exo). To 
sequence the discussion, during the analysis, the codes of the participants (P1-P16) as well as their rank, 
(T=Teacher, DH=Departmental Head, DP=Deputy Principal=P, and CP for Clinical Psychologist) are used 
when verbatim excerpts are presented since it is uncomplicated and clear for the reader to track. 
Table 1.2 provides the codes for each participant – these codes are used in the analysis of the data 
collected.  
 
 
 
 


 
 
Exploring the Factors Contributing Towards Teacher Workplace Bullying Across the Teaching Ranks: Focus on Selected South African Public Schools 
48 
 
International Journal of Social  
Science Research and Review 
Volume 7, Issue 2
 
February, 2024
 
Table 1.2: Codes allocated to the sample of the present paper. 
Code 
Gender Age 
Qualifications Experience 
Post-
Level 
School 
Type 
School 
Code 
P1-Teacher 
Male 
32 
B.Ed. Degree 
5 years 
1 
Primary 
A 
P2-Teacher 
Male 
30 
B.Ed. Degree 
5 years 
1 
Primary 
A 
P3-Teacher 
Male 
33 
B.Ed. Degree 
7 years 
1 
Primary 
B 
P4 Teacher 
Male 
32 
B.Ed. Degree 
5 years 
1 
Primary 
C 
P5-Teacher 
Female 45 
B.Ed. Degree  9 years 
1 
Primary 
D 
P6-Teacher 
Male 
35 
B.Ed. Hons 
6 years 
1 
Secondary 
I 
P7-Teacher 
Female 53 
Diploma  
9 years 
1 
Secondary 
F 
P8-Teacher 
Male 
62 
B.Ed. Hons 
33 years 
1 
Primary 
G 
P9-Teacher 
Female 47 
Diploma 
10 years 
1 
Primary 
D 
P10-D. Head 
Male 
62 
B.A Degree 
33 years 
2 
Primary 
D 
P11-D. Head 
Male 
52 
B.Ed. Degree 
21 years 
2 
Secondary 
F 
P12-Deputy P 
Female 59 
B.A Degree 
21 years 
3 
secondary 
E 
P13-Principal 
Female 46 
B.Ed. Degree 
14 years 
4 
secondary 
F 
P14-Principal 
Female 55 
B.Ed. Hons 
22 years 
4 
Primary 
H 
P15-Principal 
Female 54 
MEd Degree 
21 years 
4 
Primary 
D 
P16 
Female 38 
(MSc Clinical 
Psychology) 
8 years  
Grade2 
(level 
11) 
 
 
Theme 1: Teachers’ Thoughts on Predictors of TWB across the teaching ranks 
This theme highlights various factors contributing to TWB.  
Sub-theme: 1.1 Lack of Mutual Respect (Environmental Factor) 
Collected data revealed that teachers’ interactions are often characterised by disrespect and lack 
of good manners resulting in disharmony. When probed about what is creating tension amongst teachers, 
(P12, DP) attributed the strain to the newly appointed teachers: “they don’t want to go through the ranks 
… they just want to be in power without acquiring proper growth and this normally lead to tension 
amongst colleagues. They just want to be promoted no matter what.” The view that is supported by (P11, 
DH) who conceded that… “young teachers don’t want to accept authority; they seem to challenge 
everything. They walk in and they want to be in charge. You sometimes have to remind them in a nice 
subtle way what they still have to learn. Sadly, they are power hungry and always disrespectful, they don’t 
understand respect.” P7 agreed and stated that… “they don’t have respect to each other, whatever each 
one thinks must be heard.” In similar vein to the narrative of these teachers’ experiences, (P13, P) 
described how she was constantly belittled. “One male teacher once told me that my style of leadership is 
too rural, you know according to me he was undermining and bullying me. This male teacher went to an 
extent that in staff meetings he wanted people to rally behind him…when I raised issues as the head of the 
institution, he would disrespectfully interrupt me.” (P8, T) gave an account of a lady teacher who did not 
respect departmental heads and other teachers. He disclosed the following: “if something happens to her, 
she doesn’t follow protocol; she just goes straight to the office to lay whatever complaint … because she 
feels that by being in love with the principal or deputy, she is just operating at that level.” … “I have seen 
that happening,” he stressed. These above narrations confirm previous findings by various scholars 
(Hershcovis & Barling, 2010; Parzefall & Salin, 2010), that a disrespectful manner is the predominant 
predictor of workplace bullying.  
Teachers are disrespecting one another across the teaching ranks. The disrespect is revealed in 
their interactions since the school is a place of social interactions. It is where the co-workers and 


 
 
Exploring the Factors Contributing Towards Teacher Workplace Bullying Across the Teaching Ranks: Focus on Selected South African Public Schools 
49 
 
International Journal of Social  
Science Research and Review 
Volume 7, Issue 2
 
February, 2024
 
supervisors of the bully and target (mesosystem) interact, and as such squabbles and tensions will forever 
be present.  People differ in the way that they view themselves and others, connect in relationships, and 
cope with harsh conditions, because of personality traits that are part of regular language, teachers may 
quarrel.  
a) Varying Personalities Traits (Personal   Factor) 
Given the hierarchal nature of the teaching profession, teachers hold different responsibilities and 
positions that compel them to interact at various levels, and in the process, misunderstandings and clash 
of personalities may occur. (P5, T) attested that “there was an incident at the school whereby a temporary 
teacher was shouting at another teacher,” and in her view she thought it was a clash of personalities: it 
was not really bullying. In alignment with the views of (P5, T), (P13, P) alluded to inadequate training: 
“we are not trained on how to treat each other at the school level.” When (P16, CP) was asked what 
caused bullying amongst teachers, she indicated that had observed and also dealt with in therapy with 
teachers were mostly complaints about personalities at work. Expressing her observation, (P16, CP) 
divulged the following: “I think personalities at work do contribute so much that whenever they work 
together in the same space, you find that there are those individuals who come out very strong and when 
they talk, you find that they are reckless with the words they use, and it ends up in conflict amongst 
teachers. Others might perceive that as being bullied by their colleagues.”  
The view was supported by (P11, DH) who affirmed that...” the principal is not deliberately 
bullying teachers, [but] if you say something [like] ‘the principal likes giving instructions’, sometimes 
you get other teachers off guard.” Such behaviours were substantiated by Coetzee (2017) where she 
accentuated that desire for control is a particular common personality traits and characteristics found in 
workplace bullying and school violence. Part of the challenge with teachers is that they end up in 
duplicate relationships whereby they are both colleagues and friends, and they end up sharing personal 
and work-related issues within that space of work. In her assessment, (P16, CP) validated that, “what 
transpires over time is that when now they have to deal with work-related issues, they are being unable to 
separate being professionals and being friends at the same time and it results in issues of trust and 
confidentiality and they end up in a lot of conflicts which again interferes with their work, and in that 
process you find that now they are starting to fight, they are starting to gossip and others would also 
regard it as another form of being bullied at the workplace.” Lending support to this, De Vos and Kirsten 
(2015) indicated that teacher-colleagues often engaged in malicious gossip and disclosed victims’ 
personal information, shared in confidence, to the other colleagues and or principals. The study can thus 
confirm that an encounter of personalities can lead to misinterpretations that manifest TWB. The other 
contributory factor that was prominent in most of the nine researched schools was the competition for 
promotional teaching posts. 
Sub-theme: 1.2 Competition for Promotional Posts (Environmental Factor) 
The majority of the participants fortified TWB based on competition for promotional posts. 
Confirming the strain around promotional posts, (P4, T) revealed that “there are usually tensions around 
individuals and whoever get promoted to a post that is advertised.” The interviewed (P11, DH) acceded 
to TWB due to promotional posts, he authenticated his observations “is because of people being selfish. 
You know when the post is advertised, it does not have a name and people start attaching names to it like; 
‘I want to be there’ not having a room that says others want to be there and they can even be in better 
positions. Once you go with that mind…once you do not get that position, you become negative.”  
In demonstrating negativity, (P5, T) reported that “there was a teacher … before she resigned, she 
was very angry with everything at the school … she was angry about change of leadership … a new 
principal, departmental heads and everything … sadly she was not chosen to be one of the leaders…then 
she resigned.” Corroborating what this teacher said, (P12, DP) divulged that “since January, one 


 
 
Exploring the Factors Contributing Towards Teacher Workplace Bullying Across the Teaching Ranks: Focus on Selected South African Public Schools 
50 
 
International Journal of Social  
Science Research and Review 
Volume 7, Issue 2
 
February, 2024
 
aggrieved teacher has been coming to school to simply bask in the sun because he never got the 
departmental head promotional post. Today he will complain about head-ache, tomorrow about stomach-
ache.” Concurring with the other participants, (P14, P) disclosed the following: “there was a person who 
had applied for the same post, and he did not get it and became negative by slowing down his work rate, 
being passive, you know, you could see that you are dealing with a bitter group.” Presenting another 
viewpoint, (P4, T) mentioned that “when teachers have different qualifications but earn the same salary, 
this is a factor contributing to TWB”. Substantiating his own viewpoint, he noted that “we can’t all be 
principals – that is why you find people fighting for positions. The better qualifications you have must put 
more weight on your incentive, even if you are a PL1 teacher,” he concluded. Tensions that emerge as a 
result of competition for promotion are not surprising given that promotion goes with financial gains 
where the defeated candidates become desponded and dejected. 
The study can confirm that the fight for promotional posts has even escalated to teachers’ trade 
unions, for instance, (P3, T) said that “when you look at instances of branch level, you find that teachers 
are fighting for promotional posts within the branch, they want to control a particular school” …some 
branch leaders because they feel they are powerful they instigate bullying amongst colleagues.” 
Expressing his concerns and views, he further said teachers fight because of ambition and greed which 
was accompanied by wanting power. Teachers want to be glorified as powerful leaders within a teachers’ 
trade union branch. Sharing similar experiences, (P14, P) indicated that “teachers fight for promotional 
posts which they know they can’t even sustain…I don’t know … it’s really wrong, it tarnishes the name of 
the union.” These findings are consistent with those of Pahad and Graham (2012) and MTT (2016) report. 
It can be concluded that promotion is linked and associated with power, regrettably in the process of 
assuming promotion eligible competitors are targeted, in some instances using union affiliation as a 
vehicle for the upward mobility. The findings further revealed that the anger and animosity surges when 
an outsider is appointed.  
b) Appointment of an Outsider 
(P14, P) revealed that “the deputy principal asked for a meeting with me, arguing that they are 
not happy about the new appointee we acquired from outside. The deputy was attacking me for 
appointment made forgetting that the vacant post is advertised to anybody whether from within or not.” 
The reaction of the aggrieved deputy principal is not astonishing since it coincides with the previous 
enquiry by Fahie (2014). In one of the schools under study the appointment of an outsider led to a nasty 
scene, where a teacher drew a gun against the principal for placing him in an acting departmental head 
position while ultimately someone known as the principal’s friend was eventually awarded the post.  
Explaining what transpired, (P7, T) gave the following details… “the aggrieved teacher pulled 
out a gun against the principal. Fortunately, no blood was spilled.” Similarly, such responses were 
recorded in the MTT (2016) report, which found teachers fighting for promotional posts. This also 
concurs well with Sasson and Somech (2015) who posited that principals, who are in a position of power, 
control allocations, dismissals, promotions, and school tasks. However, it has to be highlighted that 
promotions are not finalised by the principal and the school governing body, they only recommend a 
suitable candidate, and the final appointments are made at the provincial level. Though principals usually 
have influence on who is appointed, there is no justification for bullying and attacking them because there 
is a legal recourse when one is aggrieved. This substantiate previous findings in literature that all the 
teaching ranks are susceptible to TWB. 
c) Temporary and New Appointees 
Readers are reminded that newly appointed teachers were not interviewed for this present paper. 
Only those with a minimum of five years’ teaching experience were considered. However, the evidence of 
how the teachers were treated when they entered the teaching profession for the first time remains 


 
 
Exploring the Factors Contributing Towards Teacher Workplace Bullying Across the Teaching Ranks: Focus on Selected South African Public Schools 
51 
 
International Journal of Social  
Science Research and Review 
Volume 7, Issue 2
 
February, 2024
 
significant based on the interpretive paradigm underpinning the paper. Furthermore, the interpretive 
methodology is directed at understanding a phenomenon from an individual perspective and its historical 
and cultural contexts, as accentuated by Creswell (2009). Evidence of being bullied as a consequence of 
being a new appointee emerged. (P2, T) explained that principals want you to feel their presence and the 
power given to them by the DBE. He revealed the following: “So, they mistreat you because you are a 
newly appointed teacher. So, either you are with them or against them. When I raise a point and say this 
is not the correct implication, by so doing, I become a victim.” The author found many studies reinforcing 
these findings, where the bullying was meted out to the SGB appointees and temporary teachers (De Wet, 
2010a; De Wet, 2010b: 108; Salin, 2003). Weighing in on the bullying of newly appointed teachers, (P6, 
T) reported that TWB is a very serious problem in his school and teachers are bullied in many ways. He 
indicated the following: “for example, a teacher is recently appointed, and her contract has to be renewed 
or extended and it is not. If you dig deep just to find out what could be the problem … within corridors 
you find out that a bribe was needed for the contract extension.” These findings signal the vulnerability of   
temporary and newly appointed teachers in comparison to the long serving staff members, and present 
TWB as a territorial phenomenon.  Amassed data further revealed that personal and professional jealousy 
contribute towards TWB. 
Sub-theme: 1.3 Personal and Professional Jealousy (Personal Factor) 
 
Expressing his concern, (P8, T) noted that professional jealousy plays a role in TWB. Giving an 
example, the participant indicated that “I am more qualified than the principal himself, but I know 
because of that professional jealousy and also based on the fact that you are more knowledgeable than 
them, more experienced, they make sure that you don’t get promotion, they are threatened by your 
qualifications.” Sharing the same view is (P11, DH) who added that, … “This type of jealousy exists… 
You hear teachers saying…I cannot be led by someone younger than me... some of the teachers will even 
go to the extent of resigning. If you don’t take things positive you will be angry at all times,” he remarked. 
Further analysis showed that teachers would do anything to challenge your professional status and 
backing P11, is (P13, P) from the same school who maintained that “they make sure that they pull you 
down…because they cannot be led by a woman, especially by then they thought I was younger than them 
“they were not taking instructions…it was so difficult for them to adhere.” This supports the claim by 
Orange (2018) that age and gender dynamics may render victims susceptible to TWB. These findings also 
tie in well with a previous review by Kiriakidis (2011) who posited that with bullying there is typically an 
imbalance of power; physically, (the victim may be smaller or weak); numerically (the number of bullies 
may be many); or psychologically (the victim may be less tough than the bully).  
Conversely, (P7, T) relayed her experiences on professional jealousy, affirming that “it is there. 
You cannot run away from it…you can see with your eyes that these people dislike you simply because of 
the promotion. I am a PL1 teacher but acting as a departmental head. It was not possible for them to 
accept that I am now acting. These are my fellow PL1 teachers that are unhappy about what I may call 
temporary promotion.” Certain commonalities prevail between the current study and previous literature 
with regard to how qualifying teachers are overlooked for promotion due to professional jealousy Sasson 
and Somech (2015).  (P1, T) was asked on his views based on Henning’s (2004) emphasis that the 
interpretive paradigm seeks to produce a descriptive analysis that emphasises deep, interpretive 
understanding of social phenomenon. Explaining, (P1) conceded that “there is too much gossip around 
here … a lot of negative things were said about me after I registered for my B.Ed. Honours Degree … they 
were saying things like; ‘I think I am a better person’; you know such things … ‘what will that 
qualification assist you with, you will remain a PL1 teacher until you die’.” Weighing in on the same 
aspect, (P6, T) related his experiences and disclosed that “we are not given the vacancy list for 
promotional posts on time. They will give it just before the closing date … meaning we are victimised in a 
way … so that you should not get enough time to go through the advertised posts, that is jealousy at its 
worst” he concluded.  


 
 
Exploring the Factors Contributing Towards Teacher Workplace Bullying Across the Teaching Ranks: Focus on Selected South African Public Schools 
52 
 
International Journal of Social  
Science Research and Review 
Volume 7, Issue 2
 
February, 2024
 
Teachers having superior qualifications and those who have assumed managerial positions seem 
to be the worst affected by jealousy meted out by their colleagues. It is used to stall the careers of the 
teacher targets. Still at the microlevel, and given the above narrations, the author purports that jealousy 
remains a strong contributing factor towards TWB, were the young and females are seen as easy targets. 
Findings showed that personal and professional jealousy often leads to favouritism.  
Sub-theme: 1.4 Favouritism and Selective Treatment (Environmental Factor) 
One of the factors contributing to bullying established by (Sargioti, Kuldas & Foody, 2023) study 
was favouritism of selected teachers, resonating with the outcomes of the present paper. When the 
participants were asked about the subject, majority commented on how the teachers are selectively treated 
by the supervisors. (P4, T) revealed the following: “another female teacher administered corporal 
punishment on a learner, and the principal took the matter straight to the district, and another teacher 
(because she is a departmental head and a union representative) punished the learner, and the parent of 
the learner and the teacher were taken to the principal’s office and the matter was resolved.” Similar 
views were also echoed by P8, confirming previous findings by Binduko (2013) where teachers raised 
major issues that included the selective treatment of some teachers at the expense of others.  
Weighing in on how the teachers are selectively treated by the supervisors, (P1, T) “there is a 
huge favouritism in our school... let me talk in terms of Quality Management Systems (QMS), certain 
individuals receive high appraisal scores, whereby everyone knows that this person does not deserve such 
points.” Playing favourites, was the vice also displayed by some members of the SMT.  (P14, P) 
complained about the teacher who was protected by some departmental heads who would cover for him 
when he did not do his work. She conveyed the complaint similar to P1.” Even if he was not performing 
well…he received high score in QMS. When I raised it, it was like I am against him,” she remarked. The 
findings are consistent with Mafora (2013) who found that teachers benefit unfairly if they belong to the 
principals’ union, ethnic group, friendship circle, or show blind loyalty. The rest of the teachers are 
usually belittled, humiliated, or censored.  
The study also found favouritism at the district level, signalling how the interconnected layers of 
the adopted model are influencing each other, even without direct contact. (P14, P) indicated that.” there 
is also favouritism from the district, it depends on who you know at that level and then you will get 
assistance.” When probed to elaborate further, she divulged the following: “because you are reporting to 
the Institutional Development Support Official (IDSO) and the IDSO reports to the (CM) Circuit 
Manager, and they are not in good terms…they drag you in.” In explaining how they dealt with 
favouritism, P8 highlighted the following: “there is favouritism but to a minimal level because the union 
is very active here, and the union become very active if the union representative for instance is not one of 
the SMT,”  
It can be concluded that favouritism practised by some principals may lead to division amongst 
colleagues making the ground fertile for TWB. The position ties in with the author’s assertion that; 
playing favourites is not good for any organisation, and it is therefore, discouraged because it may 
manifest in cliques, cabals, and power blocs, either belonging to the principal or deputy principal. 
Favouritism is acceptable, until it is misused, abused, and used as weapon to vindicate others within 
organisations (Monyepao, 2017). The principals are required to be impartial and treat all staff members as 
equals. Furthermore, the analysis confirmed that, when employees are unionised or have good 
representation, some of the workplace ills, such as bullying in its various forms may be minimised. 
Sub-theme: 1.5 Excessive Work Overload (Organisational Factor) 
Previous research identified a sense of excessive work overload as one of the major factors 
contributing towards TWB. Equally, the present paper established that teachers are carrying excessive 


 
 
Exploring the Factors Contributing Towards Teacher Workplace Bullying Across the Teaching Ranks: Focus on Selected South African Public Schools 
53 
 
International Journal of Social  
Science Research and Review 
Volume 7, Issue 2
 
February, 2024
 
work overloads and are unable to cope with the work demand. Supporting this position was P5 who 
complained about excessive work overload: “teachers are absolutely overloaded; especially the 
administrative part…the teaching in the class is not the problem. It is the forms, reports for the 
department and all those things that contribute to so much stress.” (P2, T) highlighted that “we usually 
disagree because the beloved teachers are given less periods or are given their preferred subjects. For 
example, others would say; I want to teach mathematics only, not life skills because it has plenty of 
work.” This finding supports previously reviewed literature, and further demonstrates how the factors 
contributing to TWB are multifaceted.  
When probed, (P12, DP) has this to say…” Honestly speaking excessive work overload leaves 
teachers frustrated and as a result they are going to vent their anger to whoever is closer to them, mainly 
their immediate seniors in a form of departmental heads, departmental heads will also vent their 
frustrations to the deputy principals. Leaving deputy principals with no choice but to find themselves 
fighting with the principal”. (P1, T) confirmed the above commentaries, surprisingly when he had fewer 
teaching periods. He made the following remarks: “they even verbally attacked me, saying; ‘how special 
are you’?”. This shows that making unfair changes relating to teachers’ workloads may generate tension 
and manifest in adversarial relationships. Furthermore, excessive work overload has the potential to 
compromise the quality of teaching and learning, were affected teachers may avoid honouring certain 
periods. However, it is worth mentioning that no evidence was found in literature that substantiate TWB 
as a result of a particular teacher having fewer teaching periods.   
Theme 2: The Identified Measures to Avert TWB 
This theme focuses on the suggested measures in the prevention of TWB. The bulk of the 
participants mainly consent that behavioural change may play a huge role in the reduction of TWB. 
Sub-theme: 2.1 Constant Training and Workshops (Organisational Level) 
The bulk of participants concurred with what reviewed literature suggested. For example, (P8, T) 
presented the following remedies at the school level: “the site can train teachers; for example, in my site I 
do workshops about teachers’ rights on labour issues.” He suggested that those trainings should be 
streamlined; for instance, the Department of Labour needs to provide manuals that they can use, so that 
the content of the training is similar to that of the unions. He emphasised that “labour issues are about 
bringing peace in the work environment. If teachers don’t know their rights, and are not trained, there 
would not be any peace at the workplace environment.”  
Presenting a matching view, (P1, T) proposed the following: “the DBE must come up with 
developmental plans, because if teachers are not emotionally trained, they cannot handle work-related 
stress. Teachers’ voices are not as loud as that of the department…but if training is coming through the 
DBE it will work. Or if it comes amongst us collectively it might work, by saying as a school, TWB will 
not be tolerated.” The participant suggested that TWB must be spoken about on a daily basis, not only 
when certain teachers are involved in a fight. This resonates with the findings by Mahome (2017) that 
meetings dealing with the challenge’s teachers are experiencing in schools should be ongoing. On the 
same issue of training, (P2, T) suggested that the department should provide some sort of workshops to 
the managers on how to prevent TWB. He further proposed that “there must be an induction for every 
management to end this thing of favouritism and ethnic differences, I think it can work. We must have 
posters in staffrooms that warn against TWB.”  
Congruent with the above participants is (P16, CP): “I think constant workshops that emphasise 
good working ethics may assist in minimising the behaviour. I also think workshops should encourage 
those experiencing bullying to seek help; active labour unions or site stewards may also play a significant 
role.” The author argues that the suggestion of workshops by the participants to tackle TWB expose the 


 
 
Exploring the Factors Contributing Towards Teacher Workplace Bullying Across the Teaching Ranks: Focus on Selected South African Public Schools 
54 
 
International Journal of Social  
Science Research and Review 
Volume 7, Issue 2
 
February, 2024
 
failure of the SACE in enlightening teachers about workplace bullying. For example, in the 2018/19 
financial year report, SACE held workshops for teachers on the Code of Professional Ethics (SACE, 
2020). Regrettably, the workshops did not address teachers’ daily challenges such as teacher bullying and 
violence. In addition, with regard to the campaign launched by SACE (2019) on teachers’ rights, 
responsibilities and safety, the draft handbook focuses mainly on learner bullying and falls short on TWB 
(SACE, 2020). The reviewed literature and some of the interviewed participants recommended that good 
working ethics and communication skills should be included in the training of teachers, as some of the 
measures to avert TWB.  
a) Good Working Ethics 
When probed on good working ethics, (P3, T) highlighted that some teachers and principals lack 
morals. He suggested the following: “If the DBE can take them back to the drawing board, especially 
these seniors, take them through ethics, how to behave whenever they are around let say; junior staff 
members.” According to him, it is a matter of teachers conducting themselves in an appropriate manner 
which shows respect. He concluded by saying that “teachers at this point are not respected in their 
communities, because they (communities) know that these teachers fight at schools…they stab each other. 
Hence, we are losing the value of being teachers.” The study can confirm that teachers are compelled to 
espouse and demonstrate a high level of professional and ethical conduct. This should trickle down to the 
learners and consequently school violence in any form could be reduced.  
b) Decent Communication Skills 
During the daily interactions, information is also shared through verbal and non-verbal 
communication, and, along the way, strain may arise, manifesting strained relationships. As a result, the 
interviewed participants suggested that teachers improve the manner in which they communicate with one 
another. Klein and Bentolila (2018) suggested that when internal communication is effective and positive 
interaction is evident amongst all parties, the organisation remain healthy, and employees are protected 
from external pressures. (P16, CP) agreed and suggested the following measures: “more than anything if 
teachers, the DBE for one can invest in workshops on interpersonal skills it will assist a lot. Engage in 
workshops on communication training it will help because more than anything, everything gets lost in 
these dynamics of interpersonal relationships on how they communicate with each other.” This finding 
may be aligned to previous research by Fox, Gong, and Attoh (2015) who accentuated that it is important 
to foster strong interpersonal relationships between the principal and the teachers. The findings seem to 
suggest that every teacher is distinctive, and teaching is a networking practice, where different individuals 
converge and interact, therefore; improved communication skills may reduce TWB.  
P16 further stressed that over and above the DBE focusing on equipping teachers with curriculum 
and teaching skills, they also have to look at other skills that are needed to help them with carrying out 
their responsibilities on a day-to-day basis. She outlined these examples: “in terms of how they interact 
and communicate with each other, and how they carry themselves within their workspaces and still 
remain professional even when they have relationships out of being professionals or out of being 
teachers.” This finding ties in well with De Wet’s (2010b) assertion that workplace bullying manifests 
itself in interpersonal work relationships between individuals (principal and his or her victim). Therefore, 
communication plays a meaningful part not just in improving the schools’ achievement, but also in 
shaping a healthy professional relationship of the SMT and the teachers.  
Decent and polite communication amongst colleagues may manifest in regular meetings that 
forge understanding and ultimately curtail the scourge of TWB. For instance, when asked on how tensions 
can be eliminated, (P11, DH) said “having meetings time and again so that we understand each other.” 
He emphasised that, if you are not telling you wouldn’t know what one is thinking until we start talking.” 
P6 agrees and suggested the DBE have regular meetings with PL1 teachers to establish if they are being 


 
 
Exploring the Factors Contributing Towards Teacher Workplace Bullying Across the Teaching Ranks: Focus on Selected South African Public Schools 
55 
 
International Journal of Social  
Science Research and Review 
Volume 7, Issue 2
 
February, 2024
 
bullied. These proposals resonate well with the suggestion by McMahon, Reeves, McConnell, Peist, Ruiz 
and APA (2017) who maintained that communicating more effectively, resolving conflicts peacefully and 
developing healthy problem-solving strategies my lead to pro-social and harmonious workplaces. Given 
the aforementioned findings and discussions, it can be concluded that improved communication skills 
characterised by deference and courtesy have the potential to bring about harmony in the workplace.  
Sub-theme: 2.2 Promotion of Mutual Respect (Environmental Level) 
Section 18 of the South African Employment of Educators Act of 1998 stipulates that teacher 
commits misconduct if they display disrespect towards others in the workplace or demonstrate abusive or 
insolent behaviour. Regrettably, the study found that teachers are disrespecting one another across various 
ranks; for example, (P4, T) divulged that “our principal doesn’t see us as professionals; he sees teachers 
as his children.” Related to the narrative of this teacher’s experiences, P3 disclosed the following: “our 
leaders are running the school as if they are running their households…these old teachers treat us like 
kids.” The aforementioned accounts correspond well with Mafora’s (2013) study where the principal was 
viewed by teachers as running the school like his own house and treating teachers as his children who 
must agree with whatever he said. These findings are further indicative to the effect that no one is spared 
when it comes to the bullying of the teachers by the supervisors; however, the common trend as 
established by the study is that the younger teachers remain the most susceptible. As a result, some of the 
participants suggested that mutual respect has to be inculcated and entrenched. Weighing in on this, (P10, 
DH) suggested that “we must have respect for each other, and you have to get your school to buy in this 
culture of respect.” Likewise, the DBE (2015) emphasised the importance of creating safe schools that 
encourage respect for human rights. The foregoing is in commensurate with conclusions of (Fahie & 
Devine, 2014), namely that compassion and mutual respect foster a positive culture. Collaboration is 
essential in any organisation: in a school milieu, it has the potential to yield positive academic results. The 
study has established that several teachers are unaware that disrespecting a colleague is a punishable 
offence; hence, it is significant for schools to implement practices that respect individual wellbeing and 
dignity.  
 
Conclusion 
Steered by Johnson’s ecological model the present paper explored factors contributing towards 
TWB by considering personal, environmental, and organisational factors that were aligned to the three 
layers of influence adopted by the paper. Largely qualitative collected data revealed that greatest number 
of the participants confirmed various factors triggering bullying across the teaching ranks. The bullying is 
unleashed by all the members of the teaching staff, depending on the contraposition of each individual 
teacher. It should be emphasised that the aim of the paper was not to accuse a particular member of the 
teaching staff of TWB, but to explore its predictors across the teaching ranks. The study ascertained a lack 
of mutual respect across the teaching ranks as one of the contributory factors. At the same time, some 
principals were laid bare as disrespectful to their subordinates due to the power that goes with the position 
of Principalship. 
The other contributory factor that was prominent in most of the nine researched schools was the 
competition for promotional teaching posts. Promotion is linked and associated with power, regrettably in 
the process of assuming promotion eligible competitors are targeted, in some instances using union 
affiliation as a vehicle for the upward mobility. The findings signal the vulnerability of   temporary and 
newly appointed teachers in comparison to the long serving staff members, and thus present TWB as a 
territorial phenomenon. In addition, teachers having superior qualifications and those who have assumed 
managerial positions seem to be the worst affected by jealousy meted out by their colleagues. The author 
purports that jealousy remains a strong contributing factor towards TWB, with age and gender rendering 


 
 
Exploring the Factors Contributing Towards Teacher Workplace Bullying Across the Teaching Ranks: Focus on Selected South African Public Schools 
56 
 
International Journal of Social  
Science Research and Review 
Volume 7, Issue 2
 
February, 2024
 
the targets more susceptible to attacks. In the process, most of the teachers also noted selective treatment 
and favouritism practised by some principals, may lead to division amongst colleagues making the ground 
fertile for TWB. Principals were identified as persons encouraging dissent between teachers, thereby 
preventing them from uniting and getting along with each other. Equally, the present paper established 
that teachers are carrying excessive work overloads and are unable to cope with the work demand. 
Whereby, making unfair changes relating to teachers’ workloads may generate tension and manifest in 
adversarial relationships. However, it is worth mentioning that no evidence was found in literature that 
substantiate TWB as a result of a particular teacher having fewer teaching periods.   
In preventing TWB, the bulk of the participants mainly consent that behavioural change may play 
a huge role in the reduction of TWB. Participants recommended that good working ethics and 
communication skills should be included in the training of teachers, as some of the measures. In fact, the 
training of all employees should be implemented for the purpose of recognising, dealing with, and 
preventing TWB (DE Wet & Jacobs, 2013). It can be concluded that improved communication skills 
characterised by deference and courtesy have the potential to bring about harmony in the workplace. 
These findings are further indicative to the effect that no one is spared when it comes to the bullying of 
the teachers by the supervisors; however, the common trend as established by the study is that the 
younger teachers remain the most susceptible. As a result, some of the participants suggested that mutual 
respect has to be inculcated and entrenched. A recognised limitation of the paper is that the author did not 
interview office-based practitioners, especially those in provincial and national education echelons. Their 
contribution might have reinforced the preventive measures given their vast experience in educational 
matters. However, this paper augments the restricted knowledge base on TWB and hope to create 
alertness to the educational policy-makers, scholars, and practitioners about this disparaging form of 
bullying. 
 
Recommendations 
In contemplation of preventing TWB, the following recommendations are put forward.  
● Principals to take the lead in changing the organisational culture from top down, where mutual 
respect is normalised, since a change in behaviour and practice may yield desirable results.  
● Principals and teachers’ trade unions should refrain from interfering in the promotion appointments 
processes as their undue influence perpetuates TWB. Instead, it is recommended that they focus 
on conducting training and workshops on pro-social behaviour, peaceful conflict resolution and 
how teachers are supposed to protect themselves from retribution and threats.  The provincial 
district officials have to play a leading role in turning schools into safe spaces.  
● There should be equal distribution of workload according to the post levels, excessive work 
overload should not be weaponised to bully teacher targets. 
● It is further recommended that the Department of Basic Education formulate a clear and coherent 
anti-bullying policy to tackle TWB, a policy that is teacher-centric and address gender-based 
bullying among the primary focuses. 
 
Suggestions for Further Studies 
●  A large-scale study on the subject should be conducted so that the findings could be generalised. 
●  How the involvement of teacher unions in the awarding of promotional posts enhance TWB, an 
ecological perspective study focusing on the role of the branch and provincial union leaders. 
●  How excessive work overload affects teachers daily performance in carrying out official duties. 
 


 
 
Exploring the Factors Contributing Towards Teacher Workplace Bullying Across the Teaching Ranks: Focus on Selected South African Public Schools 
57 
 
International Journal of Social  
Science Research and Review 
Volume 7, Issue 2
 
February, 2024
 
Acknowledgements  
The author would like to thank the provincial Gauteng Department of Basic Education for giving 
approval for the study, and a further thank you to all the participants. To the acting HOD of the 
Soshanguve North Campus Library, your assistance is acknowledged, right from the beginning of the 
major study until the production of the present paper. 
 
References 
Ariza-Montes A., Muniz., R. N.M., Leal-Rodríguez., A.L. & Leal-Millán, A.G. “Workplace Bullying 
Among Teachers: An Analysis from the Job Demands-   Resources (JD-R) Model Perspective.” 
Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, vol. 58, no. 8, 2016, pp. 818–27. JSTOR, 
https://www.jstor.org/stable/48500992. Accessed 19 Sept. 2023. 
Bassette. R. 2004. Qualitative data analysis software: Addressing the debates. Journal of Management 
Systems. XVI:33-39. 
Batchelor T 2019. The experience of workplace bullying amongst teachers: A qualitative study. MA 
dissertation. Johannesburg, South Africa: University of the Witwatersrand. Available at 
https://wiredspace.wits.ac.za/xmlui/bitstream/handl 
e/10539/29490/Toni%20Batchelor%20Masters%20 
Research%202019%20%281%29.pdf?sequence=2 &is Allowed=y. Accessed 31 May 2022. 
Bently, T., Catley, B., Forsyth, D. & Tappin, D. C. 2014. Understanding workplace violence: The value of 
a system perspective. Applied Ergonomics 45 (4): 839-849.  
Bernstein, C. & Batchelor, J. 2022. Qualitative exploration of workplace demands, resources and bullying 
among teachers in South African schools: Implications for individual and organisational well-being. 
South African Journal of Education, 42(2):1-9. 
Bradshaw, C.P. 2015. Translating research to practice in bullying intervention. American Psychologist, 
70(4), 322–332. 
Bernotaite, L, & Malinauskiene, V. 2017. Workplace bullying and mental health among teachers in 
relation to psychosocial job characteristics and burnout. International Journal of Occupational 
Medicine and Environmental Health. 30. 10.13075/ijomeh.1896.00943. 
Bezuidenhout, R. M. & Cronje, F. 2014. Qualitative data analysis. In Du Plooy-Cilliers, F., Davis C. & 
Bezuidenhout, R. M. (Eds.) Research Matters. Cape Town: Juta.  
Binduko, S. 2013. The role of the principal in maintaining a harmonious working environment: An 
investigation into “legal staff” bullying by the school management team in Ekurhuleni North District 
high schools. Unpublished master’s dissertation. University of South Africa, Pretoria. 
Bless, C., Higson-Smith, C. & Sithole, S. L. 2000. Fundamentals of social research methods: An African 
perspective. (3rd ed.) Cape Town: Juta. 
Burton, P. 2008. Merchants, skollies and stone. Experience of school violence in South Africa. Monograph 
Series, No. 4. Cape Town: Centre for Justice and Crime Prevention in South Africa. 
Bronfenbrenner, U. 1979 Ecology of Human Development: Experiments by Nature and Design. Havard 
University Press, Cambridge. 


 
 
Exploring the Factors Contributing Towards Teacher Workplace Bullying Across the Teaching Ranks: Focus on Selected South African Public Schools 
58 
 
International Journal of Social  
Science Research and Review 
Volume 7, Issue 2
 
February, 2024
 
Bronfenbrenner, U. 1994. Ecological Models of Human Development. In: Husen, T. and Postlethwaite, 
T.N., Eds., The International Encyclopaedia of Education, 2nd Edition, Elsevier Sciences, New York. 
Catherine Scheeler, M., Markelz, A., Taylor, J. C., Deshpande, D. S., & Wolfe, P. 2022. Teacher 
Workplace Bullying: How Pervasive is the Problem? Teacher Education and Special Education, 
45(2), 123–140. https://doi.org/10.1177/08884064211015698. 
Čech, T., Dobeŝová Cakirpaloglu, S. & Kvintová, J. 2017. Workplace bullying - coping strategies of 
teachers. 3rd International Conference on Lifelong Education and Leadership for all ICLEL, 12 - 14 
September 2017. Polytechnic Institute of Porto, Porto, Portugal. [Online] Available from: 
http://www.ijlel.com/ conferance17/52.pdf. 
Čech, Tomáš & Kvintova, Jana & Cakirpaloglu, Simona. 2018. Causes of bullying in the workplace 
among primary school teachers of your paper. Global Journal of Guidance and Counselling in 
Schools: Current Perspectives. 8. 173-181. 10.18844/gjgc. v8i3.3581. 
Cemaloglu, N. 2007. The relationship between organizational health and bullying that teachers experience 
in primary schools in Turkey. Educational Research Quarterly, 31 (2): 3-29.  
Coetzee, A. 2017. Workplace violence against educators in public and private schools in Pretoria, 
Gauteng: A comparative investigation. Unpublished master’s dissertation. University of Pretoria, 
Pretoria. 
Crawshaw, L. 2009. Workplace bullying? Mobbing? Harassment? Distraction by a thousand 
definitions. Consulting 
Psychology 
Journal: 
Practice 
and 
Research, 
61(3), 
263–
267. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0016590. 
Creswell, J. W. 2009. Research design: qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods approaches. (3rd ed.). 
London: SAGE.  
Department of Basic Education (DBE), UNICEF, & Centre for Justice and Crime Prevention. 2015. 
National School Safety Framework. Pretoria: Department of Basic Education. Available at: 
http://www.cjcp.org.za/national-school-safety--framework-nssf [Accessed 20/01/2020].  
Department of Basic Education (DBE). 2016. Personnel administrative measures (PAM). Government 
Gazette No: 39684. Pretoria: Government Printers. 
Department of Basic Education (DBE). 2016. Report of the ministerial task team appointed by Angie 
Motshekga to investigate allegations into the selling of posts of educators by members of teaching 
unions and departmental officials in provincial education departments. Final report. Pretoria: 
Department 
of 
Basic 
Education. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.gov.za/Portals/0/Documents/Reports/MTTJobsReport2016.pdf?ver=2016-05-20-173514-
773. [Accessed 05/08/2021] 
De Vos, A., Strydom, H., Fouche, C. B. & Delport, C. S. L. 2011. Research at grass roots. A primer for 
caring professions. (4th ed.) Pretoria: Van Schaik.  
De Vos, J. & Kirsten, G. J. C. 2015. The nature of workplace bullying experienced by the teachers and the 
bio psychosocial health effects. South African Journal of Education, 35 (3): 1-9.  
De Wet, N. C. 2010a. The reasons for and the impact of principal-on-teacher bullying on victims’ private 
and professional lives. Teaching and Teacher Education, 26 (7): 1450-1459. 


 
 
Exploring the Factors Contributing Towards Teacher Workplace Bullying Across the Teaching Ranks: Focus on Selected South African Public Schools 
59 
 
International Journal of Social  
Science Research and Review 
Volume 7, Issue 2
 
February, 2024
 
De Wet, N. C. 2010b. School principals’ bullying behaviour. Acta Criminologica, 23 (1): 96-117.  
De Wet, N. C. 2011. Educator-on-educator workplace bullying: a phenomenological study. Africa 
Education Review, 8 (3): 450-466.  
De Wet, N. C. & Jacobs, L. 2013. South African teachers’ exposure to workplace bullying. The Journal 
for Trans disciplinary Research in Southern Africa, 9 (3): 446-464.  
De Wet, N. C. 2014. Educators’ understanding of workplace bullying. South African Journal of 
Education, 34 (1): 1-16. 
De Wet, C. 2020. Social media commenters’ understanding of the antecedents of teacher-targeted 
bullying. South African Journal of Education, 40(3):1-11.   
Dillon, B. L. 2012. Workplace violence: Impact, causes and prevention. Work, 42 (1): 15-20.  
Einarsen S, Hoel H, Zapf, D. & Cooper, C.L 2003. The concept of bullying at work: The European 
tradition. In S Einarsen et al. (eds) 2003:175-184. 
Einarsen, S., Hoel, H., Zapf, D. & Cooper, C. 2011. The concept of bullying and harassment at work: The 
European tradition. In Einarsen, S., Hoel, H., Zapf, D. & Cooper, C. (Eds.) Bullying and Harassment 
in the Workplace (2nd ed.) New York: Taylor and Francis. 3-39.  
Espelage, D. L., Low, S., & De La Rue, L. (2012). Relations between peer victimization subtypes, family 
violence, and psychological outcomes during early adolescence. Psychology of Violence, 2(4), 313–
324. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0027386. 
Espelage, D., Anderman, E. M., Brown, V. E., Jones, A., Lane, K. L., McMahon, S. D., Reddy, L. A. & 
Reynolds, C. R. (2013). Understanding and preventing violence directed against teachers: 
Recommendations for a national research, practice, and policy agenda. American Psychologist, 68(2), 
75-87. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0031307. 
Fahie, D. 2014. Blackboard bullies: workplace bullying in primary schools. Irish Educational Studies, 33: 
1-41.  
Fahie, D. & Devine, D. 2014. The impact of workplace bullying on primary school teachers and 
principals, Scandinavian Journal of Education Research, 58 (2): 235-252.  
Fox, G., Bullon. S. & Manning, E. 1995. Collins Cobuild English Dictionary. London: Harper Collins.  
Fox, S. & Stallworth, L. E. 2010. The battered apple: An application of stressor-emotion-control/ support 
theory to teachers’ experiences of violence and bullying. Human Relations, 63 (7): 927-954.  
Fox, J., Gong, T. & Attoh, P. 2015. The impact of principal as authentic leader on teacher trust in the K-12 
educational context. Journal Leadership Studies, 8: 6-18.  
Gradinger, P., Strohmeier, D. & Spiel, C. 2017. Parents‟ and teachers‟ opinions on bullying and 
cyberbullying prevention: the relevance of their own children’s or students‟ involvement. Zeitschrift 
für Psychologie, 225(1):76–84. https://doi.org/10.1027/2151- 2604/a000278. 
Greeff, F. 2013. Information collection: Interviewing. In De Vos, A. S., Strydom, H., Fouche, C. B. & 
Delport C. S. L. (Eds.) Research at Grass Roots: For the Social Sciences and Human Service 
Professions. (4th ed.) Pretoria: Van Schaik. 


 
 
Exploring the Factors Contributing Towards Teacher Workplace Bullying Across the Teaching Ranks: Focus on Selected South African Public Schools 
60 
 
International Journal of Social  
Science Research and Review 
Volume 7, Issue 2
 
February, 2024
 
Henning, E. 2004. Finding your way in qualitative research. Pretoria: Van Schaik.  
Hershcovis, M. S. & Barling, J. 2010. Towards a multi-foci approach to workplace aggression: A meta-
analytic review of outcomes from different perpetrators. Journal of Organisational Behaviour, 3 (1): 
24-44.  
Hong, J. S., & Espelage, D. L. 2012. A review of research on bullying and peer victimization in school: 
An 
ecological 
system 
analysis. 
Aggression 
and 
Violent 
Behaviour, 
17(4), 
311-322. 
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.avb.2012.03.003. 
Howard, G. M. 2014. The literature review. In Du Plooy-Cilliers, F., Davis, C. & Bezuidenhout, R. M. 
(Eds.) Research Matters. Cape Town: Juta.  
Jacobs, L. 2012. School violence: A multidimensional education nemesis. Unpublished doctoral thesis. 
University of the Free State, Bloemfontein. 
Johnson SL 2011. An ecological model of workplace bullying: A guide for intervention and research. 
Nursing Forum, 46(2):55–63. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-6198.2011.00213.x. 
Johnson, S.L., & Rea, R.E. 2009. Workplace bullying: Concerns for nurse leaders. Journal of Nursing 
Administration, 39(2):84-90. 
Jacobs L & De Wet C 2015. A quantitative exploration of the effects of workplace bullying on South 
African 
educators. 
African 
Safety 
Promotion 
Journal, 
13(2):31–58. 
Available 
at 
https://www.ajol.info/index.php/asp/article/view/13 6137/125629. 
Jacobs, L. & De Wet, C. 2018. The complexity of teacher targeted-bullying: An analysis of policy. 
Journal of Social Science, 43(2):53-78. 
Jacobs, L. & Tiese, K.L.G. 2019. Educators’ subjective experiences of workplace bullying within a 
perceived neoliberalist education system. South African Journal of Education, 39(4):1-9. 
Khunou, P. M. 2006. Skilful conversation as a strategic tool for school successes. Unpublished master’s 
mini-dissertation. University of Johannesburg, Johannesburg. 
Kiriakidis, S. P. 2011. Bullying among youth. Issues, interventions, and theory. New York: Nova Science.  
Klein, J. & Bentolila, A. 2018. Principals bully teachers at schools: causes, examples, and consequences. 
International Journal of Leadership in Education, (1): 1-19.  
Kleinheksel, C. J. 2018. Not just the playground: Adult bullying in the K-12 workplace. Unpublished 
doctoral dissertation. Available from ProQuest Dissertations and Thesis: Full Text database. ProQuest 
No: 10931642.  
Kleinheksel, C. J. & Geisel, R. T. 2019. An examination of adult bullying in the K-12 workplace: 
Implications for school leaders. School Leadership Review, 14 (1):  Article 7. Available at: 
https://schoolworks.sfasu.edu/slr/vol14/iss1/7 [Accessed 21/10/2019].  
Kollapen, J. 2006. “School Violence.” Report for the Helen Suzman Foundation, Pretoria: South African 
Human Rights Commission. 
Le Roux, R., Rycroft, A. & Orleyn, T. 2010. Harassment in the workplace: Law policies and processes. 
Durban: LexisNexis Butterworth.  


 
 
Exploring the Factors Contributing Towards Teacher Workplace Bullying Across the Teaching Ranks: Focus on Selected South African Public Schools 
61 
 
International Journal of Social  
Science Research and Review 
Volume 7, Issue 2
 
February, 2024
 
Lind, K., Glaso, L., Pallesen, S. & Einarsen. 2009. Personality profiles among targets and non-targets of 
workplace bullying, European Psychologist, 14 (3): 231-237.  
Longobardi, C., Badenes-Ribera, L., Fabris, M. A., Martinez, A. & McMahon, S. D. (2018). Prevalence of 
student 
violence 
against 
teachers: 
A 
meta-analysis. 
Psychology 
of 
Violence, 
https://doi.org/10.1037/vio0000202. 
Lutgen-Sandvik, P. & Tracy, S. J. 2012. Answering five key questions about workplace bullying: How 
communication scholarship provides thought leadership for transforming abuse at work. Management 
Communication Quarterly, 26 (1): 3-47.  
Mafora, P. 2013. Learners’ and teachers’ perceptions of principal’s leadership in Soweto secondary 
schools: a social justice perspective. South African Journal of Education, 33 (3): 1-15. 
Mahabeer, P., 2020. Novice teachers’ beliefs and fears on bullying in schools in South Africa. KOERS — 
Bulletin for Christian Scholarship, 85(1). Available at: https://doi.org/10.19108/ KOERS.85.1.2445. 
Mahome, M.M. 2017. Violence directed against teachers: A case of Johannesburg district. Unpublished 
dissertation. M.Ed. Tshwane University of Technology, Pretoria. 
Mahome, M.M. 2021. Perpetrators of staff victimisation within the teaching ranks: A socioecological 
perspective. Acta Criminologica: African Journal of Criminology & Victimology, 34(2): 1-25. 
Malahy, S. 2015. Workplace bullying: Teacher-to-teacher. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Available 
from ProQuest Dissertation and Thesis: Full Text database. (ProQuest No: 3739757).  
Martinez, A., McMahon, S. D., Espelage, D., Anderman, E. M., Reddy, L. A. & Sanchez, B. 2015. 
Teachers’ experiences with multiple victimisations. Identifying demographic, cognitive, and 
contextual correlates. Journal of School Violence, 15: 387-405.  
Mazzarella, J. 2018. Reported experiences of adult-to-adult bullying in K-12 New Jersey schools. 
Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Available from ProQuest Dissertations and Thesis: Full text 
database. (ProQuest No: 1074563). 
McMahon, S. D., Reaves, S., McConnell, E., Peist, E. & Ruiz, L. & the APA Task Force on Classroom 
Violence Directed Against Teachers. 2017. Ecology of teachers’ experiences with violence and lack of 
administrative support. American Journal of Community Psychology, 60: 502-515.  
Mollema, E.H. 2018. Teachers’ experiences of workplace bullying in secondary schools. Unpublished 
master’s dissertation. University of Pretoria, Pretoria. 
Monyepao, N. 2017. The workplace: Another terrain for struggle. Pretoria: Succinct Investments.  
Netshitangani, T. 2014. Causes of school-based violence in South African public schools: Application of 
normalisation theory to understand the phenomenon through educators’ perspectives. Mediterranean 
Journal of Social Sciences, 5 (20): 1394-1402.  
Newman, B.M. & Newman, P.R. 2020. Ecological theories In B.M. Newman & P.R. Newman 
(Eds.) Theories of Adolescent Development, (pp. 313-335) Elsevier. 
Nijhawan, L.P., Janodia, M.D., Muddukrishna, B.S., Bhat, K.M., Bairy, K.L., Udupa, N. & Musmade, 
P.B. 2013. Informed consent: issues and challenges. Journal of advanced Pharmaceutical Technology 
& Research, 4(3): 133-140. http://dx.doi.org/10.4103/2231-4040.116779. 


 
 
Exploring the Factors Contributing Towards Teacher Workplace Bullying Across the Teaching Ranks: Focus on Selected South African Public Schools 
62 
 
International Journal of Social  
Science Research and Review 
Volume 7, Issue 2
 
February, 2024
 
Okeke, C.C., Omodan, B.I., & Dube, B. 2022. Ethical issues in humanities, social sciences, and science 
IN: E.O. Adu & C.I.O, Okeke. (Eds). Fundamentals of research in humanities, social sciences, and 
science education. Van Schaik Publishers.  
Orange, A. 2018. Workplace bullying in schools: Teachers’ perceptions of why they were mistreated. The 
Educational Forum, 82 (4) 390-405.  
Pahad, S. & Graham, T. M. 2012. Educators’ perceptions of factors contributing to school violence in 
Alexandra. African Safety Promotional Journal, 10 (1): 1-15.  
Parzefall, M. & Salin, D. M. 2010. Perceptions of and reactions to workplace bullying: A social exchange 
perspective. Human Relations, 63: 761-780.  
Patton, M. 2002. Qualitative research and evaluation methods. Thousand Oaks, California: Sage 
Publications Inc. 
Prpić, M. (2021). Students’ violence against teachers in relation to school climate. Varstvoslovje, Journal 
of Criminal Justice and Security, 4, 405-425. 
Republic of South Africa (RSA). Occupational Health and Safety Amendment Act 11 of 1993 (Published 
in the Government Gazette, (15369) Cape Town: Government Printers.  
Republic of South Africa (RSA) 1993a. The Compensation for Occupational Injuries and Diseases Act, 
Act 130 of 1993. Pretoria: Government Printer. 
Republic of South Africa (RSA) 1995. The Labour Relations Act, Act 66 of 1995. Pretoria: Government 
Printer. 
Republic of South Africa (RSA) 1998b. Employment Equity Act, Act 55 of 1998. Pretoria: Government 
Printer. 
Republic of South Africa (RSA). Employment of Educators Act (17 of 1998) in the Policy Handbook for 
Educators. Education Labour Relations. South Africa: Education Labour Relations Council. 
Republic of South Africa. 2016. Personnel Administrative Measures (Report No. 39684). Retrieved from 
https://naptosa.org.za/what-s-new/1812-revisedpersonnel-administrative-measures-pam-government-
gazette-no-396684. 
Rowe, K., Shilbury, D., Ferkins, L., & Hinckson, E. 2013. Sports development and physical activity 
promotion: An integrated model to enhance collaboration and understanding. Sport Management 
Review, 16(3), 364-377. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.smr.2012.12.003. 
Rutherford, R. M. 2009. A creativity development model to enhance educator security-a labour law 
perspective. Unpublished doctoral thesis. Northwest University: Potchefstroom.  
Salin, D. 2003. Ways of explaining: A review of enabling, motivating and precipitating structures and 
processes in the work environment. Human Relations, 56 (10): 1213-1232.  
Santos, A., &. & Tin, J. J. 2016. The nature, extent, and impact of educator targeted bullying on school 
teachers in West Malaysia. British Journal of Guidance and Counselling, 46 (5): 1-14. 
Sargioti, A., Kuldas, S., Foody, M., Otero, P.V., Kinahan, A., Canning, C., Heaney, D. & Norman, J.O. 
2023. Dublin anti-bullying self-efficacy models and scales: Development and validation. Journal of 
Interpersonal Violence, 38(7-8-): 5748-5773. 


 
 
Exploring the Factors Contributing Towards Teacher Workplace Bullying Across the Teaching Ranks: Focus on Selected South African Public Schools 
63 
 
International Journal of Social  
Science Research and Review 
Volume 7, Issue 2
 
February, 2024
 
Sasson, D. B. &. & Somech, A. 2015. Observing aggression of teachers in school teams. Teachers and 
Teaching: Theory and Practice, 21 (8): 941-957. 
Sato, M., Inoue, Y., Du, J. & Funk, D.C. 2019. Access to parks and recreational facilities, physical 
activity, and health care costs for older adults. Evidence from U.S countries. Journal of Leisure 
Research, 50(3), 220-238. https://doi.org/10.1080/0022216.2019.1583048. 
Scheeler, M.C., Markelz, A., Taylor, J. C., Deshpande, D. S., & Wolfe, P. 2022. Teacher Workplace 
Bullying: How Pervasive is the Problem? Teacher Education and Special Education, 45(2), 123–140. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/08884064211015698. 
Sinha, S.K., & Yadav, R. 2017. Workplace Bullying in School Teachers: An Indian Enquiry. Indian 
Journal of Health and Wellbeing, 8, 200-205. 
Sitoyi, Z.M. 2020. Teacher and learner experiences of violence in a Cape Flats school, Western Cape. 
Unpublished M.Ed. dissertation. University of the Western Cape: Cape Town. 
Skogstad, A., Torsheim, T. &. & Einarsen, S. 2011. Testing the work environment hypothesis of bullying 
on a group level of analysis: Psychosocial factors as precursors of observed workplace bullying. 
Applied Psychology: An International Review, 60 (3): 475-495. 
Smit, D. M. 2014. Bullying in the workplace: Towards a uniform approach in South African labour law. 
Unpublished doctoral thesis. University of the Free State, Bloemfontein. 
Solomon D 2021. Workplace bullying among teachers: A job demands-resources perspective. MPsych 
dissertation. Johannesburg, South Africa: University of the Witwatersrand. 
Sorrell, D.A. 2015. Workplace bullying in education. Journal of bullying and social aggression, 1(2). 
Available at: http://sites.tamuc.edu/bullyingjournal/article/workplace-bullying-education/. Accessed 
on 30 October 2023. 
South African Council for Educators Act 31 of 2000. Government Gazette No. 34620, as amended by 
Basic Education Laws Amendment Act, No. 15 of 2011. Cape Town: Parliament.  
South 
African 
Council 
for 
Educators. 
(SACE). 
2019. 
Annual 
report. 
Available 
at: 
https://www.sace.org.za/assets/documents/uploads/sace_93707-2019-11-14-SACE. 
[Accessed 
11/02/2021]. 
South African Council for Educators. (SACE). 2020. Handbook for teachers’ rights, responsibilities, and 
safety. Available at: https://sace.org.za/assets/documents/uploads/sace_90707-2020-01-10 [Accessed 
03/01/2021]. 
Tepper, B. J., Moss, S. E. &. & Duffy, M. K. 2011. Predictors of abusive supervision: Supervisor 
perceptions of deep-level dissimilation, relationships conflict, and subordinate performance. Academy 
of Management Journal, 54 (2): 279-294.  
Tolentino, A.C. 2016. Bullying of Teachers in the Workplace: A Phenomenological Study. International 
Journal of Learning and Teaching. 10.18178/ijlt.2.1.20-27. 
Vinz, S. 2023, July 18. What Is a Theoretical Framework? | Guide to Organizing. Scribbr. Retrieved 
November 13, 2023, from https://www.scribbr.com/dissertation/theoretical-framework/. 


 
 
Exploring the Factors Contributing Towards Teacher Workplace Bullying Across the Teaching Ranks: Focus on Selected South African Public Schools 
64 
 
International Journal of Social  
Science Research and Review 
Volume 7, Issue 2
 
February, 2024
 
Vveinhardrt, J., Zukauskas, P. &. & Rivera, M. 2014. Testing hypotheses concerning correlations between 
“mobbing as discrimination” in employee relations and organisational climate. Problems and 
Perspectives in Management, 12 (3): 26-37.  
World Health Organisation. 2019. School-Based Violence Prevention: A Practical Handbook. Geneva. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyrights 
 
Copyright for this article is retained by the author(s), with first publication rights granted to the journal. 
 
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons 
Attribution license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).