Identifying and Preventing Gender Bias in 
Law Enforcement Response to Sexual Assault 
and Domestic Violence 


Table of Contents
I. Background......................................................................................Page 5
II. Improving the Response to Domestice Violence and Sexual Assault by 
Preventing Gender Bias in Policing Practices.....................................Page 7
III. Revelant Federal Law..................................................................Page 23
IV. Additional Resources...................................................................Page 26
Identifying and Preventing Gender Bias in 
Law Enforcement Response to Sexual Assault 
and Domestic Violence 


Statement of Purpose
 
The Department of Justice (department) is committed to assisting law enforcement agencies in their 
efforts to reduce sexual assault and domestic violence, and to administer justice when these crimes occur.  
Through the department’s many partnerships with state, local, tribal and territory law enforcement agencies 
(collectively, law enforcement agencies or LEAs), the department has recognized that many agencies are striv-
ing to improve their response to allegations of sexual assault and domestic violence, and are seeking assistance 
and support for these efforts.  
 
This guidance document is intended to reflect and further the department’s partnership with the police 
leaders, line officers and detectives who work tirelessly to ensure that policing is free from bias and to uphold 
the civil and human rights of the communities they serve.  The department extends its appreciation to the many 
police leaders and experts on law enforcement responses to sexual assault and domestic violence who worked 
with us to develop this guidance and provided us with helpful comments and suggestions.   
 
One critical part of improving LEAs’ response to allegations of sexual assault and domestic violence is 
identifying and preventing gender bias in policing practices.  Gender bias in policing practices is a form of 
discrimination that may result in LEAs providing less protection to certain victims on the basis of gender, 
failing to respond to crimes that disproportionately harm people of a particular gender or offering reduced or 
less robust services due to a reliance on gender stereotypes.  Gender bias, whether explicit or implicit, conscious 
or unconscious, may include police officers misclassifying or underreporting sexual assault or domestic 
violence cases, or inappropriately concluding that sexual assault cases are unfounded; failing to test sexual 
assault kits; interrogating rather than interviewing victims and witnesses; treating domestic violence as a family 
matter rather than a crime; failing to enforce protection orders; or failing to treat same-sex domestic violence as 
a crime.  In the sexual assault and domestic violence context, if gender bias influences the initial response to or 
investigation of the alleged crime, it may compromise law enforcement’s ability to ascertain the facts, determine 
whether the incident is a crime, and develop a case that supports effective prosecution and holds the perpetrator 
accountable.
 
   This guidance, however, is not intended to, and does not, create any right, benefit, trust or responsibility, 
whether substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or equity by a party against the United States, its depart-
ments, agencies, instrumentalities, entities, officers, employees or agents, or any person.
   The focus of this document is reducing gender bias in policing.  Addressing gender bias in policing is critical 
because police officers frequently have the initial contact with victims of sexual assault and domestic violence 
and LEAs generally conduct the investigations of sexual assault and domestic violence incidents.  It is import-
ant to note, however, that gender bias—both explicit and implicit—exists throughout society, and as a result, it 
can arise in various aspects of the criminal justice system.  Explicit and implicit gender bias can undermine the 
effective handling of sexual assault and domestic violence cases at any point from report to adjudication or 
closure.   While not the subject of this document, addressing gender bias on the part of prosecutors, judges and 
juries in their consideration of sexual assault and domestic violence cases is critical to ensuring that justice is 
served.  In addition, it is important for LEAs to be mindful that gender bias can occur alongside other types of 
unlawful discrimination, including racial bias, exacerbating any deficiencies in the criminal justice system’s 
response to reports of sexual assault and domestic violence and further undermining access to safety for those 
victims.
Identifying and Preventing Gender Bias in 
Law Enforcement Response to Sexual Assault 
and Domestic Violence 
1
2
1
2
Page 3


The Purpose of This Guidance is to: 
 
 
examine how gender bias can undermine LEAs’ response to sexual assault and domestic
 
 
violence; and
 
 
provide a set of basic principles that—if integrated into LEAs’ policies, trainings and
 
 
practices—will help ensure that agencies’ efforts to keep victims safe and hold offenders
 
 
accountable are not undermined, either intentionally or unintentionally, by gender bias.
The Department Encourages Law Enforcement Agencies to Consider These Principles and
Integrate Them into: 
 
 
clear, unequivocal policies about the proper handling of sexual assault and domestic violence
 
 
crimes; 
 
 
training for officers about these policies and about effective responses to sexual assault and 
 
 
domestic violence crimes more generally; and 
 
 
supervision protocols and systems of accountability to ensure that officers responding to sexual
 
 
assault and domestic violence crimes act in accordance with these policies and trainings.
 
This document, alongside the department’s other work in this area—including the provision of funding 
and technical assistance to LEAs—is meant to provide guidance to agencies as they develop more effective 
policies, practices and trainings.  This document is not intended to provide a comprehensive list of best practic-
es, or act as an operational handbook for responding to and investigating allegations of sexual assault or domes-
tic violence.  The department has additional resources to further assist LEAs in improving their response to 
sexual assault and domestic violence.  These resources are discussed at the end of this document and listed in 
the attached appendix.
Page 4


I. Background
 
 
Sexual assault and domestic violence are crimes that disproportionately impact women, girls, and 
lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) individuals in the United States.  According to surveys conduct-
ed by the Bureau of Justice Statistics and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC): 
 
 
90 percent of all cases of rape involve female victims. 
 
 
Nearly one in five women in the United States (18.3 percent) have been raped. 
 
 
About one in four women (24.3 percent) and one in seven men (13.8 percent) in the United
 
 
States have experienced severe physical violence at the hands of an intimate partner.  
 
 
44 percent of lesbian women and 61 percent of bisexual women have experienced rape, physical
 
 
violence, and/or stalking by an intimate partner.
 
 
26 percent of gay men and 37 percent of bisexual men have experienced rape, physical violence,
 
 
and/or stalking by an intimate partner.
 
While there is a lack of data on the violence experienced by transgender individuals, community-based 
studies indicate high levels of victimization.
 
Since the passage of the Violence against Women Act in 1994 (VAWA),   annual rates of domestic 
violence reports have dropped by 64 percent.    This progress is significant and due in no small part to the work  
  
   U.S. Dep’t of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Female Victims of Sexual Violence, 1994-2010, at 3 (2013), 
available at http://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/fvsv9410.pdf.    
   Ctrs. for Disease Control and Prevention, Nat’l Ctr. for Injury Prevention and Control, National Intimate 
Partner and Sexual Violence Survey 1 (2010), available at http://www.cdc.gov/ViolencePrevention/pdf/NIS-
VS_Executive_Summary-a.pdf.
   Id. at 2.
   Ctrs. for Disease Control and Prevention, Nat’l Ctr. for Injury Prevention and Control, National Intimate 
Partner and Sexual Violence Survey: 2010 Findings on Victimization by Sexual Orientation 2 (2013), available 
at http://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/pdf/nisvs_sofindings.pdf.
   Id.
   See, e.g., Nat’l Coalition of Anti-Violence Programs, Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Queer, and 
HIV-Affected Intimate Partner Violence in 2013, at 10 (2014 release edition), available at http://ww-
w.avp.org/storage/documents/ncavp2013ipvreport_webfinal.pdf; see also Rebecca L. Stotzer, Violence Against 
Transgender People: A Review of United States Data, 14 Aggression and Violent Behavior 170, 171-172 
(May-June 2009).
   Although VAWA refers to women in its title, the statute makes clear that the protections are for all victims of 
domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, and stalking, regardless of sex, gender identity, or sexual 
orientation.  42 U.S.C. § 13925(b)(13).
   
3
4
5
6
7
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
8
9
Page 5


that LEAs have done, in partnership with the department, to improve their response to allegations of domestic 
violence.  Yet, despite this progress, domestic violence still occurs at alarming rates and too often becomes 
lethal.  On average, three women die per day as a result of domestic violence in the United States and, for every 
woman killed in a domestic violence homicide, nine more are critically injured.    
 
The persistence of these high rates of crimes involving sexual assault and domestic violence underscores 
the critical importance of the role of law enforcement agencies in investigating these crimes thoroughly and 
with the same vigor and skill as they do other crimes of a similar significance that occur in their jurisdictions.  
By using thorough and effective investigative techniques, LEAs will continue to improve their efforts to ensure 
that the perpetrators of these crimes are held accountable and that the victims receive meaningful access to 
justice.
 
Over the past 20 years, VAWA funding has transformed how criminal justice systems in many communi-
ties respond to sexual assault and domestic violence.  Some of the innovations funded through VAWA include 
law enforcement collaboration with victim service providers; use of evidence-based lethality assessments to 
curb domestic violence-related homicides; improved forensic medical examinations for sexual assault victims; 
investigation and prosecution policies and practices that focus on the offender and account for the effects of 
trauma on victims; specialized law enforcement and prosecution units; enhanced offender monitoring; and 
improved training for law enforcement, prosecutors and judges.  LEAs are a critical component of a coordinat-
ed community response to sexual assault and domestic violence.  By dedicating additional attention and 
resources to improving law enforcement’s response to such crimes—including making efforts to eliminate 
gender bias—agencies will be better able to meet the needs of victims and the communities they serve.
    U.S. Dep’t of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Intimate Partner Violence, 1993-2010, at 1 (rev. 2015), 
available at http://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/ipv9310.pdf.
    U.S. White House, Office of the Vice President, Fact Sheet: The Obama Administration’s Commitment to 
Reducing Domestic Violence Homicides (2014), available at https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/-
files/docs/dv_homicide_reduction_fact_sheet.pdf; see also U.S. Dep’t of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, 
Intimate Partner Violence:  Attributes of Victimization, 1993-2011, (2013), available at http://www.bjs.gov/con-
tent/pub/pdf/ipvav9311.pdf; Jacquelyn C. Campbell et al., Intimate Partner Homicide: Review and implications 
of research and policy, 8 Trauma, Violence, & Abuse 246 (July 2007).  
11
10
11
Page 6


II. Improving the Response to Domestic Violence and Sexual Assault by Preventing Gender 
Bias in Policing Practices    
A. Identifying the Impact of Gender Bias on Policing
 
Explicit and implicit biases, including stereotypes about gender roles, sexual assault, and domestic 
violence, are embedded in our culture and can affect people in all different professions.    With respect to 
policing, these biases may affect law enforcement officers’ perceptions of sexual assault and domestic violence 
incidents and prevent them from effectively handling allegations of these crimes.    The intersection of racial 
and gender stereotypes and biases can also pose unique difficulties for women and LGBT individuals of color 
seeking police services to address sexual assault and domestic violence incidents.
 
In some cases, a police officer may discriminate against victims of sexual assault or domestic violence 
because of a general bias against women or LGBT individuals.  More commonly, discrimination may be based 
on explicit stereotypes about women or LGBT individuals.  Acting on stereotypes about why women or LGBT 
individuals are sexually assaulted, or about how a victim of domestic violence or sexual assault should look or 
behave, can constitute unlawful discrimination and profoundly undermine an effective response to these 
crimes.  For example, if an officer believes a sexual assault to be less severe because the victim was assaulted 
by an acquaintance or was intoxicated when the assault occurred, or based on stereotypical assumptions about 
a victim who is a gay man or lesbian woman assaulted by his or her partner, that is gender bias and may consti-
tute unlawful discrimination. 
 
 
Even where law enforcement officers harbor no explicit biases or stereotypes about women or LGBT 
individuals, an officer’s unconscious bias towards these groups can undermine an effective response to sexual 
assault and domestic violence incidents.  In recent years, the criminal justice community has begun to examine   
    See e.g., Rape in the United States:  The Chronic Failure to Report and Investigate Rape Cases:  Hearing 
Before the Subcomm. on Crime and Drugs of the Senate Comm. on the Judiciary 111th Cong. 6-7 (Sept. 14, 
2010) (statement of Carol E. Tracy, Executive Director, Women’s Law Project) [hereinafter 2010 Senate 
Committee Testimony], available at http://www.judiciary.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/09-14-10%20Tra-
cy%20Testimony.pdf (citing research); Zanita E. Fenton, Domestic Violence in Black and White: Racialized 
Gender Stereotypes in Gender Violence, 8 Colum. J. Gender & L. 1, 27 (1998).
    See 2010 Senate Committee Testimony, supra note 12, at 6-7. 
    See generally, Linda L. Ammons, Mules, Madonnas, Babies, Bathwater, Racial Imagery and Stereotypes: 
The African‐American Woman and the Battered Woman Syndrome, 1995 Wis. L. Rev. 1003, 1069‐74 (1995). 
See also Fenton, supra note 12, at 53‐54  (discussing how stereotypes can lead police to take the claims of 
African‐American victims less seriously than others); Domestic Violence at the Margins: Readings on Race, 
Class, Gender, and Culture (Natalie J. Sokoloff and Christina Pratt, eds., 2005); Natalie J. Sokoloff and Ida 
Dupont, Domestic Violence at the Intersections of Race, Class, and Gender: Challenges and Contributions to 
Understanding Violence Against Marginalized Women in Diverse Communities, 11 Violence Against Women 
38, 43 (Jan. 2005).
12
13
14
12
13
14
Page 7


compelling social science research that suggests “implicit biases are predilections held by all [people] that 
operate largely outside of one’s awareness.”    A collaboration of researchers at several major universities has 
found that implicit biases are pervasive, people are often unaware of their implicit biases and implicit biases can 
SUHGLFWEHKDYLRU6FKRODUVKDYHH[DPLQHGWKHLPSOLFDWLRQVRIWKLVUHVHDUFKIRUODZHQIRUFHPHQWDJHQFLHV¬,W
is important for law enforcement to recognize the prevalence of implicit bias and to consider how both explicit 
and implicit bias might impact the law enforcement response to crimes involving sexual assault and domestic 
violence.
  
 
Eliminating gender bias in policing practices is an integral component of combating sexual assault and 
domestic violence, and can have a real and immediate effect on the safety of individual victims.  A swift and 
meaningful criminal justice response to violence against women and LGBT individuals is critical for preventing 
future victimization    and arresting offenders can deter repeat abuses.    Further, an appropriate law enforcement 
response not only fosters victim confidence, it also makes victims more likely to report future incidents.    By 
contrast, if law enforcement agencies do not respond effectively to an incident of sexual assault or domestic 
violence, victims are less likely to participate in the investigation and prosecution of their case or seek police 
assistance in the future. 
    Tracey G. Gove, Implicit Bias and Law Enforcement, 78 The Police Chief 44, 44 (Oct. 2011), available at 
http://www.policechiefmagazine.org/magazine/index.cfm?fuseac-
tion=display_arch&article_id=2499&issue_id=102011 (last visited Oct. 2, 2015); see also Tami Abdollah, 
Police Agencies Line Up to Learn About Unconscious Bias, Associated Press, Mar. 9, 2015, available at 
http://www.dailynews.com/government-and-poli-
tics/20150315/police-agencies-line-up-to-learn-about-unconscious-bias.
    Gove, supra note 15.
    See e.g., L. Song Richardson and Phillip Atiba Goff, Interrogating Racial Violence, 12 Ohio St. J. Crim. L. 
115 , 120-24 (2014) (discussing studies regarding the impact of implicit bias on police use of force).
    See André Rosey et al., Investigation and Prosecution of Sexual Assault, Domestic Violence, and Stalking 
17-18 (2011), available at https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/grants/236429.pdf; Jill Messing et al., Police 
Departments’ Use of the Lethality Assessment Program: A Quasi-Experimental Evaluation 86-87 (2014), 
available at https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/grants/247456.pdf. 
    Christopher D. Maxwell et al., U.S. Dep’t of Justice, Nat’l Institute of Justice, The Effects of Arrest on 
Intimate Partner Violence:  New Evidence From the Spouse Assault Replication Program 1 (2001), available at 
https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/188199.pdf; Laura Dugan et al., Exposure Reduction or Retaliation? The 
Effects of Domestic Violence Resources on Intimate-Partner Homicide, 37 Law & Society Review 169, 178 
(2003) available at http://www.ccjs.umd.edu/sites/ccjs.umd.edu/files/pubs/lasr_03701005.pdf.  
    Robert C. Davis & Christopher Maxwell, Vera Institute of Justice, Preventing Repeat Incidents of Family 
Violence: A Reanalysis of Data from Three Field Tests 5-6 (2002), available at https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdf-
files1/nij/grants/200608.pdf ; Paul C. Friday, Evaluating the Impact of a Specialized Domestic Violence Police 
Unit 5-8 (2006), available at https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/grants/215916.pdf.
    Eve S. Buzawa & Carl G. Buzawa, Domestic Violence:  The Criminal Justice Response 127 (2003).
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
Page 8


 
Moreover, an effective police response to domestic violence and sexual assault can improve the safety of 
our communities as a whole.  Reducing female intimate partner homicides also reduces collateral homicides of 
children, other family members, and responding law enforcement officers, while also reducing abuser suicides.    
Because some individuals suffer multiple victimizations before reporting to police, a full investigation of a 
particular domestic violence incident may reveal additional, even more serious incidents of abuse.     Studies 
also indicate that many abusers are likely to commit new domestic and nondomestic violence crimes; thus, 
vigilant police investigation of sexual assault and domestic violence may help prevent other violent crimes.  
 
The experience of Detroit illustrates the vital importance of fully investigating every reported sexual 
assault, regardless of an individual officer’s assessment of a particular victim’s credibility.    In 2009, the City of 
Detroit discovered over 11,000 untested sexual assault kits.  When just 1,595 of those kits were tested, they 
yielded 785 Combined DNA Index System (CODIS) eligible profiles.  And, in turn, over half of those profiles 
belonged to individuals already in CODIS and 28 percent yielded serial sexual assault hits (i.e., a DNA match 
across two or more sexual assault kits).     In short, the DNA from these untested kits belonged to offenders who 
had committed other crimes, including multiple other sexual assaults. 
    Andrew R. Klein, U.S. Dep’t of Justice, Nat’l Institute of Justice, Practical Implications of Current Domestic 
Violence Research: For Law Enforcement, Prosecutors, and Judges 4 (2009), available at https://www.nc-
jrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/225722.pdf (citing Federal Bureau of Investigations data and multiple state and local 
fatality reviews).
    Id. at 4, 6.
    Id. at 19-21.
    “An analysis of 1,268 sexual assault police reports associated with [sexual assault kits] that had not been 
VXEPLWWHGIRUWHVWLQJUHYHDOHGWKDWPRVWFDVHVZHUHFORVHGDIWHUPLQLPDOLQYHVWLJDWLRQDOHIIRUW¬,QERWKWKH
stakeholder interviews and in the actual police reports, law enforcement personnel expressed negative, 
victim-blaming beliefs about sexual assault victims.”  Rebecca Campbell et al., The Detroit Sexual Assault Kit 
(SAK) Action Research Project (ARP), Final Report iv (2015) (emphasis in original), available at https://ww-
w.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/grants/248680.pdf. 
    Id. at iii-vi. 
    As of August 2015, Detroit has tested approximately 10,000 kits, resulting in 2,478 DNA matches and the 
identification of 469 potential serial rapists.  The Wayne County Prosecutor’s Office has obtained 21 convic-
tions, and the DNA from the tested kits has been linked to crimes committed in 39 states. Detroit, EndtheBack-
log,  http://www.endthebacklog.org/detroit-0 (last visited Aug. 27, 2015).
22
23
24
25
26
27
22
23
24
25
26
27
Page 9


B. Principles to Prevent Gender Bias in Policing
 
Certain aspects of the law enforcement response to sexual assault and domestic violence appear particu-
larly susceptible to explicit and implicit bias based on gender.  Set forth below are a set of basic principles that 
will help reduce the potential for discrimination.  The department encourages LEAs to consider these principles 
and integrate them into: (1) clear, unequivocal policies about the proper handling of sexual assault and domes-
tic violence crimes; (2) training for officers about these policies and about effective responses to sexual assault 
and domestic violence crimes more generally; and (3) supervision protocols and systems of accountability to 
ensure that officers responding to sexual assault and domestic violence crimes act in accordance with these 
policies and trainings.
 
In identifying these principles, the department is not presenting an exhaustive list of ways that LEAs can 
reduce gender bias in its policing activities.  Rather, adherence to these basic principles in developing policies, 
practices and trainings related to sexual assault and domestic violence cases will help law enforcement agencies 
provide police services free from discrimination on the basis of gender and handle these cases more effectively.  
The Department encourages LEAs to develop practices that build on and go beyond the basic principles 
described here.  As set forth in the conclusion of this document, the department stands ready to assist and 
support these efforts.
Principle 1 
Recognize and Address Biases, Assumptions and Stereotypes about Victims
 
In responding to a report of sexual assault or domestic violence, law enforcement officers should not 
base their judgments as to the credibility of a victim’s account on assumptions or stereotypes about the “types” 
of people that can be victims of sexual assault, or about how victims of sexual assault and domestic violence 
“should” respond or behave.  The following examples illustrate the application of assumptions or stereotypes to 
victims to gauge a victim’s credibility, which undermines an effective investigation:  
 
Example:  A young woman enters a police station and reports that, two weeks earlier, she was raped at a 
house party by a colleague from work.  The woman reports that she had been drinking that evening.  The police 
officer on duty asks how often the woman drinks excessively at house parties and asks her what she was wear-
ing that night.  The officer then tells her that she should really watch how much she consumes when she goes 
out at night, especially if she is getting dressed up.
 
Example:  A tall man, in good physical condition and with no visible injuries, goes to the local police 
precinct and reports that his boyfriend, with whom he lives, has been sending him threatening text and voice 
messages over the past several weeks, and that, the night before, his boyfriend had assaulted him.  The respond-
ing officer looks at the man skeptically and tells him that he’s not sure that he can take a report based on this 
situation.  The officer tells the man to think carefully about whether he has a crime to report and to come back 
another day if he still believes he needs assistance.
    Letter from Thomas Perez, Ass’t Att’y Gen. of the United States, to Hon. John Engen, Mayor of Missoula, 
Montana, 8, 13 (May 15, 2013) [hereinafter Missoula FL], available at http://www.justice.gov/sites/default/-
files/crt/legacy/2013/05/22/missoulapdfind_5-15-13.pdf; Investigation of the New Orleans Police Dep’t, U.S. 
Dep’t of Justice, Civil Rights Division 43, 46 (Mar. 16, 2011) [hereinafter NOPD FL], available at http://ww-
w.justice.gov/crt/about/spl/nopd_report.pdf; Int’l Ass’n of Chiefs of Police, Nat’l Law Enforcement Policy Ctr., 
Investigating Sexual Assaults: Concepts and Issues Paper 4 (2005) [hereinafter IACP Investigating Sexual 
Assaults Issues Paper], available at http://www.ncdsv.org/images/IACP_InvestigatingSAConceptsIs-
suesPaper_7-2005.pdf. 
28
28
Page 10


 
Example:  A woman who has been known to engage in prostitution flags down a police officer who 
frequently patrols her neighborhood.  She reports to the officer that she was just raped.  The police officer on 
duty writes down her statement, but, when he returns to the police station, he immediately classifies the com-
plaint as “unfounded,” and takes no further action, because of the woman’s sexual and criminal history.
Principle in Practice  
 
Law enforcement agencies should review and revise their policies and procedures as necessary and 
provide training to officers to ensure that responding officers and investigators gather all pertinent evidence in 
an unbiased manner.  A victim’s nonconformance with behavioral stereotypes should not impact the way law 
enforcement officers evaluate the complaint.     Biases should also not prevent officers from taking a report or 
detectives from conducting a full investigation of all complaints received.     Thus, the following factors, stand-
ing alone, are not dispositive in determining a victim’s credibility: delayed reporting; the victim’s history of 
making similar reports; the victim’s sexual history; the victim’s emotional state (e.g., whether a victim appears 
calm versus emotional or visibly upset); the victim’s lack of resistance; the victim’s criminal history or history 
of prostitution; evidence that the victim has a mental illness; evidence that the victim has a history of abusing 
alcohol or drugs; what the victim was wearing at the time the victimization occurred; whether the victim is of 
comparable size/strength to the assailant; the lack of any obvious signs of physical harm to the victim; the 
victim’s sexual orientation or gender identity; and whether the victim was attacked by a person of the same sex.  
    See Memorandum of Understanding between the U.S. Dep’t of Justice and City of Missoula Regarding the 
Missoula Police Department’s Response to Sexual Assault 5 (May 15, 2013) [hereinafter Missoula MOU], 
available at http://www.justice.gov/sites/default/files/crt/legacy/2013/05/15/missoulapdsettle_5-15-13.pdf ; 
Int’l Ass’n of Chiefs of Police, Sexual Assault Incident Reports Investigative Strategies 5 (2005) [hereinafter 
IACP Sexual Assault Incident Reports], available at http://www.theiacp.org/portals/0/pdfs/SexualAssaultGuide-
lines.pdf; Int’l Ass’n of Chiefs of Police, Model Policy on Investigating Sexual Assaults 1, 4 (2005) [hereinafter 
IACP Model Policy on Investigating Sexual Assaults], available at https://www.evawintl.org/Library/Documen-
tLibraryHandler.ashx?id=93; IACP Investigating Sexual Assaults Issues Paper, supra note 29, at 4; End 
Violence Against Women Int’l, Training Bulletin:  When to Conduct an Exam or Interview 3 (2013) [hereinafter 
EVAWI Training Bulletin], available at http://www.ncdsv.org/images/EVAW_When-to-conduct-an-ex-
am-or-interview_6-2013.pdf.
    Before making final credibility determinations, investigators should gather and assess objective evidence 
(statements; medical evidence; camera footage) as available and appropriate.  See infra, Principle 3, notes 42-45 
for guidelines on conducting a full investigation.
    See generally IACP Sexual Assault Incident Reports, supra note 29, at 5; IACP Model Policy on Investigating 
Sexual Assaults, supra note 29, at 4.
30
29
31
29
30
31
Page 11


Principle 2
Treat All Victims with Respect and Employ Interviewing Tactics That Encourage a Victim to 
Participate and Provide Facts About the Incident
 
A victim who is treated with respect is more likely to continue participating in an investigation and 
prosecution than one who feels judged or blamed for a sexual assault or domestic violence incident.  Law 
enforcement agencies should take affirmative steps to ensure that, throughout their investigations, officers 
treat victims with respect and dignity, and use appropriate trauma-informed interviewing techniques to estab-
lish a rapport with the victim.  The following example illustrates the use of inappropriate interviewing tactics 
that may cause a victim to be less willing to participate in an investigation or proffer facts about the incident: 
 
Example:  A woman reports to the police that she was raped several months ago while attending a 
party.  The law enforcement officer on duty takes a cursory report and gives the file to an investigator, who 
says to the woman:  
 
 
“I’m sorry but you are reporting an incident that occurred several months ago.  There is nothing
 
 
we can do at this point.” 
 
 
“Is the reason you waited so long to report this rape because you now regret having sex?”
 
 
“How can you remember any details given how much you had to drink?” 
 
 
“What did you think was going to happen after you went to his room alone?”
 
 
“Why didn’t you push him off you and leave?” 
Principle in Practice 
 
Although law enforcement agencies will often need to ask difficult questions on the above topics to get 
information necessary to fully investigate a complaint or prepare a case for successful prosecution, how and 
when difficult questions are asked is an important consideration.  By taking affirmative steps to respect the 
dignity of all complainants, law enforcement officers may be able to increase the quality and quantity of the 
information they receive.  In addition, there are also some questions that are inappropriate to ask at any point 
during the investigation, no matter how they are phrased.  These types of questions ignore the trauma that 
victims experience and, whether intentionally or not, suggest that blame should be placed on the victim or that 
the victim should not have reported the incident to the police at all.  Examples of these questions include:
 
 
“Have you considered talking to the man and letting him know that you are upset?”
 
 
“Have you thought about how this is going to affect the alleged assailant’s scholarship/career/
 
 
  reputation/etc.?”
 
 
“Wasn’t this just a trick gone bad?” 
    Missoula FL, supra note 28, at 8-9, 13; NOPD FL, supra note 28, at 43-44, 46-48.
32
32
Page 12


 
Understanding the impact of trauma on the victim may help to explain many of the challenges that 
officers face in interviewing victims (e.g., memory gaps, inconsistent accounts, or delayed reporting) and 
prevent inappropriate questioning.  Law enforcement agencies should review and revise their policies and 
procedures, as necessary, and provide training to assist officers in being cognizant of the emotional impact that 
participating in interviews and evidence-gathering may have on a victim who has undergone a traumatic event, 
such as a rape or sexual assault.     For example, a victim may experience flashbacks or intense psychological 
distress when asked to recall details about the incident or event.  It is important that officers convey to a victim 
that the purpose of the interview is to understand and determine the facts, not to blame the victim.     According-
ly, officers should be trained to ask neutral, open-ended questions that elicit a narrative of the events from the 
victim, rather than leading questions or questions that may be perceived as assigning blame.     Examples of 
neutral and open-ended questions include:
 
 
“Can you tell me what happened?”
 
 
“What can you tell me about the person who did this to you?”
 
 
“What can you tell me about anything the person said before, during, or after the incident?”
 
 
“Can you tell me about any witnesses or people who might have seen the incident?”
 
 
“Did anything in particular cause you to come tell us about this incident today?” 
 
 
“Have you received medical treatment?  Would you like to go to the hospital?”
    Consent Decree Regarding the New Orleans Police Department, U.S. v. City of New Orleans, No. 
2:12-cv-01924-SM-JCW, at 54 (Jan. 11, 2013) [hereinafter NOPD CD], available at http://www.justice.gov-
/sites/default/files/crt/legacy/2013/01/11/nopd_agreement_1-11-13.pdf; IACP Sexual Assault Incident Reports, 
supra note 29, at 4-5; IACP Model Policy on Investigating Sexual Assaults, supra note 29,  at 4; EVAWI Train-
ing Bulletin, supra note 29, at 3-4.
    Missoula MOU, supra note 29, at 5, 7; IACP Sexual Assault Incident Reports, supra note 29, at 4; IACP 
Model Policy on Investigating Sexual Assaults, supra note 29, at 1.
    Missoula MOU, supra note 29, at 5, 7; IACP Sexual Assault Incident Reports, supra note 29, at 3; IACP 
Model Policy on Investigating Sexual Assaults, supra note 29, at 4. See also The Nat’l Ctr. for Women and 
Policing, Successfully Investigating Acquaintance Sexual Assault:  A National Training Manual for Law 
Enforcement, Drug-Facilitated Sexual Assault Module 9-10 (2001) [hereinafter Nat’l Ctr. For Women and 
Policing Training Manual], available at http://www.mincava.umn.edu/documents/acquaintsa/participant/d-
rugfacilitated.pdf.
33
34
35
33
34
35
Page 13


 
A trauma-informed approach to asking questions during a victim interview also can help the investigator 
establish trust, which in turn can help the victim feel more comfortable disclosing aspects of the assault that 
could be difficult or embarrassing to talk about, or which the victim might worry will damage her/his credibility.  
For example, a victim might be more willing to disclose any voluntary or involuntary alcohol or drug use 
around the time of the assault if the officer has established a non-judgmental environment and demonstrated 
genuine empathy for the victim.  Although an investigator has to ask questions necessary to corroborate the 
victim's account, many victims may become upset and frustrated by questions regarding their actions or behav-
ior around the time of the incident, including alcohol or drug use.  These questions, depending on how they are 
phrased, can come across as victim-blaming and can dissuade a victim from assisting with the investigation.    
An example of how an officer could converse with a victim who might have been drinking or using drugs before 
s/he was assaulted might be:
 
 
“I know that this question is difficult to answer and I want you to know I am only asking you this
 
 
 question to get a clear picture of what you’ve experienced.  I am very sorry about what has
 
 
 happened to you and I do not think that you are responsible for what happened.  Any questions I
 
 
 may ask about alcohol or drug use by you or the offender I’m only asking to understand what
 
 
 happened.”
 
Similarly, officers should not make statements or engage in acts that indicate to the victim that they 
doubt the victim’s credibility, or that otherwise exhibit any bias towards the victim based on gender.     Such 
statements and judgments could include: stereotyped assumptions about the truth of a reported assault (e.g., that 
women are likely to report “regretted sex” as rape, that transgender women and men are unlikely to be raped, 
that people engaged in prostitution cannot be raped, or that certain ethnicities or races are more “promiscuous”); 
automatically believing the alleged assailant’s claim that the sex was consensual; or subtly, or even blatantly, 
coercing the victim to recant the allegation of sexual assault by blaming the victim for being assaulted or for 
making unwise or dangerous choices.
 
Further, law enforcement agencies should train officers to write reports of interviews or statements 
incorporating the victim’s words, spontaneous statements, and narrative as much as possible, as opposed to 
providing the officer’s summary.  Such an approach will further the goal of presenting the victim’s version of 
the events from the victim’s perspective.     To ensure privacy and encourage candor, investigations of domestic 
violence or sexual assault complaints should not be conducted in public waiting areas.
 
    See Nat’l Ctr. For Women and Policing Training Manual, supra 35, at 9-10.  
    Missoula MOU, supra note 29, at 5; IACP Sexual Assault Incident Reports, supra note 29, at 3, 7.
    Missoula MOU, supra note 29, at 7; IACP Sexual Assault Incident Reports, supra note 29, at 3; Int’l Ass’n of 
Chiefs of Police, Nat’l Law Enforcement Policy Ctr., Domestic Violence Concepts and Issues Paper 3 (2006) 
[hereinafter IACP Domestic Violence Issues Paper], available at  http://www.ncdsv.org/images/IACP_DVCon-
ceptsIssuesPaper_rev6-2006.pdf; Joanne Archambault et al., End Violence Against Women Int’l, Effective 
Report Writing: Using the Language of Non-Consensual Sex 5-13 (2012) [hereinafter EVAWI Effective Report 
Writing], available at http://www.evawintl.org/Library/DocumentLibraryHandler.ashx?id=43. 
36
37
38
36
37
38
Page 14


 
Additionally, allowing the victim, if he or she so desires, to have the support of a victim advocate during 
a criminal investigation has been shown to have a positive impact on the victim’s experience with law enforce-
ment.   A victim advocate can provide support in several ways, including preparing a victim for law enforce-
ment interviews by helping the victim understand what to expect.  This preparation may help the victim to feel 
at ease during the interview, as well as promote the development of a relationship of trust between the victim 
and the law enforcement officer.  This simple step of encouraging victims to seek support during the criminal 
investigation process may be critical to an effective victim interview, which in turn could prove important to 
the investigation, to the prosecution of any crime, and to the victim’s continued cooperation with law enforce-
ment. 
 
Finally, to ensure that all individuals are able to communicate the relevant facts clearly, it is important to 
ensure meaningful language access for individuals with limited English proficiency.    Absent exigent circum-
stances, law enforcement agencies should always use an independent interpreter for interviews, such as some-
one who works for the agency or a language services interpreter.    To ensure independence and accuracy in law 
enforcement investigations, law enforcement agencies should not use victims’ family members and friends as 
interpreters.  Moreover, it is critical that children never be used as interpreters: this undermines effective 
language access for victims, can traumatize children exposed to these situations and may inhibit a victim from 
fully revealing important details about the assault. 
    Rebecca Campbell, Rape Survivors’ Experiences with the Legal and Medical Systems: Do Rape Victim 
Advocates Make a Difference?, 12 Violence Against Women 30, 30 (2006); Missoula MOU, supra note 29, at 
7; IACP Sexual Assault Incident Reports, supra note 29, at 4.
    See Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C §§ 2000d et seq.; Exec. Order No. 13166, 65 Fed. 
Reg. 50,121 (Aug. 16, 2000).
    See Common Language Access Questions, Technical Assistance, and Guidance for Federally Conducted and 
Federally Assisted Programs 8 & n.1 (August 2011), available at http://www.lep.gov/resources/081511_Lan-
guage_Access_CAQ_TA_Guidance.pdf (citing Dep’t of Justice Guidance to Federal Financial Assistance 
Recipients Regarding Title VI Prohibition Against National Origin Discrimination Affecting Limited English 
Proficient Persons, 67 Fed. Reg. 41,455, 41,461 (June 18, 2002)).
39
40
41
39
40
41
Page 15


Principle 3
Investigate Sexual Assault or Domestic Violence Complaints Thoroughly and Effectively
 
Unlike many other crimes, incidents of sexual assault and domestic violence frequently occur in more 
private settings, with few, if any, witnesses present.  As a result, it is crucial that LEAs undertake a thorough 
investigation of these crimes by gathering, preserving and analyzing as much evidence, particularly corrobora-
tive evidence, as quickly as they can.  The following examples illustrate failures to thoroughly and effectively 
investigate complaints involving sexual assault and domestic violence:  
 
Example:  A 25-year-old woman reports to the police that the previous day, her ex-boyfriend physically 
and sexually assaulted her.  After disclosing to her roommate what had happened, the woman goes to the hospi-
tal for a forensic exam and the patrol officer who interviews her takes the kit to an evidence storage facility.  A 
detective calls her a few days later, but, when he does not immediately hear back, he closes the case, noting that 
the victim cannot be located, is not cooperating and there were no witnesses.  The kit is never submitted to the 
lab for testing and an arrest is never made.  
 
Example:  Officers respond to a call for service based on a domestic dispute.  When they arrive, they 
find a man and a woman at the scene.  The man is clearly distressed and angry.  The woman says the man hit 
her several times, but says she was not seriously injured.  The man says that he and the woman had been on 
several dates, and he learned tonight that the woman is transgender.  The man says that the woman is “crazy” 
and deceived him by “pretending” to be a woman.  The officers leave the apartment without taking a report 
from the woman because there were no serious injuries; they have some sympathy for the man who feels 
deceived; and they believe their efforts are better spent on more serious crimes. 
Principle in Practice 
 
 
To ensure that investigations are thorough, law enforcement agencies should implement clear policies 
and training about how to conduct domestic and sexual violence investigations that are complete and bias-free.    
At a minimum, law enforcement agencies should have guidelines that address the following for possible crimes 
involving sexual or domestic violence:    collecting and preserving all relevant and corroborative evidence; 
ensuring that forensic medical exams, including “rape kits,” are completed and analyzed in a timely manner; 
identifying and documenting victim injuries, both at the time of the incident and during subsequent interactions; 
identifying and documenting all psychological and sensory evidence; and interviewing all possible witnesses 
and suspects and conducting each interview separately. 
    Missoula FL, supra note 28, at 7; NOPD FL, supra note 28, at 47-50; IACP Model Policy on Investigating 
Sexual Assaults, supra note 29, at 2-3.
    Missoula MOU, supra note 29, at 4; NOPD CD, supra note 33, at 54; IACP Sexual Assault Incident Reports, 
supra note 29, at 7; see generally IACP Model Policy on Investigating Sexual Assaults, supra note 29; Police 
Executive Research Forum, Improving the Police Response to Sexual Assault 1-2 (2012) [hereinafter PERF 
Improving the Police Response], available at http://www.policeforum.org/assets/docs/Critical_Is-
sues_Series/improving%20the%20police%20response%20to%20sexual%20assault%202012.pdf. 
    Missoula MOU, supra note 29, at 5; NOPD CD, supra note 33, at 54-55; Int’l Ass’n of Chiefs of Police, 
Model Policy on Domestic Violence 4 (2006) [hereinafter IACP Model Policy on Domestic Violence], available 
at http://www.theiacp.org/Portals/0/documents/pdfs/MembersOnly/DomesticViolencePolicy.pdf.
    NOPD CD, supra note 33, at 54; IACP Sexual Assault Incident Reports, supra note 29, at 7; IACP Model 
Policy on Investigating Sexual Assaults, supra note 29, at 3.
42
43
44
45
42
43
44
45
Page 16


Principle 4
Appropriately Classify Reports of Sexual Assault or Domestic Violence 
 
Complaints of sexual assault and domestic violence should be classified in a manner that will allow 
them to be fully investigated.  If a sexual assault or domestic violence complaint is given an improper or 
non-criminal classification, the case may be closed before an investigation has been conducted.  Like any other 
allegation of a crime, the determination that a sexual assault or domestic violence complaint is unsubstantiated 
should be made only after a thorough and full investigation, as discussed in Principle 3, and not presumptively 
at the classification stage.  In order to encourage accurate classification of reports of sexual offenses, officers 
must be knowledgeable not only about their agency’s procedures for documenting such reports, but also about 
the elements of sexual assault and domestic violence offenses, so that they can better identify incidents that 
meet those criteria.  The following example illustrates how a misclassification of a sexual assault complaint 
can lead to the failure to properly investigate (and secure a successful prosecution of) the complaint:
 
Example:  A friend brings a woman to a police station and tells the police that her friend was raped 
while on a date the night before.  While still sitting in the public waiting area, an officer asks the woman what 
happened, and the woman says she does not remember and does not know if she was raped.  The law enforce-
ment officer on duty fills out a report, but immediately classifies the incident as “unfounded.” 
Principle in Practice  
 
Law enforcement agencies should review and revise their policies and procedures as necessary, and 
provide training to officers to ensure that sexual assault and domestic violence complaints are properly docu-
mented and only classified as non-criminal or unfounded after a thorough, full investigation is conducted.    All 
sexual assault or domestic violence complaints should be investigated, regardless of any of the following 
circumstances: the victim has gaps in memory; there are potential conflicts in the victim’s statements; the 
victim is reluctant to share his or her story; the victim expresses concern over having the alleged assailant 
charged with a crime; the victim expresses self-blame (e.g., suggests that she/he didn’t fight hard enough to 
stop the assault); the victim is emotionally distraught and unable to discuss the incident; or the victim was 
under the influence of alcohol or drugs at the time of the incident.  
    Missoula FL, supra note 28, at 8; NOPD FL, supra note 28, at 45-47.
    NOPD CD, supra note 33, at 54-56; End Violence Against Women Int’l, Reporting Methods for Sexual 
Assault Cases 8, 18 (2007) [hereinafter EVAWI Sexual Assault Cases], available at https://www.evawin-
tl.org/Library/DocumentLibraryHandler.ashx?id=35; EVAWI Training Bulletin, supra note 29, at 4-5. 
    Missoula MOU, supra note 29, at 7; IACP Sexual Assault Incident Reports, supra note 29, at 2, 5; IACP 
Model Policy on Investigating Sexual Assaults, supra note 29, at 2, 4; EVAWI Sexual Assault Cases, supra note 
47, at 7; EVAWI Training Bulletin, supra note 29, at 3.
 
    In conducting a full and thorough investigation, law enforcement officers should engage victims in a trau-
ma-informed manner: officers should be careful to avoid pursuing victims (some of whom may be reluctant to 
speak to law enforcement) in a way that might “re-traumatize” them. See supra note 33.
46
47
48
49
46
47
48 49
Page 17


 
Additionally, law enforcement should be aware that victims of domestic violence and sexual assault may 
also be victims of sex trafficking, and officers should receive training on identifying and responding to victims 
of trafficking.   The department offers training and grants to assist law enforcement and community partners in 
detecting trafficking and providing services to trafficking victims.    Law enforcement agencies should also 
develop policies and procedures regarding U visas, which are available for immigrant victims of certain 
crimes—including sexual assault and domestic violence—if they assist law enforcement in the investigation or 
prosecution of criminal activity and meet other eligibility criteria.
    
    For example, the Department’s Bureau of Justice Assistance works collaboratively with the Department’s 
Office for Victims of Crime (“OVC”) to develop training for law enforcement and communities to identify 
trafficking victims and to support anti-trafficking task forces involving collaboration among state and local law 
enforcement, trafficking victim services providers, federal law enforcement, and U.S. Attorney’s Offices.  More 
information about OVC anti-human trafficking efforts is available here: http://ovc.ncjrs.gov/humantraffick-
ing/lawenforcement.html. Information about OVC training and grant opportunities is available at: https://ww-
w.ovcttac.gov/views/Resources/dspResources_Org.cfm.  The Department’s Civil Rights Division Human 
Trafficking Prosecution Unit (HTPU) also provides advanced capacity-building and training programs on 
trauma-informed, victim-centered best practices in the investigation and prosecution of human trafficking cases 
and the stabilization of human trafficking victims.  These programs include intensive, week-long, interdisciplin-
ary trainings for law enforcement agents, prosecutors, law enforcement victim-witness coordinators, and 
non-governmental victim advocates on stabilizing traumatized victims, earning the trust of traumatized victims 
of labor trafficking and sex trafficking, and overcoming challenges to securing the cooperation of reluctant 
victims and empowering them to become active participants in the criminal justice process.  These programs 
continue to enhance law enforcement capacity to empower victims of human trafficking—many of whom are 
women and girls with histories of poverty, dislocation, physical and sexual abuse, and cultural isolation—to 
report their victimization and play an active role in bringing human traffickers to justice.  More information 
about HTPU is available at: http://www.justice.gov/crt/human-trafficking-prosecution-unit-htpu.  
    Additional information about the U non-immigrant status (also known as the “U visa”) is available at: 
http://www.uscis.gov/humanitarian/victims-human-traffick-
ing-other-crimes/victims-criminal-activity-u-nonimmigrant-status/victims-criminal-activity-u-nonimmigrant-stat
us.  Victims of human trafficking also may be eligible for T non-immigrant status. See http://www.uscis.gov/hu-
manitarian/victims-human-trafficking-other-crimes/victims-human-trafficking-t-nonimmigrant-status.  
50
51
50
51
Page 18


Principle 5
Refer Victims to Appropriate Services 
 
Officers should take steps to address the medical, emotional, safety and other needs of victims of sexual 
assault and domestic violence at the time they report an incident or make a complaint.    
Principle in Practice  
 
Law enforcement officials should make timely and appropriate referrals to medical professionals for 
victims of sexual assault or domestic violence.    Law enforcement policies and trainings should direct officers 
to, at the earliest point possible, offer to contact a victim advocate and refer victims of sexual assault or domes-
tic violence to resources, such as rape crisis centers, domestic violence shelters or legal services organizations.  
At a minimum, officers should ensure that victims are aware of these services.    It is important for law enforce-
ment to know and have relationships with community-based victim advocacy organizations, including any local 
culturally-specific organizations or other organizations that focus on underserved or marginalized populations.  
Law enforcement agencies seeking to identify victim service providers in their jurisdictions should contact their 
state domestic violence and sexual assault coalitions.  Contact information for these organizations is available 
on the website of the department’s office on violence against women at http://www.Justice.Gov/ovw/local-re-
sources.  
Principle 6
Properly Identify the Assailant in Domestic Violence Incidents
 
It is essential that officers are trained to identify the predominant aggressor when responding to domestic 
violence incidents, and make arrests accordingly.  Law enforcement officials should be aware of the potential 
for abusers to report domestic violence complaints preemptively, claiming that they themselves are the victims 
of domestic violence.  The following example illustrates a failure to pursue information that would help identify 
the predominant aggressor:
 
Example:  An adult male calls 911 to report that his girlfriend assaulted him.  When a police officer 
arrives, he sees the male caller with a deep scratch on his face.  The female, while visibly shaken, appears to be 
physically unharmed, although she claims that her boyfriend tried to strangle her.  Without further inquiry, the 
police officer files a report, citing the female as the predominant aggressor, and arrests her.
    Missoula FL, supra note 28, at 10-11; NOPD FL, supra note 28, at 43, 50-51.
    IACP Sexual Assault Incident Reports, supra note 29, at 4-5; IACP Model Policy on Investigating Sexual 
Assaults, supra note 29, at 2-3.
    NOPD CD, supra note 33, at 55.
    NOPD FL, supra note 28, at 48.
52
55
52
53
54
55
53
54
Page 19


Principle in Practice  
 
Law enforcement agencies should review and revise their policies and procedures as necessary, and 
provide specialized training to ensure that officers are capable of properly identifying the predominant aggres-
sor.    Specifically, officers should be trained to consider and balance the following factors, among others, to 
determine whose account is corroborated by the evidence, but without relying on any one of these factors alone 
as determinative: 
 
 
A documented or undocumented history of domestic violence;
 
 
Whether a party to the incident may have a motivation to be untruthful;
 
 
Whether someone may have been injured as a result of the other person  engaging in
 
 
self-defense;
 
 
The existence of past or present protective orders; and
 
 
Criminal histories involving violence to others.
 
There may be instances where law enforcement officers respond to reports of sexual assault or domestic 
violence and find that they are unable to communicate with both parties.  This may be because one party does 
not speak or understand English proficiently, or because one party has a hearing or speech disability.  In these 
circumstances, officers should ensure that they are able to adequately communicate with both parties before 
determining the predominant aggressor.   
 
Law enforcement agencies also should discourage dual arrests in domestic violence cases, wherever 
feasible as well as issue policies that delineate the limited circumstances under which dual arrests are permissi-
ble.    Arresting the wrong party or both parties increases the likelihood that the offender will act again, and 
discourages the victim from reporting future incidents.  Further, dual arrests often result in children being taken 
into the custody of child protective services and may diminish children’s trust in law enforcement. 
    NOPD CD, supra note 33, at 58.
    IACP Domestic Violence Issues Paper, supra note 38, at 4-5.
    NOPD CD, supra note 33, at 58; IACP Domestic Violence Issues Paper, supra note 38, at 4; IACP Model 
Policy on Domestic Violence, supra note 29 at 5; Barbara J. Hart, Arrest: What's the Big Deal, 3 Wm. & Mary 
J. Women & L.  207, 207-210 (1997) (noting the importance of first responders being cognizant of the goals of 
domestic violence intervention because their perspective will influence all major decisions, including whether 
to arrest one or both parties).
56
57
58
56
57
58
Page 20


Princple 7
Hold Officers Who Commit Sexual Assault or Domestic Violence Accountable
 
Law enforcement agencies strive to be seen by their communities as credible and legitimate authorities 
in enforcing the law and protecting public safety.  If a law enforcement agency does not fully investigate reports 
of sexual assault, sexual misconduct and domestic violence perpetrated by its own officers, or fails to appropri-
ately discipline officers when those allegations are substantiated, the legitimacy of that law enforcement agency 
may be called into question.  This, in turn, may make victims more reluctant to report crimes of sexual assault 
and domestic violence, which undermines public safety by increasing the risk of future harm from offenders 
who are not held accountable by the criminal justice system.
Principle in Practice 
 
To maintain public confidence, law enforcement agencies should develop policies and practices aimed at 
preventing and addressing on-duty sexual harassment and assault of members of the public by law enforcement 
officers.  These policies should provide that, at a minimum, the agency will open an internal investigation 
whenever an allegation is made that an officer has engaged in sexual abuse, sexual misconduct or domestic 
violence, irrespective of whether the officer was acting in his or her official capacity at the time.    In addition to 
opening an internal investigation, law enforcement agencies should refer allegations of officer misconduct 
involving potential criminal activity to the local prosecutor’s office.
    NOPD FL, supra note 28, at 92; Int’l Ass’n of Chiefs of Police, Model Policy on Domestic Violence by 
Police Officers 1 (2003) [hereinafter IACP Model Policy on Domestic Violence by Police Officers], available at 
http://www.theiacp.org/Portals/0/documents/pdfs/MembersOnly/DomesticViolencebyPolicePolicy.pdf. 
    IACP Model Policy on Domestic Violence by Police Officers, supra note 59, at 2-3; Int’l Ass’n of Chiefs of 
Police, Nat’l Law Enforcement Policy Ctr., Domestic Violence by Police Officers Concepts and Issues Paper 2, 
6-7 (2003) [hereinafter IACP Domestic Violence by Police Officers Issues Paper], available at http://www.thei-
acp.org/Portals/0/documents/pdfs/MembersOnly/DomesticViolencebyPolicePaper.pdf.
    NOPD CD, supra note 33, at 101-102; IACP Model Policy on Domestic Violence by Police Officers, supra 
note 59, at 3, 7; IACP Domestic Violence by Police Officers Issues Paper, supra note 60, at 5, 9.
59
60
61
59
60
61
Page 21


Prinicple 8
Main, Review and Act Upon Data Regarding Sexual Assault and Domestice Violence
 
Some law enforcement agencies may be under-investigating sexual assault or domestic violence reports 
without being aware of the pattern.  For instance, in most jurisdictions, the reported rate of sexual assaults 
typically exceeds the homicide rate.    If homicides exceed sexual assaults in a particular jurisdiction, this may 
be an indication that the agency is misclassifying or under-investigating incidents of sexual assault.  Similarly, 
studies indicate that almost two-thirds to three-quarters of domestic violence incidents would be properly 
classified as “assaults” in law enforcement incident reports.    Therefore, if the ratio of arrest reports for lesser 
offenses (e.g., disorderly conduct) is significantly greater than that for assaults, this may indicate that law 
enforcement officers are not correctly identifying the underlying behavior – i.e., they are classifying serious 
domestic violence incidents as less serious infractions, such as disorderly conduct.
Principle in Practice  
 
Law enforcement agencies should assess whether their jurisdictions are under-investigating sexual 
assault and domestic violence reports by examining their own jurisdiction’s crime statistics, including statistics 
on other violent crimes in that jurisdiction.    Law enforcement agencies should gather and maintain accurate 
data on sexual assault and domestic violence reports in order to conduct such diagnostic reviews.    Law 
enforcement agencies also should analyze such data in order to identify trends in the rates of sexual assault 
and domestic violence in their communities, to assess the effectiveness of their response to these crimes, and 
to make decisions about their response to and investigation of these crimes.  For example, a law enforcement 
agency might rely on data on sexual assault and domestic violence reports to determine whether it has an 
appropriate number of officers assigned to handle crimes of sexual assault and domestic violence and to 
determine the appropriate level of specialized training about sexual assault and domestic violence for its 
officers.  Collecting, analyzing and acting upon data is key to ensuring that law enforcement agencies are 
operating lawfully and effectively.   
    FBI Crime in the United States 2013, Uniform Crime Reports online Table 7, available at http://www.f-
bi.gov/about-us/cjis/u-
cr/crime-in-the-u.s/2013/crime-in-the-u.s.-2013/tables/7tabledatadecpdf/table_7_offense_analysis_united_stat
es_2009-2013.xls (last visited Oct. 2, 2015) (showing that for 2013, there were 14,196 murders nationwide; by 
comparison, there were 108,612 rapes); FBI, Crime in the United States 2013, Uniform Crime Reports online 
Table 16, available at http://www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/u-
cr/crime-in-the-u.s/2013/crime-in-the-u.s.-2013/tables/table-16/table_16_rate_by_population_group_2013.xls 
(showing that in 2013, the rate of murder and nonnegligent manslaughter per 100,000 inhabitants was 4.6, 
while the rate of rape per 100,000 inhabitants was 39.8). 
    Klein, supra note 22, at 9 (citing multiple studies).
    Id.
    NOPD CD, supra note 33, at 54-60.
    Missoula MOU, supra note 29, at 10-11; NOPD CD, supra note 33, at 57; IACP Model Policy on Domestic 
Violence, supra note 44, at 2-3.
 
62
63
64
65
66
62
63
64
65
66
Page 22


III. Relevant Federal Law
 
Gender bias in the law enforcement response to sexual assault and domestic violence can make it more 
difficult to determine whether a crime occurred and more difficult to hold perpetrators accountable.  While 
many in law enforcement are effectively conducting such investigations, by identifying practices that may 
reflect or contribute to gender bias in policing, and describing  a set of basic principles that can help to prevent 
such bias, this guidance is intended to help LEAs improve their ability to effectively address sexual assault and 
domestic violence.  Moreover, as laid out below, the U.S. Constitution and various federal laws prohibit law 
enforcement agencies from discriminating – including on the basis of gender – in the discharge of their duties.  
The department outlines these legal principles to help LEAs further understand the source of their duty to 
eliminate policing practices that may be biased.  LEAs that integrate the basic principles described in this 
guidance into their policies, trainings and practices will be able to respond to allegations of sexual assault and 
domestic violence more effectively and will more readily fulfill their own legal obligations. 
U.S. Constitution
 
The Equal Protection Clause of the U.S. Constitution prohibits discriminatory enforcement of the law.    
Discriminatory policing occurs when police officers and departments selectively enforce the law—or fail to 
enforce the law—based on characteristics such as race, color, national origin, sex or religion.    Denying police 
services to some persons or communities due to bias or stereotypes related to these characteristics is a form of 
discriminatory policing.  According to the Supreme Court, the 14   Amendment “prohibits the states from 
denying to all persons within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.  Denying includes inaction as well 
as action, and denying the equal protection of the laws includes the omission to protect.”    Many courts have 
extended this principle to a law enforcement agency’s under‐enforcement of crimes that disproportionately 
affect women, where it is established that the agency has a policy, practice or custom of intentionally providing  
    Whren v. United States, 517 U.S. 806, 813 (1996) (noting that the Equal Protection Clause is the constitution-
al basis for objecting to intentionally discriminatory applications of the law); DeShaney v. Winnebago County 
Dep't of Social Servs., 489 U.S. 189, 197 n. 3 (1989) (noting that, pursuant to the Equal Protection Clause, state 
executive and law enforcement officials may not “selectively deny . . . protective services to certain disfavored 
minorities.”); Elliot-Park v. Manglona, 592 F.3d 1003, 1007 (9th Cir. 2010) (Equal Protection Clause prohibits 
law enforcement from intentionally discriminating in the provision of any services to any degree) (9th Cir. 
2010); Estate of Macias v. Ihde, 219 F.3d 1018, 1019, 1028 (9th Cir. 2000) (in case alleging “inferior police 
protection on account of status as a woman, a Latina, and a victim of domestic violence,” holding that there is 
an equal protection right to have law enforcement services administered in a nondiscriminatory manner); 
Pariseau v. City of Brockton, 135 F. Supp. 2d 257, 262 (D. Mass. 2001) (“[A]lthough there is no constitutional 
right to police protection, law enforcement officials may not selectively deny protective services based on such 
invidious classifications as race, gender and religion.”) (citing Hayden v. Grayson, 134 F.3d 449, 452, 453 n. 3 
(1st Cir.1998)).
    Id.
    Bell v. Maryland, 378 U.S. 266, 310 n. 31 (1964) (Goldberg, J., concurring) (internal citation omitted). 
 
67
68
69
67
68
69
Page 23
th


unequal protection to community members on the basis of sex, in the form of failing to respond with equal effort 
to victims of those crimes than to victims of other comparable crimes.
 
The Due Process Clause of the U.S. Constitution also prohibits discriminatory policing.  Due Process 
violations occur when law enforcements’ affirmative conduct creates or increases the risk of private violence, 
which increases the danger to the victim.
Safe Streets Act – 42 U.S.C. § 3789d
 
Discriminatory policing also is prohibited under the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 
1968 (Safe Streets Act), which provides that “[n]o person in any State shall on the ground of race, color, 
religion, national origin, or sex be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to 
discrimination under or denied employment in connection with any programs or activity funded in whole or in  
    In evaluating equal protection claims regarding under-enforcement of crimes that disproportionately affect 
women, courts consider whether: (1) the jurisdiction has a policy or custom of providing less protection to 
victims of those crimes than they do to other crimes; (2) whether gender discrimination was a motivating factor 
in providing less protection; and (3) whether the policy or practice caused the plaintiff injury.  See, e.g., Soto v. 
Flores, 103 F.3d 1056, 1066 (1st Cir. 1997); Watson v. City of Kansas City, 857 F.2d 690 (10th Cir. 1988); 
Hynson v. City of Chester, 864 F.2d 1026, 1031 (3rd Cir. 1988).  Importantly, a discriminatory purpose need not 
be the only motivation for an agency’s policy or practice.  Vill. Of Arlington Heights v. Metro Hous. Dev. Corp., 
429 U.S. 252, 265-66 (1977).  Courts will consider the totality of the circumstances and consider factors that 
indirectly indicate an intent to discriminate, including discriminatory impact.  Id.  Certain contemporaneous 
actions or statements by police officers may be sufficient to establish discriminatory intent.  See, e.g.,  Balistreri 
v. Pacifica Police Dep’t., 901 F.2d 696, 701 (9th Cir. 1990) (finding officer’s alleged statement, that he did not 
blame plaintiff’s husband for hitting her because she was “carrying on,” strongly suggested discriminatory 
intent and an animus towards abused women).
    See, e.g., Okin v. Vill. of Cornwall‐On‐Hudson Police Dep’t, 577 F.3d 415, 429-430 (2d Cir. 2009) (finding 
that a reasonable fact-finder could infer that the police affirmatively encouraged a man’s domestic violence 
when police engaged in casual, friendly conversation with the alleged abuser during their response to the 
victim’s complaint, and otherwise communicated that the alleged abuser’s conduct would go punished); Phillips 
v. County of Allegheny, 515 F.3d 224, 236-237 (3d Cir. 2008) (police providing individual with confidential 
information that permits that individual to harm another may give rise to a due process violation under the 
“state-harm” doctrine); Freeman v. Ferguson, 911 F.2d 52, 54-55 (8th Cir. 1990) (noting that there is a “possibil-
ity that a constitutional duty to protect an individual against private violence may exist[s] in a non-custodial 
setting if the state has taken affirmative action which increases the individual's danger of, or vulnerability to, 
such violence beyond the level it would have been at absent state action”).; Smith v. City of Elyria, 857 F. Supp. 
1203, 1210 (N.D. Ohio 1994) (finding facts sufficient to support a due process claim, where, among other 
things, police officers responding to domestic abuse call told the alleged abuser to throw his clothing back inside 
the house if the alleged victim threw it out). 
   
70
71
70
71
Page 24


part with funds made available under this chapter.”     The implementing regulation of the Safe Streets Act 
prohibits program recipients from “utiliz[ing] criteria or methods of administration which have the effect of 
subjecting individuals to discrimination.”     When a law enforcement agency’s handling of sexual assault or 
domestic violence cases has an unnecessary disparate impact on women, it violates the Safe Streets Act and its 
implementing regulations, even where the discrimination is not intentional, unless the agency can show that the 
discriminatory impact is necessitated by some legitimate law enforcement or other purpose.  
Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 ‐ 42 U.S.C. § 14141
 
The Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994, 42 U.S.C. § 14141 prohibits law 
enforcement officers from engaging in a pattern or practice of policing that violates either the Constitution or 
federal laws.  Under Section 14141, it is unlawful for law enforcement agencies, including prosecutorial offic-
es, to violate the Constitution or any other federal statute, including, for example, the Civil Rights Act of 1964 
and the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
Violence Against Women Reauthorization Act of 2013 – Pub. L. No. 113-4
 
The Violence Against Women Reauthorization Act of 2013 (VAWA 2013) expanded prior federal law 
addressing domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault and stalking.  VAWA 2013 reauthorizes critical 
grant programs created by the original Violence Against Women Act and subsequent legislation, establishes 
new programs and strengthens civil rights protections.  As a result of VAWA 2013, VAWA grants now contain a 
condition that prohibits discrimination in any program or activity funded in whole or in part with funds made 
available under VAWA, or other funds administered by the Office on Violence Against Women, on the basis of 
actual or perceived race, color, religion, national origin, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation or disability.  42 
U.S.C. § 13925(b)(13).  
    42 U.S.C. § 3789d(c)(1) (2006).
    28 C.F.R. § 42.203(e) (2012) (emphasis added).  See also United States v. Virginia, 620 F.2d 1018, 1024 (4th 
Cir. 1980) (Safe Streets Act requires showing that defendants' discriminatory employment practices had an 
adverse impact on female job applicants, not proof of intentional discrimination, before defendants must 
demonstrate the challenged practices have a necessary relationship to the job).
72
73
72
73
Page 25


IV. Additional Resources        
 
The department has additional resources to further guide law enforcement agencies’ responses to reports 
of sexual assault and domestic violence in the attached appendix, as well as on its website at www.justice.gov-
/ovw/identifying-and-preventing-gender-bias.  These materials include:  guidance setting forth best practices on 
law enforcement responses to sexual assault and domestic violence from national law enforcement and prosecu-
tors’ associations; technical assistance documents developed by the department and its grantees about sexual 
assault, domestic violence, and trafficking in persons; letters of findings that the department has issued after 
conducting civil rights investigations of law enforcement agencies, whose policing practices were affected by 
gender bias; negotiated agreements that have resulted from these civil rights investigations; and a sample 
memorandum of understanding from the White House Task Force to Protect Students from Sexual Assault, 
aimed at preventing and responding effectively to sexual assaults at colleges and universities.  These resources 
also contain sources for training opportunities for local law enforcement staff.  Law enforcement agencies who 
desire additional technical assistance on how to eradicate gender bias in law enforcement should contact the 
Office on Violence Against Women by phone at (202) 307-6026 or email at ovw.info@usdoj.gov.
*****
For ease of further dissemination, this guidance is available at the following website link: www.justice.gov-
/ovw/identifying-and-preventing-gender-bias 
Page 26