Skip to Content
    
                  
    
    
 
    
        
            
        
    
    
  
      
      
          Fair and Equal Housing Act
        
           
  
    
    
      
        
  
        
          The Fair and Equal Housing Act would provide consistent and explicit non-discrimination protections for LGBTQ+ people in housing by adding “sexual orientation” and “gender identity” as protected characteristics under the Fair Housing Act.
      
     
    
    
    
      
    
  
    
      
        119th Congress: H.R. 3696
The Problem
Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer (LGBTQ+) people face significant levels of discrimination in housing, which can take a variety of forms. LGBTQ+ people are at risk of being
denied, charged higher rates for, or removed from housing. Currently, there is no federal law that consistently protects LGBTQ+ individuals from housing discrimination.
A 2013 study by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development showed that same-sex couples experience significant levels of discrimination when responding to advertised rental housing in metropolitan areas nationwide. In this study, heterosexual couples were favored over same-sex couples by sixteen percent. For transgender people, housing discrimination is even more prevalent. According to the 2015 U.S. Transgender Survey, nearly one quarter of transgender people report having experienced housing discrimination within the past year because of their gender identity.
What is the Fair and Equal Housing Act?
The Fair and Equal Housing Act would provide consistent and explicit non-discrimination protections for LGBTQ+ people in housing by adding “sexual orientation” and “gender identity” as protected characteristics under the Fair Housing Act, which currently prohibits discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, and national origin. The Fair and Equal Housing Act also clarifies existing law to ensure that housing protections apply to anyone who experiences discrimination because they are perceived as or associate with someone of a different race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, disability, familial status, or national origin
States’ Experiences
Only 22 states and the District of Columbia prohibit discrimination in housing based on both sexual orientation and gender identity. Another state, Wisconsin, bans discrimination in housing based on sexual orientation only.
Current Status of the Bill? 
The Fair and Equal Housing Act was reintroduced in the House of Representatives on June 3, 2025 by Rep. Brad Schneider (D-IL). This bill has not yet been reintroduced in the Senate.
For more information, please contact legislation@hrc.org. Read about other Federal Legislation pertinent to the LGBTQ+ community here.
    
   
      
    
  
    
      
        
    
   
  
  
    
    
    
          
  
    
   
    
    
          
  
    
   
    
           
                                  
                            
          
            
  
  
    
      
        
          
                          
                Love Conquers Hate
              
            
                          
                      
        
                  
                        
          
              
      
        
                      
              
            
          
          
                          
                Fall Favorites
              
            
                          Shop for HRC clothing and gifts. 100% of every purchase fuels the fight for equality.
        
      
    
  
 
          
              
        
      
    
        
  
  
      
  
    
  
  
          
              
          
    
  Last Updated: October 9, 2025