The author(s) shown below used Federal funds provided by the U.S. 
Department of Justice and prepared the following final report: 
 
 
Document Title:  
Police Officers' Decision Making and Discretion: 
Forming Suspicion and Making a Stop 
  
Author(s):  
 
Geoffrey P. Alpert 
 
 
 
 
Roger G. Dunham 
 
 
 
 
Meghan Stroshine 
 
 
 
 
Katherine Bennett 
 
 
 
 
John MacDonald 
 
Document No.:    
213004 
 
Date Received:  
February 2006 
 
Award Number:  
2001-IJ-CX-0035 
 
 
This report has not been published by the U.S. Department of Justice.  
To provide better customer service, NCJRS has made this Federally-
funded grant final report available electronically in addition to 
traditional paper copies.  
  
 
 
Opinions or points of view expressed are those 
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect 
the official position or policies of the U.S. 
Department of Justice. 
 
 
 


Police Officers' Decision Making and Discretion: 
Forming Suspicion and Making a Stop 
A Report to The National Institute of Justice 
Geoffrey P. Alpert 
University of South Carolina 
Roger G. Dunham 
University of Miami 
Meghan Stroshine 
Marquette University 
Katherine Bennett 
Armstrong Atlantic State University 
John MacDonald 
RAND 
October 2004 
I 
This research was supported by.the National Institute of Justice Grant 2001 -1J-CX-0035, 
Office of Justice Programs, U.S. Department of Justice. Points of view in this report are those of 
the authors and do not necessarily represent the official position or policies of the U.S. 
I 
Department of Justice. 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Police Officers’ Decision Making and Discretion:  
Forming Suspicion and Making a Stop 
Table of Contents 
Abstract 
Executive Summary 
1.  Introduction 
2.  Site Description and Methodology 
3.  Data Analysis 
Precinct-Level Analyses 
4. Conclusions and Policy Implications 
Appendix A: Data Collection Forms 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Police Officers’ Decision Making and Discretion:  
Forming Suspicion and Making a Stop 
Abstract 
Most police activity occurs in private, away from the public=s view.  This creates a 
situation that allows police officers discretion in the way they think about what they see and how 
they handle those with whom they come in contact. There has been an effort by the research 
community to examine issues concerning how police act and respond in general and what police 
do specifically when they interact with citizens. A conspicuous void in the research effort has 
been the lack of attention paid to the process by which police officers form suspicion about a 
suspect whether or not a formal intervention such as a stop was made.   
Officers in Savannah, Georgia were observed and debriefed after they became suspicious about 
an individual or vehicle. Observers accompanied officers on 132, 8-hour shifts, during which 
time, the officers formed suspicion 174 times.  AForming suspicion@ occurred any time an 
officer became doubting, distrustful or otherwise troubled or concerned about an individual.  In 
most of the cases, it was the behavior of the suspect(s) that concerned the officer. This concern 
did not always result in a stop of an individual or vehicle.  In some cases, the officers realized 
that their initial Asuspicion@ was unsupported. In fact, 103 stops resulted from the suspicions 
that were formed by the officers during the times they were observed. 
Several factors were significantly associated with the likelihood that an officer would 
make a stop based on suspicion.  Interestingly, none of the characteristics of the suspect was 
important.  In other words, officers were equally likely to stop individuals whether they were 
male or female, African-American or white, low or high socioeconomic status. 
i 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


The encounters were assessed by the interactions between the officers and suspects. 
Although most encounters went smoothly, some changed character based on the actions and 
attitudes of one or both of the actors. 
ii 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Police Officers’ Decision Making and Discretion: 
Forming Suspicion and Making a Stop 
Executive Summary 
The majority of past research on police behavior has employed observational methodology to focus 
on actions taken by officers following contact with a citizen.  This past research has largely concentrated on 
whether or not an arrest or other formal intervention follows a stop or other police-citizen interaction.  The 
research at hand examines police officers’ decisions before an initial contact is made.  This study therefore 
focuses on the formation of suspicion and the decision to stop and question a citizen.  Additionally, we 
analyze the outcomes of these stops.   
It is important to note that observational studies have generally been designed to collect information 
on the actions and reactions of the police and citizens during an encounter, and that the common limitation 
of such studies lies in an assessment that focuses on the interaction process after the contact with a citizen 
has been made.  While this method does produce data capable of answering many important questions 
about police behavior, it does not address why an officer selects a particular individual for a stop, thereby 
transforming some citizens into suspects at the expense of other citizens who are ignored.  Our research, 
therefore, focuses on the vitally important decisions made prior to an initial police-citizen contact, 
answering questions about forming suspicion and making the decision to stop a citizen. These observations, 
read in conjunction with the outcome of these stops, provide a useful insight into how the decision to make 
a stop can affect police-citizen interactions. 
Methodology 
1 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


The present endeavor attempts to fill some of the gaps in the previous research.  Our methodology 
integrates quantitative and qualitative data collection in an effort to improve the value of the data.  Our 
quantitative data includes the routine information necessary to conduct a case study of a police department, 
including officer behavior and the independent variables that theoretically affect police behavior.  The 
qualitative data were collected by using the general principles of observation and content analysis with a 
special emphasis on protocol analysis.  Unlike the previous research, we are interested in the formation and 
creation of cognitive suspicion, as well as in formal actions (e.g. stops) taken by the police. 
During the summer and fall of 2002, field observers accompanied officers in each of the four 
precincts and on all three shifts in Savannah, Georgia. Observers went on 132 tours with officer.  Observers 
were trained to focus on how the officers spent their discretionary time.  They were trained not to record 
any activities that were generated by radio calls, other officers, or situations in which they served as a back-
up officer. Observers were instructed to watch the interactions between the officer and suspect(s), to 
document what they saw and to note the sequence of events as they unfolded. They were provided 
structured questionnaires that included language for their questions and space to record officer responses.   
Observers were trained to take note of occasions when officers appeared to notice a suspicious 
person or incident but ultimately decided not act upon it; in such instances observers were instructed to 
question the officer about his or her behavior at an opportune time. For example, if the observer noticed an 
officer do a “double-take,” the observer would bring that to the officer’s attention after the event and ask 
what he or she was thinking at the time. In other words, the observer would ask what caught the officer’s 
eye and what made the officer proceed without acting.  Observers also recorded the interactions between an 
officer and a citizen when suspicion actually led to a stop.  In these instances observers were trained to 
complete a questionnaire concerning the officer and his or her patterns of behavior, a task undertaken when 
the officer was not engaged with a citizen. 
2 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


There are two units of analysis in this study, each based on a stage in the officer’s decision-making 
process: (1) the officer becoming suspicious of an individual, and (2) the officer making a stop based on the 
suspicion. First, we examine the decision to form a suspicion in relation to the characteristics of the areas 
patrolled, the persons encountered, the days and times suspicion was formed, and finally, the characteristics 
of officers. We next analyze the officer’s decision to stop a citizen in relation to our independent variables.  
Lastly, we discuss factors associated with the various alternative outcomes of a stop (e.g. use of force, 
searches, tickets, and arrests).   
Findings 
Officers formed suspicion when they observed something unusual, became curious or otherwise 
distrustful of an individual.  During 132 tours where officers were accompanied by observers, officers 
formed suspicion 174 times. On average, an officer would form suspicion once (X = 1.32; S.D. = 1.27) 
during a tour of duty (or shift). Officers did not form suspicion on 60 of these tours,.  However, on one 
tour, an officer formed seven suspicions.  In the majority of cases, individuals were driving vehicles, 
opposed to being on foot, at the time suspicion was formed or stops were made (70% and 73.8%, 
respectively). The majority of persons who aroused the suspicion of officers, or who were stopped by 
police, were male (74%) minority group members (71%) who averaged thirty-two years of age.  However, 
Blacks constituted a slightly higher percentage of suspicions (71.0%) than stops (68.9%), while whites had 
an inverse pattern (they constituted 29.0 % of the suspicions and 31.1 % of the stops. 
Bases for Suspicion 
When an officer was curious about a citizen or became suspicious, observers asked the officer to 
provide them with the reason(s) for this concern. The reasons provided by observers were coded according 
3 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


to the following categories: (1) appearance, (2) behavior, (3) time and place, and (4) information. 
“Appearance” refers to the appearance of an individual and/or vehicle, and can refer to things such as 
distinctive dress, indicators of class, vehicle type, color, condition, and the like.  “Behavior” refers to any 
overt action taken by an individual or vehicle that seemed inappropriate, illegal, or bizarre.  “Time and 
place” refers to an officer’s knowledge of a particular location (e.g., park, warehouse district) and what 
activities should or should not be expected there after a particular time (e.g., after hours).  Finally, 
“Information” refers to information provided by either a dispatcher or fellow officer (e.g., BOLO). 
  The main reason for forming suspicion was the behavior of the suspect(s).   In the overwhelming 
majority of cases (66%), the officer told the observer that the behavior of the suspect(s) was the primary 
reason for forming suspicion. An analysis of observer descriptions of behavior revealed that the most likely 
behavioral reasons for forming suspicion of an individual/vehicle were traffic violations (e.g., running a red 
light, driving with expired plates), avoiding officers (e.g. turning around and walking the other way, hiding 
face), and looking nervous in the presence of the officer.  
More than 18% of the suspicions were stimulated by information provided by either a dispatcher or 
fellow officer. This usually involved “Be on the Lookout” bulletins, or other information provided by the 
department or fellow officers concerning characteristics of suspects, crimes, or vehicles thought to be 
related to specific crimes.  An analysis of observer descriptions of the types of information officers used 
revealed that the most likely types of information used for forming suspicion of an individual/vehicle were 
descriptions of personal characteristics, clothing, or descriptions of vehicles that were either stolen or 
thought to have been used in a crime. 
Nearly ten percent of the reasons given for becoming suspicious of a person were related to time 
and place. These cases involved an officer drawing on his or her  knowledge of a particular location (e.g., 
4 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


park, warehouse district) and what activities should or should not be expected there after a particular time 
(e.g., after hours). An analysis of the observers’ descriptions of the situations which caused officers to 
become suspicious revealed a wide variety of situations, including a car parked near a school in the woods 
at night, a car driving slowly in a warehouse district late at night, and passengers in a car who do not match 
the ethnicity of the neighborhood they are driving in (especially at night). 
Finally, nearly six percent of the reasons given by the officers for becoming suspicious were related 
to the appearance of the person(s). This criteria involved distinctive dress, indicators of class, vehicle type, 
color, and condition. An analysis of the observers’ descriptions, as to which characteristics led officers to 
become suspicious, revealed characteristics such as a vehicle with heavily tinted windows, a dirty or 
damaged vehicle, an individual wearing gang colors, or an individual looking “strung out” like a drug 
addict. 
Overall Patterns of Officer’s Decision-Making Concerning Suspicion 
To obtain an assessment of each officer’s overall decision-making style, observers recorded the 
factors which the officer took into account when forming suspicion.  It should be noted that this was an 
overall assessment of the officer, and not an assessment of the officer with regard to any one particular 
incident. 
“Appearance,” referring to things such as distinctive dress, indicators of class, and the like, 
appeared to be an important factor for the majority of officers, with most officers rating appearance with a 
medium priority rather than high priority. Observers' explanations of these ratings were qualitatively 
analyzed to provide some insight into the reasons officers considered appearance important or unimportant.  
The following are some explanations given by officers who rated appearance as a medium or high priority: 
•  Despite ethnicity, if someone is wearing all black clothing, this is an indication that they are up to 
no good 
5 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


•  Officer is well acquainted with people and places in his beat; he can tell based on appearance who 
"doesn't belong" 
•  Person who looks "different" raises suspicion (e.g., white person in black neighborhood).  
In contrast, officers who rated appearance to be of low priority typically provided one of two              
explanations: (1) that most people encountered looked similar enough to render appearance 
meaningless as a factor that might arouse suspicion, or, (2) that they did their best not to judge people 
based on their appearance. 
Most officers described behavior as playing a significant role in their decision-making.  Nearly half 
of the officers reported that behavior was a high priority and an additional one-third stated that behavior 
was a medium priority in forming suspicion.  Again, observers' explanations of their ratings were 
qualitatively analyzed to provide some insight into the importance of behavior in forming suspicion.  The 
following are examples of comments provided by officers who treated behavior as being of medium or high 
importance in forming suspicion:  
•  Police officer stated that he watches out for the “felony stare” (i.e., getting nervous when they see a 
police car, making every effort to avoid the police). 
•  Police officer said that behavior is very important to him because he can tell when a person is lying 
to him.  He can tell this by the way they act. 
•  Police officer said he can tell if someone has done something just by how they respond to him. 
•  “It is very important to tell if they are fidgeting.” 
Analyses conducted on the importance of time and place in officer decision-making revealed that, in 
a little over one-quarter of cases, time and place were irrelevant to whether officers formed suspicion.  For 
the majority of officers observed in this study time and place was either of medium or high priority.  Most 
often, this was related to people/vehicle(s) being out of place in a particular location at a given time.  For 
instance, officers often relied on their knowledge of a particular location (e.g., park, warehouse district) and 
what activities should or should not be expected there after a particular time (e.g., after hours) to form 
suspicion. For example: 
•  People who look out of place (e.g., white person in black neighborhood) get stopped in places that 
have higher incidence of crime 
6 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


•  People can use the dark to their advantage to aid them committing crimes, therefore more attention 
paid at night 
•  People who look out of place are very suspicious, especially white people in a black neighborhood. 
•  People who were where they shouldn't be (e.g., juveniles on a school playground at night) got 
stopped 
Observers were also asked to rank the importance that information might have in determining the 
decision-making of police officers.  A small number of observers believed that information rarely played a 
role in whether officers formed suspicion.  In contrast, observers believed that the great majority of officers 
treated information as high priority. 
Factors Correlated with the Decision to Stop a Suspected Individual/Vehicle 
Now we will change our focus from the first unit of analysis (an officer becoming suspicious of a 
citizen) to the second unit of analysis (an officer making a decision to stop the citizen, based upon 
suspicion). It is important to note that “forming suspicion” did not necessarily result in stopping an 
individual. However, officers did stop the individual under suspicion the majority of the time (n=103 or 
59%). In cases where no stop was made, the officer’s continued observation of the suspect(s) convinced 
him/her that the original concern was unwarranted.  Furthermore, since officers formed suspicion a total of 
174 times and made a total of 103 stops, we can calculate that officers made an average of less than one 
stop per ride on the basis of suspicion. 
A correlation was computed for each of the independent variables and the decision to stop a person 
under suspicion. It is interesting that none of the suspect characteristics examined significantly 
influenced the likelihood of a stop. In other words, once the officers became suspicious of an individual 
they were equally as likely to stop the person whether or not the person was male or female, African-
American or white, young or old, or perceived to be of a low or high socioeconomic status.  The type of 
area in which the observation was made did have a significant effect on whether a stop was made by the 
7 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


officer. Suspicions were significantly less likely to result in stops in residential areas (46% of the time) 
when compared to the other types of areas, which ranged from 72% to 80% of the time. 
Stops were significantly related to whether the observation occurred during the weekend or not. 
Suspicions resulted in actual stops 69% of the time during the weekdays, but only 41% of the time during 
the weekend (Friday and Saturday nights). It is quite likely that weekend nights are generally far busier 
times for law enforcement and officers cannot follow up on suspicious behaviors they observe as often as 
during the less busy time periods. 
The nature of the suspicion also was influential in determining the relative likelihood that an 
officer would make a stop. Officers were significantly more likely to make stops when they had formed 
suspicion on the basis of the suspect’s behavior (75% of the time), but significantly less likely to make a 
stop if they had formed suspicion on the basis of time and place (29%) or information (34%).   
Finally, two officer characteristics were associated with making a stop of an individual.  Older 
officers and officers with a high school education were significantly more likely to make stops than 
younger and more educated officers.  Officers with a high school education made stops in 70% of the 
incidents which they defined as suspicious, a significantly higher percentages than that of educated officers. 
The mean age of officers making stops after forming suspicion is 34.5 years, which is significantly older 
than the mean of officers forming suspicion but not making a stop (31.3 years). 
Officer and Suspect Demeanor throughout the Interaction 
Observers recorded the demeanor of suspects and officers at various points during the encounter.  
Overall, officers acted more positively toward suspects than suspects did towards officers.  Suspect and 
officer demeanor changed at approximately the same rate during their interaction, and in roughly one-
8 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


fourth of all cases, the officer and suspect changed their demeanor during the course of the encounter. 
The nature of an officer’s and/or suspect’s change in demeanor was evenly divided between 
changes for the better and for the worse.  Officers tended to hold more positive attitudes toward suspects 
than suspects did towards officers. Regardless of whether an officer’s demeanor changed for the better or 
worse, officers appeared overwhelmingly to be responding to the attitude/demeanor displayed by the 
suspect. 
Very few officers were disrespectful toward the person they stopped.  Of the four cases where an 
officer was disrespectful to the citizen, only one was assessed as being unprovoked; in the remaining 
instances officers were reacting to disrespect exhibited by the citizen.  While the overall percentage of 
suspects who displayed disrespect to the police was also relatively low, suspects were disrespectful at over 
twice the rate of officers. 
Factors Associated with the Outcome of a Stop 
A correlational analysis was performed on a number of variables (area, time, individual 
characteristics of the actors, and reasons for becoming suspicious) that may have an impact on selected 
outcome measures (resistance, frisked, coercion used, being searched, issued a warning, ticket or being 
arrested). We discuss important relationships that emerge from this analysis in the sections below. 
Characteristics of the Area 
Characteristics of the area had an impact on whether or not the suspect was frisked.  Suspects were 
more likely to be frisked if the area was private and when the area was residential.  Further, suspects 
stopped in commercial areas were more likely to be issued a ticket (45%) than suspects stopped in 
residential areas (25%).  There were two characteristics of areas that did not make a difference on any of 
9 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


the stop results: the racial makeup of the area and areas the officer thought were “trouble spots.”  Also, 
neither time measure—stops made after dark and stops made on weekend nights—affected stop outcomes. 
Suspect Characteristics 
Only one suspect characteristic was not related to any of the seven outcome variables: the race of 
the suspect did not affect the measured outcome of stops.  Gender was related to the likelihood of being 
frisked and receiving a ticket.  There was a five times greater likelihood of males being frisked than 
females.  However, females who were stopped were nearly twice as likely as males to be issued a traffic 
ticket. Age was related to the likelihood of being frisked and of the vehicle being searched.  Younger 
persons were significantly more likely to be frisked or have their vehicle searched than older individuals. 
The perceived social class of the suspect was related to only one outcome variable, but the one 
which is the most severe: being arrested.  Stopped suspects perceived by the officer to be lower class were 
arrested 25% of the time, while suspects perceived to be middle class were arrested only 6% of the time.  
Only four suspects were perceived to be in the upper class, and none were arrested.  The reason for the 
greater likelihood of arrest of lower-status suspects is unclear.  It may be due to a higher offending rate of 
lower-status citizens. 
The suspect characteristic most consistently related to the results of stops was whether the suspect 
was under the influence of alcohol or drugs at the time of the stop.  When this was the case, the suspect was 
significantly more likely to resist the officer, to be frisked, to have force used against him/her, to have their 
vehicle searched, and also to be arrested. More specifically, suspects under the influence of alcohol or 
drugs were approximately ten times more likely to resist (33%) than suspects not under the influence (3%).   
Further, suspects under the influence were about five times more likely to be patted down (75%) than other 
suspects (15%), and more than twelve times (25%) more likely to have force used against them during the 
encounter with the police than suspects not under the influence (2%).  Police officers decided to search the 
10 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


vehicles of 50% of the suspects under the influence of alcohol or drugs, but only 5% of the vehicles of 
other suspects, a ten times greater likelihood.  Finally, the suspects under the influence of alcohol or drugs 
were fourteen times more likely to be arrested (42%) than suspects not under the influence ( 3%). 
A Brief Look at Outcomes and the Source of Suspicion 
When the reason for forming suspicion was behavior (versus appearance, time and place, or 
information), suspects were significantly less likely to resist, to have force used against them, or to be 
frisked. However, they were significantly more likely to be issued a ticket.  More specifically, only 2% of 
the suspects who were selected by the officer for observation because of their behavior ended up resisting 
the officer. Compare this figure to the 45% of suspects who resisted when the officer began observing 
them because of specific information received by the officer about the situation.  There were too few cases 
involving suspicion based on appearance or time and place to allow valid comparisons with these 
categories. Patdowns were more likely to result when the officer had specific information (e.g. BOLO) that 
led him/her to become suspicious (82%) when compared to all the other reasons for forming suspicion.  
Suspicions formed strictly on the behavior of the suspects only resulted in patdowns 16% of the time.  
Officer use of force occurred most frequently when officers had specific information that led them to 
become suspicious (4 out of the 5 instances of force).  Issuing tickets, on the other hand, came mostly from 
suspicions formed because of the behavior of the suspects (41%).  This finding is logical as the behavior 
that the officer observed most often was a traffic violation.  When information was the basis of suspicion, 
suspects were significantly more likely to resist, to have force used against them, or to be frisked and 
arrested. When information led officers to become suspicious of an individual, the suspect was 
significantly less likely to be issued a ticket. 
Characteristics of the Officer 
In a perfect world, staffed with perfectly trained officers who follow specified policies and 
11 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


procedures to the letter, we would expect officer characteristics not to factor significantly in officer 
decision-making.  In this study, only two officer characteristics influenced the results of stops, and each 
influenced only one outcome.  The first is the officer’s race, which influenced the likelihood of suspects 
receiving a ticket. White officers were more than twice as likely to issue tickets during their stops as were 
other officers. 
The second officer characteristic to have an influence on the outcome of stops is an officer’s length 
of tenure in the police department.  Officer tenure was correlated with the resistance offered by suspects: 
officers with longer tenure were more likely to have a suspect offering resistance.  Either the more senior 
officers are handling cases with a greater likelihood of suspect resistance or they are doing something that 
creates more resistance from the suspects (e.g. rougher treatment, less patience). 
Reasons for Stopping Suspects 
As with the previous analysis, we examined the descriptions of the officers’ rationale for making a 
stop. The narrative descriptions of these cases indicate that the probability of stopping a citizen was greatly 
influenced by officers observing citizens committing traffic related offenses.  Importantly, these narrative 
descriptions reveal further evidence that the reasons for non-behavioral suspicion differ from those that 
cause the police to stop citizens. 
Conclusions 
Research on the police has relied on observational strategies to develop rich and important 
information on the behavior of police and the public they serve in a natural setting.  Our study, undertaken 
in cooperation with the Savannah Police Department, is based upon the ideas and data-collection 
instruments developed in earlier research efforts.  One of the major differences in the methodology used in 
this study is the selection of police-citizen interactions used for analyses.  Our unit of analysis is the 
12 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


formation of officer suspicion and the stops that are pursuant to that suspicion.  Relying on the general 
principles of observational research and content analysis, we incorporated Staged Activity Analysis and 
Protocol Analysis into a hybrid methodology.  This approach to collecting the data was successful in that 
ride-along observers were accepted by the police, thereby establishing the rapport necessary to collect the 
required information.  From our descriptive analyses, several conclusions emerged:   
1) Officers formed suspicions quite infrequently.  Most officers only formed one suspicion per shift, but 
the average was 1.3 per shift. It was very unusual for an officer to form more than three suspicions per 
shift. 
2) For the most part officers formed suspicions using legitimate criteria.  In the majority of cases, the 
officer told the observer that the behavior of the suspect(s) was the primary reason for forming suspicion. 
An analysis of the observers’ descriptions of behavior revealed that the most likely behavioral reason for 
forming suspicion of an individual/vehicle was a traffic violation (e.g., running a red light, driving with 
expired plates). 
3) Forming a suspicion did not necessarily result in a stop.  Stops were made a majority of the time (less 
than one per shift), however there were instances when continued observation of the suspect(s) convinced 
the officer that the original concern was unwarranted.   
4) While deployment patterns were not part of the analyses, it is likely that they are an important factor in 
explaining where most suspicions and stops occurred.  The characteristics of areas where most suspicions 
were formed and where most stops were made are as follows: the majority of suspicions were formed in 
residential areas, and the greatest percentage of stops occurred in commercial areas. While the majority of 
the suspicions and stops were made in areas that were not considered particularly dangerous, they did occur 
in predominantly African-American areas. 
5) The demographic characteristics of the citizen about whom officers formed suspicion, or who were 
13 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


stopped, were young minorities.  However, Blacks constituted a slightly higher percentage of suspicions 
than stops, while whites had a slightly higher percentage of stops than suspicions.   
6) During the course of stops, officers acted more positively toward suspects than suspects did towards 
officers. Suspects were nearly three times more likely than officers to be negative and twice as likely to be 
disrespectful at the beginning of an encounter. Only a handful of officers had a negative initial demeanor 
or acted disrespectfully towards the citizen.  Suspect and officer demeanor changed at approximately the 
same rate during their interaction, with half turning more negative and the other half turning more positive.  
Officers appeared to be responding to the attitude/demeanor displayed by the suspect.  According to this 
measure, citizens being disrespectful were nearly twice as likely to be ticketed or arrested compared to 
citizens showing respect to the officer. 
7) Officers were significantly more likely to make stops when they had formed suspicion on the basis of 
the suspect’s behavior, rather than on the basis of time and place, information, or appearance.  Suspect 
characteristics, such as gender, ethnicity, socio-economic status, and age, did not significantly influence the 
likelihood of a stop after a suspicion was formed. However, non-behavioral suspicions were most common 
when a suspect and an officer were both Black and least common when an officer and suspect were white. 
8) Only two officer characteristics, age and education, were important determinants of the decision to 
make a stop.  Older officers and officers with a high school education were significantly more likely to 
make stops than younger and more educated officers. Interestingly, white officers were more than twice as 
likely to issue tickets during their stops as other officers.  
9) Suspects under the influence of alcohol or drugs negatively influenced the interaction.  Suspects under 
the influence of alcohol or drugs at the time of the stop were significantly more likely to resist the officer, 
to be frisked, to have force used against him/her, to have their vehicle searched, and to be arrested.   
10) Most officers reported that they had working rules to help them identify suspicious persons or to 
14 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


determine how to handle a particular situation.   
11) While most of the officer decisions were based on behavioral criteria, decisions based on the non-
behavioral criteria were also important.  In contrast to officer decisions based on behavioral criteria, the 
small percentage of decisions based on non-behavioral criteria can be explained by suspect and officer 
demographic variables. For example, officers were significantly more likely to form a non-behavioral 
suspicion when the suspect was Black and the officer had longer tenure. 
12) Most of the stops were routine and resulted in no consequence for the citizen.  When there was a 
consequence, the most common was a warning or a ticket.  An arrest was made in less than 10% of the 
stops.  Further, coercion against the citizen was seldom used and citizen resistance was uncommon.  
Frisking or searching suspects was more common than force, but most often came subsequent to an arrest 
or following suspect resistance. Coercion was never used unless the suspect offered resistance. 
These conclusions are significant in several respects.  First, to the best of our knowledge, this is the 
first attempt to assess officer decision-making before the actual stop is made i.e. when officers are in the 
initial stages of forming suspicion.  Second, our findings do not support the speculation that it is during this 
pre-stop stage of decision-making that major levels of discrimination are likely. In our analysis of the 
observations, very few problematic attitudes and behaviors surfaced.  As in other observational research, 
most of the officers’ time was spent in routine activities with routine outcomes. The Savannah study failed 
to uncover any serious or major flaws in how the police managed their interactions with citizens.  However, 
in any organization, there is always room for improvement.  We did uncover some stops based on non-
behavioral criteria, and it is from these few potentially problematic interaction patterns that our policy 
suggestions are based. 
Policy Implications and Future Research 
15 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Our findings and conclusions have important policy implications regarding the management of 
police officer discretionary time, and for the development of officers’ decision-making skills.  The policy 
implications of our research are in many ways similar to findings in other observational studies: changing 
police officers’ attitudes alone will not change their behavior on the street. It is clear that if changes are 
desired, managers must provide data-based training to educate officers about their actions.  This training 
must be supported by close supervision to assure that the desired behavior is taking place.   
Since officers form suspicions relatively infrequently, it may be necessary to create a workload 
analysis to determine how officer discretionary time is used.  We did not record the time officers spent 
responding to radio calls and other service so it may be that very little time exists for discretionary stops 
and the formation of suspicions. However, managers may be able to encourage officers to use their 
available time more efficiently, effectively, and productively. 
As our research is the first to address the formation of suspicion, it is difficult to determine the value 
of these decisions. Our data show that not all suspicions resulted in an official response.  This could mean 
that some of the criteria used by officers to form suspicion are proper and valuable, while using other 
criteria is unfounded and inefficient.  Clearly, more attention and research needs to be done in this area, but 
our preliminary findings can guide future researchers and police managers. 
Officers formed the majority of their suspicions in function of a citizen’s behavior.  However, there 
were some times when officers became suspicious about citizens based on non-behavioral criteria.  Since 
these are the most problematic, officers need to understand their likely outcome and consequences.  In 
other words, people are more likely to be angry and resentful of a police officer who becomes suspicious 
without behavioral cues. Training and role-play could help officers and managers understand the process 
of forming suspicion.  In addition, special attention should be focused on managing intoxicated citizens as 
they are the most likely to have a bad attitude and resist an officer’s actions.  We learned the prevalent 
16 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


nature of working rules that govern officer behavior: it is vital that police managers be aware of these 
“rules” and that they ensure such rules remain consistent with both departmental policy and its mission 
statement.   
17 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Ch. 1 Police Officers’ Decision Making and Discretion:  
Forming Suspicion and Making a Stop 
Introduction 
Most police activity occurs in private, away from the public’s view.  This creates a 
situation that allows police officers discretion in the way they think about what they see and how 
they handle those with whom they come in contact. There has been an effort by the research 
community to examine issues concerning how police act and respond in general and what police 
do specifically when they interact with citizens. A conspicuous void in this research effort has 
been the lack of attention paid to the process by which police officers form suspicion about a 
suspect, whether or not a formal intervention such as a stop was made.   
The present study includes a study of police officers in Savannah, Georgia, who were 
observed and debriefed after incidents when they showed some sign of becoming suspicious 
about an individual or vehicle. Observers accompanied officers on 132, 8-hour shifts, during 
which time the officers formed suspicion 174 times.  “Forming suspicion” occurred any time an 
officer became doubting, distrustful, or otherwise troubled or concerned about an individual.  In 
most of the cases, it was the behavior of the suspect(s) that concerned the officer. This concern 
or unease did not always result in a stop of an individual or vehicle. In some cases, the officers 
realized that their initial “suspicion” was unwarranted and the officers continued to go about 
their routine activities. This is demonstrated by the fact that only 103 stops resulted from the 174 
suspicions that were formed by the officers during the times they were observed. Before 
explaining the present research protocol and analyses, we describe the past research on police 
officer behavior that shaped our study and its methodology.  
1-1  
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


One of the weaknesses of the research on policing is that it has neglected the police 
officer’s method or approach of forming suspicion.  The majority of research on police behavior 
has focused on the actions taken by the officer after a contact with a citizen has been made.  
Specifically, the majority of the research on police behavior has concentrated on the decision to 
intervene formally and on whether or not to make an arrest.  The influences on these decisions 
made by police officers are best determined by observing the police in action. Three major 
observational studies of police patrol activities have been conducted since the 1960s. The first 
was the ambitious study conducted by Albert Reiss, Jr. for the President’s Commission on Law 
Enforcement and Administration of Justice (Black and Reiss, 1967).  This work included 
systematic observations of the police in Boston, Chicago, and Washington, DC, throughout 
1966. The focus of the study was to collect detailed descriptions of police and citizen behavior 
during their encounters. Second, the Police Services Study (PSS) observed officers who 
patrolled 60 neighborhoods in 24 agencies located in three metropolitan areas, including 
Rochester, NY., St. Louis, MO., and Tampa-St. Petersburg, FL.  Data were collected on almost 
5,700 police-citizen encounters during the summer 1977 (see Worden, 1989).  Most recently, the 
Project on Policing Neighborhoods (POPN) collected data on approximately 11,000 police-
citizen contacts from 12 selected beats in the Indianapolis, IN. and St. Petersburg, FL. police 
departments (Mastrofski et al., 1998).  All of these studies, as with other observational research, 
have methodological strengths and weaknesses.  Specifically, observational studies are designed 
to improve our understanding of the interactive processes that occur during a police-citizen 
encounter. 
The neglected area of research comes logically prior to the official or formal police-
1-2  
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


citizen contact, but during the process in which an officer forms a suspicion and the citizen is 
transposed into a suspect. Before discussing that aspect of policing, we will present a brief 
assessment of prior research on police officer behavior. 
Research efforts using both quantitative and qualitative methods have attempted to 
explain the behavior of police officers when they interact with citizens (Riksheim and Chermak, 
1993; Worden and Shepard, 1996), the characteristics of the environment or area in which the 
police activities occur (Klinger, 1997; Riksheim and Chermak, 1993; Brown, 1981), the 
characteristics of the officers and suspects involved in the contact (Crank, 1993; Brooks, 
Piquero, and Cronin, 1993; Riksheim and Chermak, 1993; and Worden, 1989), and the 
characteristics of the police organization (Riksheim and Chermak, 1993; Wilson, 1968; 
Mastrofski, 1981; Sherman, 1983).  These and other studies on police decision-making and 
discretion certainly provide important information on the determinants of police officer behavior. 
 Clearly, the seriousness of the alleged offense and the strength of evidence of criminal 
wrongdoing against a suspect influence officers’ actions and any decision to invoke their 
authority by controlling the suspect or making an arrest (National Research Council, 2003).  
Beyond the influence of legal factors, the impact of extra-legal factors on police behavior, such 
as race, age, gender, sobriety, and demeanor of the suspect, is weak and/or inconsistent (National 
Research Council, 2003). 
As noted, our present knowledge of police decision-making is limited to the taking of 
formal action, such as making an arrest.  Further, our knowledge is based on a limited number of 
influential studies. These include Wilson (1968:38), who suggested that agency type encourages 
officers to make judgments both about an individual’s character and the overall situation before 
1-3  
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


dispensing distributive justice. Worden (1995:50) argued that police officers act on their belief 
system, which is "comprised of beliefs, attitudes, values, and other 'subjective outlooks'."  In 
other words, officers develop indicators that are used to determine their behavior.  Brown 
(1981), Muir (1977) and Ericson (1982) have all advocated police attitudes or orientations as a 
basis for understanding police discretionary behavior. Certainly, experience helps officers draw 
conclusions concerning an individual’s suspiciousness, propensity to commit a crime, and moral 
character (Werthman and Piliavin, 1967). This determination helps the officer respond to the 
individual, the situation, and the environment.  Perhaps it is Ericson’s "recipe of rules" (1982:25) 
that describes best how an officer develops his or her personal style of policing.  In other words, 
an officer’s collection of “rules,” combined with her or his pre-established attitudes, values, and 
beliefs, provides an interpretive framework in which behavioral cues are evaluated, and behavior 
is formed.  This “recipe of rules” may be a starting point to help understand the interactions, 
signs, symbols, cues, and behavior, of each actor in a police-citizen encounter.  
Most recently, Novak et al. (2002: 75) present a review of the literature on police 
behavior and conclude that legal variables such as seriousness of offense, amount of evidence, 
and presence of a weapon, among other factors, all have a strong and constant influence on 
formal decisions made by police officers.  These researchers report that research findings on the 
influence of situational variables, including suspect and victim characteristics, are mixed and 
controversial. 
Situational and Environmental Factors 
The environment in which an interaction takes place is another important influence on an 
officer’s decision-making process. Environmental factors that require investigation include 
1-4  
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


neighborhood characteristics and the crime rate.  Other theoretically interesting neighborhood 
factors include issues of social control, poverty, percent minority, vacant housing, public 
assistance, percent renters and owners of homes, unemployment, female-headed households, and 
residential stability, among others.  Research on the use of force and deadly force indicates that 
in lower class and high-crime neighborhoods the police are more likely to engage in these 
actions (Jacobs and O’Brien, 1998; Smith, 1986).  Further, Smith (1987) reported that social 
factors, including race, gender, and demeanor, all influence an officer’s decision to arrest a 
suspect. Sykes and Brent (1983) note that the social settings in which contacts occur may 
influence an officer’s decisions to arrest a suspect. They also report that if suspects comply with 
an officer’s requests, the nature of the encounter may not intensify, while non-compliant 
suspects can lead to an escalation of words and actions. 
Individual Factors 
Individual factors conceptually play an important role in a police officer’s decision-
making processes.  Variables including social class, gender, age and physical size are important 
considerations for study (Gottfredson, and Hindeling, 1979; Lanza-Kadruce and Greenleaf, 
1994; Mastrofski et al., 1996; Riksheim and Chermak, 1993).  Other factors are the attitudes of 
both the officers and the citizens. Worden (1989) reports surprisingly, and in the aggregate, that 
attitudes do not explain the variation in officers’ behavior.  Similarly, Poaline, Myers and 
Worden (2000) explain that officers’ characteristics generally do not greatly influence their 
outlook on their work. However, the individual attitudes of officers and suspects can change the 
context, actions, and outcome of the interaction.  If an officer or citizen is having a “bad day,” or 
displays a bad attitude, the other actor may respond negatively, and the interaction may become 
1-5  
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


problematic. 
General sociological theory (Rawls, 2000), as well as research on policing (Barlow and 
Barlow, 2000), clearly shows the importance of the race of the actors involved in police-citizen 
contacts. For example, Rawls notes that there are underlying expectations that differ between 
the two groups regarding such simple tasks as conversation.  Barlow and Barlow (2000: xiii) 
suggest that police research must be multicultural and not forget “views of the communities that 
are policed.” The importance of race in policing cannot be overlooked and must therefore be 
seen as an integral part of any research scheme.  As Rawls (2000) and Barlow and Barlow 
(2000) point out, race has an important influence on the interactions between the police and the 
public. Typically, race has been used as a control variable in research on police behavior. 
Unfortunately, research findings have not provided definitive results concerning the influence of 
race on police decision making.  Research also shows mixed results on the influence of suspect 
race on police response and on the influence of officer race on suspect reaction. For example, 
some studies indicate that African American suspects are more likely to be arrested and/or to be 
treated more harshly by police than white suspects (Powell, 1990; Smith and Visher, 1981; 
Smith and Davidson, 1984), while other studies report no effect (Klinger, 1996; Smith, 1984).  
The research is also mixed on the importance of race with regard to both the use of deadly force 
(Geller and Karales, 1981; Blumberg, 1981; Fyfe, 1980) and non-deadly force (Law 
Enforcement News, 2000; Dunham and Alpert, 2004).  After an exhaustive review of the 
literature, the National Research Council (2003: 3) concluded that: 
This research finds that the impact of legally relevant factors is strong. Taking these into 
account, the class and gender of suspects play a small role.  However, more research is needed  
on the complex interplay of race, ethnicity, and other social factors in police-citizen interactions. 
Among officer characteristics, neither race, nor gender has a direct influence on the 
1-6  
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


outcome of routine police-citizen encounters, and there is no clear effect of officer’s attitudes, 
job satisfaction, or personality. 
A recent area of research, that of racial profiling, has begun to examine whether or not 
police officers use race to discriminate against minorities.  Research on racial profiling is 
attempting to capture officers’ pre-conceived notions and practices of discrimination by race. To 
date, the research that has been conducted cannot confirm or refute whether officers discriminate 
against members of racial minority groups. This shortcoming can be attributed to methodological 
weaknesses, including the lack of a proper denominator to determine if traffic stops or searches 
of minorities are significantly different from stops and searches of white citizens.  To develop 
more accurate findings, research on racial profiling needs to include information on officers’ and 
suspects’ behavior. This can be achieved by collecting qualitative methods and quantitative data 
from the agency, the census, and an appropriate baseline measure of offenders. One of the areas 
of research on profiling that has received a lot of attention recently centers on the link between 
race and place (Meehan and Ponder, 2002). Obviously, as police officers learn more about the 
areas in which they patrol, they create meanings for those places. Often, the stereotypical images 
the officers create form the expectations of what they anticipate seeing and experiencing within 
artificial geographical boundaries. When officers observe what they do not expect or anticipate, 
they can become suspicious about the person or situation.  
Cognitive Learning and Suspicion 
Cognitive theorists recognize that learning involves the acquisition or reorganization of 
information or observations and that the relative power of the learning varies by the degree of 
familiarity, and repeated number of associations (see Good and Brophy, 1990).  Constructing, 
developing, and learning cognitive schema, which can be considered shorthand for organizing 
1-7  
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


and storing information, often start as simple and loosely organized networks but can evolve into 
systematic and complex relationships.  Research findings provide evidence that these schemas 
form a mental model that play a key role in predicting a person’s responses to other individuals, 
places, and things, in future encounters or events (Brehm et al., 2002, Bower et al., 1979 and 
Read, 1987). Once formed, persons, places, or things that have familiar characteristics or 
properties, activate these cognitive schemas.  For example, it is likely that these schemas or 
biases will be triggered when making an observation, or during an encounter with a person, 
place, or thing, that is part of one’s mental model.  Specifically, a person may respond in a 
learned way to another who is a member of a particular group with which he or she has 
experiences or a history. Once a person has identified another individual or a group by an 
assumed role, future behavioral patterns will be predicted upon the developed schema. These 
schema or stereotypes can be formed by people with or without specific training, and about 
groups with individual or social characteristics: they are impressionistic and are based on 
perceptions, which may or may not reflect reality.  On the one hand, average citizens may not 
have a well-developed schema for dealing with persons who are suspicious or who pose a threat 
to them.  On the other hand, police officers should be trained to identify suspicious and 
threatening people. In fact, research shows that police officers are more likely than civilians to 
apply a “cognitive schema” that interprets actions that are unfamiliar or of uncertain intent as 
suspicious (Ruby and Bringham, 1996).  That is, police officers are likely to become suspicious 
about things that they do not believe fit the situation, time, or place, as well as of things that they 
do not understand. As officers become suspicious, they may act on these suspicions and 
approach or confront a citizen. When this occurs, citizens may not understand why they are 
1-8  
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


being approached or perhaps think they are being “hassled,” and may respond negatively. The 
officer may see this response as a bad attitude or a negative demeanor.   
Many attempts to study the interactions between the police and citizens have used citizen 
demeanor as an explanatory variable.  This research includes efforts in the 1970's by Lundman 
(1974, 1994), by Worden and Shepard (1996), who reanalyzed the Police Services Study data, 
and by Klinger (1994, 1996) who used data from the Miami-Dade Police.  Worden and Shepard 
reported results similar to those found by Lundman and concluded that “... police behavior is 
influenced by suspects’ demeanor...” (1996: 99). Klinger concluded that, after controlling for 
crime, demeanor did not have an independent effect on arrest.  He reported that suspects with a 
negative demeanor are more likely to be arrested because they commit crimes against and in 
front of the police, not because they show a lack of respect for the officer (Klinger, 1994). 
In his subsequent analysis of the same data, Klinger isolated interactions involving 
“extreme hostility” (Klinger, 1996: 69).  Although his findings were weak, he concluded that the 
“analyses conducted show an increased likelihood of arrest when citizens display ‘extreme’ 
hostility, which suggests that displays of hostility may independently increase the odds of arrest 
once they pass a severity threshold” (1996: 75). The studies on suspect demeanor result in 
different conclusions in encounters that remain at a low level of conflict between the officer and 
the suspect. When the encounter involved “extreme hostility,” all the studies’ findings concur 
that a suspect’s demeanor will have some influence on an officer’s decision to affect an arrest 
(Klinger, 1996). The level of hostility was determined by coding the suspect’s words and 
gestures at the point of initial contact between the citizen and the officer in order to determine 
her or his degree of cooperation. Recently, Engel, et. al. (2000: 255), in another analysis of the 
1-9  
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


PSS data, report that demeanor matters and that “officers are more likely to take formal action 
toward suspects who fail to show deference.” A limitation of research on suspect demeanor has 
been the reliance on the initial point of contact as a determination of suspect demeanor.  As 
noted by many of the researchers, we need to have a more comprehensive understanding of what 
occurs during the police-citizen interaction before we can understand the impact of a citizen’s 
demeanor on police behavior (see Fyfe, 1996). 
The Present Research 
The present effort attempts to fill some of the gaps in the previous research.  Our 
methodology integrates quantitative and qualitative data collection efforts in an effort to improve 
the quality of our data.  Our quantitative data includes the routine information necessary to 
conduct a case study of a police department, including officers’ behavior and the independent 
variables that theoretically affect police behavior (see Chapter 2 on methods).  The general 
principles of observation and content analysis, with a special emphasis on protocol analysis, 
were used to collect the qualitative data (see Ericsson and Simon, 1984).  Although most of the 
previous research using protocol analysis has been limited to laboratory environments, there are 
strong reasons to believe that the proper data could be collected in field observations of the 
police. For example, Cromwell et al. (1991) utilized a similar method, labeled “Staged Activity 
Analysis,” in a study examining the decision-making processes used by burglars. He provides a 
strong rationale for using this method (1991: 42): 
We suggest that research reporting that a high percentage of burglars make carefully 
planned, highly rational decisions based upon a detailed evaluation of environmental cues may 
be in error. Our findings indicate that burglars interviewed in prison or those recalling crimes 
from the past, either consciously or unconsciously, may engage in rational reconstruction B a 
1-10  
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


reinterpretation of past behavior through which the actor recasts activities in a manner consistent 
with ‘what should have been’ rather than ‘what was.’ 
Worden and Brandl provide a solid explanation as to why protocol analysis could strengthen and 
improve our knowledge of the police (1990: 303): 
Given the ambiguity and uncertainty of police officers’ task environments, models that 
include only situational and/or organizational factors, without specifying the processes whereby 
these cues are translated into choices, are unlikely to explain the performance of any but rather 
simple police tasks. The cues that are salient, the meaning(s) imputed to them, the goals or 
objectives toward which officers responses are directed, and their beliefs about how much each 
of the alternative courses of action will contribute to meeting those objectives, are the premises 
on which officers’ decisions are likely to rest. 
In other words, as officers make observations in the field, they are asked for verbal reports of the 
cognitive steps they took to reach any decision or conclusion.  They are asked to “think out loud” 
and verbalize their cognitive steps. This method allowed the observers to record their 
observations of events and to record the officers’ version of the steps taken to make decisions 
during the event. In our case, officers are asked to respond almost immediately after the process 
of decision-making takes place.  In fact, as officers became comfortable with the “thinking out 
loud,” many would start speaking as they made their decisions. The content analysis of the 
officers’ protocols (cognitive steps in making decisions) can increase our knowledge of which 
cues or indicators are important in officer decision-making, and the meanings of the cues and 
indicators, when formulating suspicion or a decision to intervene formally.  Protocol analysis has 
the potential to uncover officers’ working rules, cognitive strategies, and to determine 
differences among officers’ decision-making processes. 
Our study takes the next step in research on policing by investigating the discretionary 
police-citizen interactions in Savannah, Georgia. By design, the present study is limited to 
discretionary actions taken by the police. Unlike the previous research, we are interested in the 
formation and creation of cognitive suspicion as well as formal actions (stops) taken by the 
police. Obviously, our observations are limited to behavioral cues given by officers. That is, if 
officers think that something is suspicious but do not say anything or make any visible motion; 
these suspicions will not be captured by our methodology.  Further, our study design does not 
capture situations when officers perceptions or biases cause them to ignore certain groups of 
1-11  
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


people whose behavior may be suspicious to others.  While these data would strengthen our 
design and analysis, they would be difficult, if not impossible, to capture. 
The following chapters will introduce the research site and explain the data collection 
instruments and methodology.  The report will then turn to the findings and conclusions from the 
data analyses. A final chapter will make policy recommendations and will present ideas for 
future research. 
References 
Barlow, David and Melissa Barlow. Police in a Multicultural Society: An American Story. 
Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press. 2000. 
Blumberg, Mark. Race and Police Shootings:  An Analysis in Two Cities, in Contemporary 
Issues in Law Enforcement. J.J. Fyfe (ed). Beverly Hills:  Sage. 1981. 
Brehm, Sharon, Saul Kassin and Steven Fein. Social Psychology, 5nd ed. Boston: Houghton-
Mifflin. (2002). 
Bower, Gordon., John Black, & Terrence Turner. Scripts in text comprehension and memory. 
Cognitive Psychology, 11: 177-220 (1979). 
Black, Donald and Albert Reiss. Patterns of Behavior in Police and Citizen Transactions. In 
Studies of Crime and Law Enforcement in Major Metropolitan Areas (Volume 2, A Report to the 
President’s Commission on Law Enforcement and the Administration of Justice). Washington, 
DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. 1967. 
Brooks, Laure. Police Discretionary Behavior: A Study of Style. In R. Dunham and G. Alpert. 
Critical Issues in Policing: Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press (forthcoming). 
1-12  
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Brooks, Laurie, Alex. Piquero, and James Cronin. 1993. Attitudes Concerning Their 
Communities and Their Roles: A Comparison of Two Suburban Police Departments.  American 
Journal of Police XII: 115-139. 
Brown, Michael.K. 1981. Working the Street:  Police Discretion and the Dilemmas of Reform.  
New York: Russell Sage Foundation. 
Cromwell, Paul, James Olson and D’Aunn W. Avary. Breaking and Entering: An Ethnographic 
Analysis of Burglary. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications. 1991. 
Crank, John (1993). Legalistic and Order-Maintenance Behavior Among Police Patrol Officers: 
A Survey of Eight Municipal Agencies.  American Journal of Police XII: 103-126. 
Dunham, Roger and Geoffrey Alpert.  The Effects of Officer and Suspect Ethnicity in Use-of-
Force Incidents (with R. Dunham). In Karen Terry and Delores Jones-Brown (eds.), Policing and 
Minority Communities: Bridging the Gap. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall. 2004. 
Engle, Robyn, James Sobol, and Rob Worden. Further Exploration of the Demeanor Hypothesis: 
The Interaction Effects of Suspects’ Characteristics and Demeanor on Police Behavior.  Justice 
Quarterly 17:235 - 258 (2000). 
Ericsson, Anders and Herbert Simon. Protocol Analysis: Verbal Reports as Data.  Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press. 1984. 
Ericson, Richard. 1982. Reproducing Order: A Study of Police Patrol Work.  Toronto: 
University of Toronto Press. 
Fyfe, James.J.  1980. Geographic Correlates of Police Shootings:  A Microanalysis. Crime and 
Delinquency 17: 101-113. 
Fyfe, James.  Methodology, Substance and Demeanor in Police Observational Research: A 
Response to Lundman and Others.  Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency 33: 337-348 
(1996). 
Geller, Richard and Kenneth. Karales. Split Second Decisions: Shootings of and by the Chicago 
Police. Chicago Law Enforcement Study Group. 1981. 
Gottfredson, Michael.R., & Hindelang, Michael J. A Study of the Behavior of Law and Theory 
and Research in the Sociology of Law. American Sociological Review 44: 3-18 (1979). 
Good, Thomas and Jere Brophy. Educational psychology: A Realistic Approach. White Plains, 
NY: Longman (1990). 
1-13  
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Jacobs, David and Robert M. O’Brien. The Determinants of Deadly Force: A Structural Analysis  
of Police Violence. American Journal of Sociology 103: 837-62 (1998).  
Klinger, David A. Negotiating Order in Patrol Work: An Ecological Theory of Police Response  
to Deviance. Criminology 35 (2) 277-306 (1997).  
________. More on Demeanor and Arrest in Dade County. Criminology 34:  61-82 (1996).  
_________ Demeanor or Crime?  Why "Hostile" Citizens Are More Likely To Be Arrested.   
Criminology 32:  475-493 (1994).  
Lanza-Kaduce, Lonn and Richard Greenleaf. Police citizen encounters: Turk on norm resistance.  
Justice Quarterly, 11, 605B623 (1994).  
Law Enforcement News. Getting it Right: Study Says Miami-Dade PD has a Handle on the Use  
of Force. March 15, 2000. P. 1 (2000).  
Lundman, Richard J. Demeanor or Crime? The Midwest City Police-Citizen Encounters Study.   
Criminology 32: 31-656 (1994).  
Lundman, Richard J.  Routine Arrest Practices.  Social Problems 22: 127-141 (1974).  
Mastrofski, Stephen. Policing the Beat: The Impact  of Organizational Scale on Patrol Officer  
Behavior in Urban residential Neighborhoods. Journal of Criminal Justice 9:  343-358 (1981).  
Mastrofski, Stephen and Roger Parks. Improving Observational Studies of Police. Criminology  
28: 475-496 (1990). 
Mastrofski, Stephen, Roger Parks, Albert Reiss, Robert Worden, Christina DeJong, Jeffrey 
Snipes and William Terrill.  Systematic Observation of Public Police: Applying Field Research 
Methods to Policy Issues. Washington, DC: National Institute of Justice. 1998. 
Mastrofski, Stephen, Jeffrey Snipes, and Supina, Anne. Compliance on Demand: the Public’s 
Response to Specific Police Requests. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency 33: 269-
305 (1996). 
Meehan, Albert and Michael Ponder. Race and Place: The Ecology of Racial Profiling African 
American Motorists.  Justice Quarterly 19: 399 - 430 (2002). 
Muir, William K. Police: Streetcorner Politicians. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 1977. 
National Research Council. Fairness and Effectiveness in Policing: The Evidence. Washington, 
DC: The National Academies Press. 2003. 
1-14  
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Novak, Kenneth, James Frank, Brad Smith and Robin S. Engel.  Revisiting the Decision to 
Arrest: Comparing Beat and Community Officers.  Crime and Delinquency 48: 70-98 (2002) 
Poaline, Eugene, Stephanie. Myers and Robert Worden. Police, Culture, Individualism, and 
Community Policing: Evidence form two Police Department. Justice Quarterly 17: 575-605 
(2000). 
Powell, David D. 1990. A Study of police Discretion in Six Southern Cities. Journal of Police 
Science and Administration 17: 1-7 (1990). 
Rawls, Anne. 2000. Race as an Interaction Order Phenomenon. Sociological Theory 18: 241-
274. 
Read, Stephen J. Constructing causal scenarios: A knowledge structure approach to causal 
reasoning. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology: 52 (288-302) 1987. 
Riksheim, Erik C. and Steven M. Chermak.. Causes of Police Behavior Revisited. Journal of 
Criminal Justice 21: 353-382 (1993). 
Ruby, C.L. and John C. Bringham. A Criminal Schema: The Role of Chronicity, Race and 
Socioeconomic Status in Law Enforcement Officials’ Perceptions of Others. Journal of Applied 
Social Psychology 26: 95-112 (1996). 
Sherman, Lawrence. "Reducing Police Gun Use:  Critical Events, Administrative Policy, and 
Organizational Change." in Control in the Police Organization. M. Punch (ed) Cambridge:  The 
MIT Press. 1983. 
Smith, Douglas. Police Response to Interpersonal Violence: Defining the Parameters of Legal 
Control. Social Forces 65: 767-782 (1987). 
__________ The Neighborhood Context of Police Behavior, in Crime and Justice:  An Annual 
Review of Research. Pp. 313-341, Vol. 6. A.J. Reiss and M. Tonry (eds).  Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.1986. 
Smith, Douglas.  The Organizational Aspects of Legal Control. Criminology 22: 19-38 (1984). 
Sykes, Richard and Edward Brent. Policing: A Social Behaviorist Perspective. New Brunswick, 
NJ: Rutgers University Press. 1983. 
Smith, Douglas and Cristy Visher. Street Level Justice: Situational Determinants of Police Arrest 
Decisions. Social Problems 29:  167-178 (1981). 
Smith, Douglass and Laura Davidson. Equity and Discretionary Justice:  The Influence of Race 
on Police Arrest Decisions. Journal of Criminal Law 75: 234-249 (1984). 
1-15  
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Werthman, Carl and Irving Piliavin 1967.  Gang Members and the Police in The Police: Six 
Sociological Essays. David Bordua (ed.) New York: John Wiley an Sons. 1967. 
Wilson, James Q. Varieties of Police Behavior.  Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 1968. 
Worden, Robert. Situational and Attitudinal Explanations of Police Behavior: A Theoretical 
Reappraisal and Empirical Assessment. Law and Society Review 23: 667-711 (1989). 
Worden, Robert and Steven Brandl.  Protocol Analysis of Police Decision-Making: Toward a 
Theory of Police Behavior. American Journal of Criminal Justice XIV No. 2: 297 - 318 (1990). 
Worden, Robert. E. and Robin Shepard. Demeanor, Crime, and Police Behavior:  A 
Reexamination of the Police Services Study Data. Criminology 34:  83-105 (1996). 
Worden, Robert .E.. Police Officers' Belief Systems:  A Framework for Analysis. American 
Journal of Police XIV: 49-81 (1995). 
Worden, Robert. A Badge and a Baccalaureate: Policies,  Hypotheses, and Further Evidence. 
Justice Quarterly 1990: 565-592 (1990). 
Worden, Robert.  Situational and Attitudinal Explanations of Police Behavior:  A Theoretical 
Reappraisal and Empirical Assessment. Law and Society Review 23:  667-711 (1989). 
1-16  
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Ch. 2  Site Description and Methodology 
 
Savannah, Georgia 
 
Shortly after the data collection phase of the study concluded, the Savannah Police 
Department merged with the Chatham County Police Department, forming the Savannah 
Chatham Metropolitan Police Department.  In 2004, the new unified Department (known as the 
Savannah Chatham Police) consists of 577 authorized sworn officers and 205 authorized 
civilians.  It consists of 6 precincts, including the four currently within the city. Two additional 
precincts provide patrol for the eastern and western areas of the county.  While the merger adds 
resources and responsibilities to the organization, it did not change the operational structure or 
philosophy.  It certainly does not affect the methodology, findings or conclusions of our study.  
Dan Flynn remains the chief officer of the new agency and is directing the seamless transition 
into the unified department.  Because the research was conducted when the agency was the 
Savannah Police Department, we will refer to that agency in our Report.  
 
The City of Savannah is located in southeast Georgia at the mouth of the Savannah River, 
which forms the boundary between Georgia and South Carolina.  It is twelve miles from the 
Atlantic Ocean.  According to the 2000 Census, Savannah has 131,510 residents: 57 percent is 
African American, 39 percent is white, 1.5 percent is Asian, and 1.5 percent is categorized as 
“other.”  Savannah is the county seat of Chatham County where tourism is the major industry.  
Savannah one of the first planned communities in the United States, and is known for its 21 
historic squares designed by General James Oglethorpe in 1733. 
  
2- 1 
 
 
 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


 
The Savannah Police Department (SPD) had approximately 400 sworn officers and was 
managed through a community policing orientation. The agency earned national accreditation 
from the Commission on Accreditation for Law Enforcement Agencies (CALEA).  The 
Savannah department was divided into four bureaus each headed by a Major.  The bureaus 
included the Patrol Bureau, the Criminal Investigations Bureau, the Information Management 
Bureau, and the Support Services Bureau.   
 
The Patrol Bureau is the largest bureau and is responsible for responding to calls for 
service and providing patrol services. The Patrol Bureau is divided into four precincts, each 
commanded by a police captain. Precinct 1 includes the downtown historic district, Cloverdale, 
Savannah’s Westside, Hitch Village, Fellwood Homes, the Savannah Airport and surrounding 
areas. Precinct 2 contains several older neighborhoods in midtown, including Ardsley Park, 
Baldwin Park, the east and west Victorian districts, and extends to the southwest. Precinct 3 
comprises Savannah’s eastside, including Blackshear Homes, Savannah Gardens, the Medical 
Arts area, and Memorial Health University. Precinct 4 includes all areas south of DeRenne 
Avenue and contains many commercial areas, including both malls, Chatham Plaza, and the 
businesses along Abercorn, Eisenhower, Waters, and Montgomery Crossroads.  This Bureau 
consisted of 31.8% Black males, 6.4% Black females, 51.2% white males, 4.8% white females, 
4.8% other males and .4% other females.  Officers were assigned by area, meaning that some 
areas had a larger distribution of minority officers than others. The distribution of sworn officers 
in Patrol closely matched the percentage of officers observed in our study. 
 
The Savannah Police Department uses Geographic Information Systems (GIS) and 
  
2- 2 
 
 
 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


COMPSTAT to assist its management team. The police department has established a strong 
partnership with Armstrong Atlantic State University (AASU) and has an on-going relationship 
with faculty and students. Because of this positive history and the proximity of AASU to the 
police department, Armstrong students were trained to serve as ride-along observers. 
Observational Methodology  
 
Observational research has a long and favorable history as a method of collecting 
information on the behavior of police and the public they serve in a natural setting (Reiss, 1971). 
The challenge to the method is the operational definition of behavior and the proper and 
consistent collection of data by a number of observers. Obviously, there are limitations to 
collecting observational data.  One of the most serious concerns is the effect of the observer on 
officer behavior, or reactivity (Spano, 2004).  There are also problems of interpretation.  
Mastrofski et al. (1998: vii) have identified some problems faced by researchers: 
 
 
For example, researchers who wish to record whether officers are  
 
respectful to complainants must define “respectful” and  “complainant” in such  
 
a manner that other researchers record these terms in the same way when observing 
 
the same and similar situations. This makes it possible for many researchers to  
 
conduct observations, rather than relying on the observations of just one. 
 
 
Several major studies have used observational methods; most notably, The Project on 
Policing Neighborhoods (POPN) was conducted in Indianapolis, Indiana and St. Petersburg, 
Florida in 1996 and 1997 (Mastrofski et al., 1998). The methods and instruments used in the 
  
2- 3 
 
 
 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


present study are based upon those used in the POPN study. Since one of the major objectives of 
the POPN study was the investigation of police discretion, many of the questions in that research 
were important for the present study, and the instrumentation developed by the POPN 
researchers was used as a point of departure. Members of the original POPN team were 
consulted to provide insight in the design and implementation of the forms for the present 
research. Additionally, the observational instrument used in the Klinger studies was used as a 
framework.1 A committee of research personnel, police officers, and citizens reviewed the POPN 
and Miami-Dade instruments and modified them for this study.  
 
Each observed interaction between an officer and a citizen, included data on the actors, 
the sequence of actions during the encounter, and the environment in which the encounter took 
place. The observers noted the physical characteristics of the suspects (race, size, gender, and 
approximate age), indicators of social class2 (dress, vehicle, language, etc.), their actions and 
responses including gestures, tone of voice, and general level of threat to the officer(s). Data also 
included information on what the officer knew prior to the encounter and whether this 
information was learned by (roll-call type) briefing, radio, or observation. Information on the 
area in which an encounter took place was also recorded, as well as ratings of officer-suspect 
demeanor throughout the encounter. The demeanor rating considered the subjects’ actions only 
1 The Principal Investigator was involved in the design of this instrument in the 1980s. 
 
2 Indicators of social class may not be linked to actual class distinctions, but the perception of an officer creates the 
reality of the interaction and the officers’ response. 
                                                 
  
2- 4 
 
 
 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


as they influenced the officers’ response(s).  In addition, observers rated whether or not an 
encounter became hostile and who was the first actor to show hostility toward the other. The 
specific criteria for this rating, the specific measures, their operational definitions, and 
measurement criteria were all determined after reviewing other attempts to measure demeanor. A 
committee of researchers, police officers, and students completed and pre-tested the instrument. 
During the training workshop, on April 12, 2002, the forms were again reviewed and modified 
based on input from SPD police officers and supervisors. Each form is discussed in more depth 
in the section on instrumentation.  
Procedure 
 
Twelve criminal justice majors and graduate students at AASU were selected to conduct 
the field observations.  One criterion for selection was an earned grade of a B or better in an 
undergraduate research methods course that emphasized observational methods and the 
successful completion (grade of B or better) of an advanced graduate research methods course. 
These courses provided a focus on observational skills and methods. Thus, all of the students 
were acquainted with field research methodology, observational and interviewing techniques, 
skills in taking detailed field notes, the importance of establishing rapport, and ethical issues in 
research.  
 
On April 12, 2002, the potential student field observers attended a one-day training 
workshop at the Savannah Police Department.  Also in attendance were Major Dan Reynolds, 
Patrol Bureau Commander, the four police precinct captains, and about 15 police officers, 
including sergeants, lieutenants, and patrol officers from the four precincts. Trainers were the 
  
2- 5 
 
 
 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Principal Investigator, Dr. Geoffrey Alpert, the co-principal investigator, Dr. Roger Dunham, 
and the on-site coordinator, Dr. Katherine Bennett from AASU.  The agenda for this workshop 
included a presentation by the principal investigators that covered the goals and objectives of the 
project and the specific purposes of the ride-along observations.  Observational research 
methodology was briefly discussed, and the draft data collection instruments were distributed 
and their content, categories and coding rules were discussed.  In addition, examples were 
provided and questions from students and officers were answered. Suggestions for improving or 
clarifying specific items on the instruments were noted and addressed. Specific ways to conduct 
observations were covered and students were instructed specifically on the accepted behavior of 
an observer during low-risk or routine, and high-risk activities. Training emphasized the 
importance of recording what observers see and hear and also how important it was not to draw 
conclusions about cause and effect relationships.  
 
The observers were instructed on what to do during routine activities, including when it 
was appropriate for them to exit the police car and observe interactions closely. The patrol 
commander and precinct captains conducted this aspect of the training. A major portion of the 
workshop was devoted to encouraging police officers to voice opinions and to offer their own 
suggestions as to how the field observers could establish proper rapport and be successful in their 
observations. Likewise, field observers were able to ask for clarification regarding their 
expectations and what was expected of them. Researchers and police captains agreed on the 
random sampling procedures to select officers for observations. 
 
  
2- 6 
 
 
 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


 
Sampling Strategy 
 
Beginning in April, 2002 and continuing through November, 2002, field observers 
accompanied officers in each of the four precincts and on all three shifts. The on-site coordinator 
contacted precinct captains and arranged times for the students to report to the precincts. The 
captain or lieutenant on duty would randomly assign students to an officer. The captain or 
lieutenant was asked, for example, to select the fifth officer on the duty roster. If that officer was 
not assigned to patrol that shift, or was absent, then the name of the officer above and then below 
on the roster was selected. The student observer was introduced to the selected officer and asked 
the officer to read and then sign the informed consent form. There was only one instance in 
which an officer declined to have a rider for a particular shift. In that instance, the officer stated 
that he was not feeling well that evening and would rather ride alone. A replacement was 
selected by using the name above that officer on the roster.  
The observers were told that they could utilize the first full ride for building rapport. 
However, some of the observers were able to establish rapport quickly and began recording 
observations toward the end of the first ride. During the rapport-building time, no notes were 
taken and the conversation was directed toward the intent and methods of the study.  By design 
observers were told by research staff to arrange three ride-along tours with the same officer. If 
the observer felt that he or she were familiar with the officer’s decision-making style and 
working rules after one or more complete ride-along, the observer could discuss with the on-site 
coordinator whether he or she should ride with another officer. Decisions to move from one 
  
2- 7 
 
 
 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


officer to another were made by the on-site coordinator. Observers attended every roll call for 
their shifts and rode with officers through the entire eight-hour work shift, taking notes of 
officers’ activities and documenting each instance where the officer formed a suspicion. Each 
complete shift required an additional 2 hours for transportation to and from the police department 
and time for completing notes and debriefing the officer with whom they rode.  
 
In routine activities, observers watched the interactions between the officer and 
suspect(s), documenting what they saw and the sequence of events as they unfolded. 
Specifically, the observers learned the importance of documenting social, behavioral, and verbal 
cues of actors during the events. After an encounter, the observer debriefed the officer as to his 
or her thoughts during encounters and elicited the officer’s overall rating of the encounter. It was 
important to ascertain from the officer any observations he or she made that helped determine the 
social class of the citizens, including the type of vehicle, their clothing, or other cues. Observers 
were trained to make note of times when officers seemed to take notice of something but not act 
on it and to question the officer about his or her behavior at an opportune time. For example, if 
the observer noticed an officer do a “double-take,” the observer would bring that to the officer’s 
attention after the event and ask what he or she was thinking at the time. In other words, the 
student would ask what caught the officer’s eye and what made the officer continue on without 
acting. As noted, this method would preclude incidents where officers “thought” suspicion but 
did not act in a way to catch an observer’s attention.  Unfortunately, this limited method was not 
able to take into consideration the level of suspicion, only that an officer acted in a certain way.   
It is probable that there is a built-in bias against events that created only a low level of suspicion.  
  
2- 8 
 
 
 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


During debriefing times, observers also would ask officers what they were thinking when they 
were taking action and reacting to subjects and behavior. 
 
Any questioning of this sort took place when officers were not otherwise occupied and 
were receptive to being interviewed, or at the end of a shift. All students took care to make their 
observations in as unobtrusive a manner as possible. As stated earlier, police officers signed 
informed consent forms that stressed confidentiality. They were guaranteed that their identities 
would not be disclosed and were reassured on more than one occasion that this was not an 
attempt “to catch them doing something wrong.”  Observers were quick to stress that they were 
“just doing research” and that they were criminal justice majors, and most officers seemed 
comfortable with being observed. The Savannah Police Department frequently uses student 
interns and allows ride-alongs for various individuals such as Citizen Police Academy 
participants, so this particular method of field observation was not new to many of the officers. 
 
After completing detailed write-ups of ride-alongs, observers would submit the forms to 
the on-site coordinator who would then debrief the observer and elicit further explanation, if 
necessary.  
 
 
Some encounters with citizens required no more than simple documentation. For 
example, when a police officer would respond to a citizen’s request for information, make a 
victimization report, respond to a scene where no suspects were present, engage in a routine 
greeting to a citizen, or have a conversation with fellow officers or others, no form was 
completed (Mastrofski and Parks, 1990).  In fact, during the first week of the study, student-
observers were surprised that officers would form no suspicions during an entire shift and that 
  
2- 9 
 
 
 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


they were always responding to calls for service. Students reported disappointment when they 
would not be able to complete forms during a shift.  As the time appeared to be wasted, students 
were asked to document all sustained interactions between officers and citizens, including 
reports of victimization. If the officer being observed acted as back-up in a situation that gave the 
observer a chance to view other officers’ actions in detail, then the observer would also 
document the encounter. Observers were given an opportunity to document different types of 
interactions and to view officers’ demeanor with all citizens, thus strengthening observational 
skills. For example, by documenting encounters with victims when no suspects were present, 
observers were sensitized toward discerning whether officers’ demeanor changed significantly 
depending upon the type of citizen with whom the officer interacted. Encouraging students to 
document any “rich” exchange gave them experience in observing interactions and writing 
narratives. Although this resulted in “non-suspicion” actions being documented, they were used 
only as training for observers and were not included in the analysis.  Overall, 49 officers on 132 
tours were observed making 174 suspicions and 103 stops. 
 
Observers attempted to make telephone contact with citizens who were involved in an 
encounter with an officer. In each case, the observer would ask permission to call the citizen later 
and requested a telephone number.  When the citizen answered, the student-observer would read 
the informed consent form language to the citizen. If the citizen agreed with the language, the 
student would ask if he or she could sign the form for the citizen. Questions on the survey 
instrument elicited citizens’ overall evaluations of the encounter, in addition to their perceptions, 
reactions, and behavior. The original purpose of these calls was to understand citizens’ 
  
2- 10 
 
 
 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


perceptions, thought processes, and insights, and to attempt to ascertain what the citizen was 
thinking, which led to or contributed to the choices he or she made. Unfortunately, most citizens 
did not cooperate with the methodology and did not volunteer proper phone numbers or gave 
numbers that were not working.  Overall, only fifteen citizens agreed to be interviewed.  
Fourteen of the fifteen citizens reported favorable impressions of the police and their 
interactions.  Only one citizen reported a negative impression of the officer and interaction. 
 
Instrumentation 
 
Field observers used three major data collection instruments in order to gather as much 
relevant information as possible from a variety of sources and in diverse situations. The Officer 
Form was an overall evaluation of the officer’s decision-making characteristics, Suspicion Forms 
captured information each time an incident occurred, and a Suspect Form was a compilation of 
data from the citizen who had an encounter with an officer. Additional documents included 
informed consent forms, a card detailing the language to be used for the initial contact with 
citizens (and hourly activity forms).  The research forms are presented in Appendix A. The 
following discussion describes each of these forms.  
Informed Consent: Each officer received an informed consent letter from the student observer 
explaining that a research project concerning officer interactions with citizens and police 
officers’ impressions of their job was being conducted with the Savannah Police Department. 
The letter noted that involvement in the research was completely voluntary, all information 
would be reported in the aggregate, and if the officer chose not to participate, there would be no 
  
2- 11 
 
 
 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


negative ramifications. Each officer agreeing to participate signed the consent form, as did the 
student observer, and a copy of the form was given to the officer. 
Officer Form: The Officer Form consisted of two sections and ten questions. Section A asked 
for demographic information gender, years with SPD, education, race, and age. Section B 
measured the officer’s overall decision-making style. Observers were asked to fill out this 
section after they had observed the officer for a full shift, rating the importance to the officer of 
the appearance of suspects, their behavior, and the time and place of suspects and situations. The 
three response categories for each of these questions were high priority, medium priority, and not 
relevant. After each rating of importance, observers explained the ratings. The last two questions 
covered importance of information given to the officer by the dispatcher or other officers and 
working rules used by officers in deciding who to follow or stop.  
 
Observers used this form as a working document when riding with one officer for a series 
of  observations. Some observers would add to the form after each ride-along and then present a 
summary form at the end of ride-alongs with a particular officer. Other observers filled out 
several officer forms on the same officer and then completed a final form that they turned in after 
completing ride-alongs with the individual officer.  
Suspicion Form: The suspicion form was the major document used by observers. A suspicion 
form was filled out each time an officer formed a suspicion or followed a suspect; thus, each 
form represented a single incident. This form was ten pages long and was divided into six major 
sections. The heading gave space for date, time of observation, precinct/shift, visibility, observer 
  
2- 12 
 
 
 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


ID, officer number,3 and observation number. The first section regarded detailed aspects of 
forming suspicion and contextual characteristics. Demographic characteristics of suspects or 
victims, make and model of vehicles, and neighborhood assessments were noted in this section 
of the form. The second section consisted of questions pertaining to the officers’ actions, 
including what the officer did, reasons given by the officer for his or her actions, and whether or 
not others observed these actions. In this section, the use of force was expanded to any physical 
force used by an officer, including come-along holds, pressure points and other strong-armed 
tactics.  The use of handcuffs was not considered a use of force.  The liberal use of coercion was 
used rather than the traditional use of force as the latter is such a rare event. The next section 
pertained to searches of vehicles or suspects. The fourth section provided space for the observers 
to describe in detail the interaction between the officer and suspect and included prompts relating 
to the officer’s and suspect’s general attitude/language and behavior toward each other. The 
officer’s perception of the social status or the importance of the suspect was gathered at this 
point, and any appearance of disrespect by either officers or suspects was documented. The next 
section surveyed the officer’s assessment of the demeanor and cooperation of the suspect and 
the result of the stop. The final section was an in-depth, three-part analysis of changes in 
demeanor displayed by both the officer and the suspect at the time of the initial contact, during 
the encounter, and after the outcome. If the situation became hostile, observers were asked to 
identify and explain who the first person to show hostility. Most of the questions in this form 
3 In order to ensure anonymity, observers assigned numbers to each of the officers with whom they rode. Officer 
names were not used on any of the suspicion forms or the officer form. 
                                                 
  
2- 13 
 
 
 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


were open-ended and observers were trained to be as detailed as possible in their narrative 
accounts.   
Language for Officers and Observers After Stop is Made: Officers were requested to ask 
citizens, “I have an observer from Armstrong Atlantic State University in the car who would like 
to ask you a question. Is that alright?”  If the citizen agreed, the observer would state that he or 
she was working on a study looking at the Savannah Police Department and would like to call 
the citizen with a few questions concerning the interaction with the officer that day. If citizens 
agreed, they would give the observer their phone number. Observers kept track of refusals. 
 
When observers were allowed to approach citizens, most of the time they declined to be 
contacted.  The question asked most often by the citizen was whether the observer was an 
attorney.  When informed that the observer was not an attorney, the citizen might refuse to 
cooperate.  As noted earlier, if the citizen provided a phone number, it might be a wrong number 
or one that was disconnected.   There were some instances when the suspect stated he/she did not 
have a telephone number. 
Suspect/Victim Form: When suspects (or victims in some cases) could be contacted, a survey 
instrument similar to the suspicion instrument was utilized. The first page was the informed 
consent form, explaining the purpose of the call and seeking the voluntary participation of the 
citizen. The rest of the form asked for the citizen’s account of the encounter with the police 
officer, including the reasons given by the officer for the stop, and the language, attitude, and 
behavior of the officer throughout the encounter.  Citizens were asked for their perceptions 
regarding the social status or importance of patrol officers and how they perceived their own 
  
2- 14 
 
 
 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


status compared to the status of patrol officers. Observers asked citizens about the effect that 
their encounter with the police has had on their overall attitude toward the Savannah Police 
Department. The final section asked for assessments of the demeanor of the officer at the time of 
initial contact, during the encounter, and at the final outcome. 
Activity Form: Students were given a one-page form on which to record hourly activity. This 
helped students document everything that occurred on a shift and was a way to account for shifts 
in which no suspicion was formed.  
 
References 
 
Mastrofski, Stephen, Roger Parks, Albert Reiss, Robert Worden, Christina DeJong, Jeffrey 
Snipes and William Terrill.  Systematic Observation of Public Police: Applying Field Research 
Methods to Policy Issues. Washington, DC: National Institute of Justice. 1998. 
 
Mastrofski, Stephen and Roger Parks. Improving Observational Studies of Police. Criminology 
28: 475-496 (1990). 
 
Reiss, Al. Systematic observation of natural social phenomenon. Sociological Methodology 3: 3–
33 (1971). 
 
Spano, Richard. Potential sources of observer bias in police observational data. Social Science 
Research (2004 forthcoming). 
  
2- 15 
 
 
 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Appendix I 
Qualitative Notes 
 
The following comments are some of the more significant or interesting remarks that were 
recorded by the on-site coordinator: 
 
“Hours of boredom followed by moments of sheer terror.” White male observer in Precinct 
2. 
 
“It was so cool! That was the most fun I’ve had in my entire life.” White female observer 
“with small bladder” who had been worried about getting bathroom breaks. 
 
“I saw the car we were on the look-out for, but I didn’t want to contaminate the research.” 
White male observer explaining why he did not say anything regarding a BOLO that his officer 
missed. 
 
One of the observers wrote a detailed narrative of his thoughts and perceptions of his 
experience.   While it was not discussed in his narrative, he explained to the on-site coordinator 
that it was very interesting that the officers on his shift took turns providing dinner for the whole 
precinct. Half of the officers on patrol would break for dinner and go back to the precinct to eat 
together, and then the other half would do the same. In addition, the officers had “family” names 
and roles for each other, much like the pseudo-families in female prisons. For example, older 
officers with seniority played parent roles; rookies were referred to as someone’s sons, and 
  
2- 16 
 
 
 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


others were “aunties” or “uncles.”  One lieutenant was a “mean auntie” and the ”kids” would 
“make fun” of her.  The following account is one observer’s account and demonstrates how well 
observers can be accepted by officers they study. 
 
 
“Precinct 2 covers a majority of lower-income, black neighborhoods. It has a high crime 
rate, and drug sales and prostitution are prevalent. Most of the officers on the 4 to midnight shift 
are African-American with only two white officers. Two officers are African American females. 
Officers were unsure of me at first, but on day 2 of my ride alongs, they came up to me and 
found out what I was doing. Once they began to feel at ease with me, they began to laugh and 
joke with me. Several even began to tell me about their policing style with little or no prompting 
from me. 
 
The officer I rode with began to refer to me as his “partner” when we came up on 
different situations. He went from saying to others that “I responded to a call” to “We 
responded to a call.” On the first night, my officer rendezvoused  (sic) with several other officers 
on patrol. When he got out to talk to the others, he told me to wait in the car, saying they had 
“police business” to discuss. On day 2, however, when he got out of the car, he said, “Come on, 
you’re with me.” All of the officers expected me to be an active participant in their 
conversations.  
 
Other officers would actually come up and tell me to get out of the car so I could observe 
what they were doing. They would treat me like a rookie officer and ask me how I would 
respond to certain situations. I felt strangely at ease with them, and once they found out that I 
  
2- 17 
 
 
 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


wanted to be a police officer, responses ranged from positive (“You would make a good cop”) to 
negative (“If I could do it over, I would pick “X”). Once they knew that I was a criminal justice 
major interested in law enforcement, even the most “hard core” officer began talking to me.  
Strangely enough to me, many suspects and complainants thought I was a detective or officer in 
plain clothes. 
  
2- 18 
 
 
 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Ch. 3  Findings 
 
The analyses presented in this section of the report are based on the observations 
made during the course of this study.  This report therefore outlines the results on a 
department-wide basis.  More specific information by precinct can be found in the 
following Appendix. Individual precincts can develop their own culture or style of 
policing.  A precinct that is significantly different from the others can influence our 
general findings and should be reviewed to determine possible explanations or reasons.   
We have decided to describe the data in great detail.  Rather than select and 
describe specific relationships, we present in this chapter, an exhaustive analysis of the 
data.   
Description of Suspicion 
 
Officers formed suspicion when they observed something unusual, became 
curious, or otherwise distrustful of an individual.  During 132 tours where officers were 
accompanied by observers, officers formed suspicion 174 times. On average, an officer 
would form suspicion once (X = 1.32; S.D. = 1.27) during a tour of duty (or shift).  On 60 
of these tours, officers did not form a suspicion.  On one tour, an officer formed suspicion 
7 times.  This information is shown graphically in Figure 1 (below). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 - 1
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Figure 1.  Number of Times Suspicion Was Formed by Number of Rides 
 
number of times suspicion was formed
7.0
5.0
3.0
1.0
100
80
60
40
20
0
 
Bases for Suspicion  
 
When an officer was curious about a citizen or became suspicious, observers 
asked the officer to provide them with the reason(s) for this concern.  The reasons 
provided by observers were organized by type and coded according to the following 
categories: (1) appearance, (2) behavior, (3) time and place, and (4) information. 
“Appearance” refers to the appearance of an individual and/or vehicle, and can refer to 
things such as distinctive dress, indicators of class, vehicle type, color, condition, and the 
like.  “Behavior” refers to any overt action taken by an individual or vehicle that seemed 
inappropriate, illegal, or bizarre.  “Time and place” refers to an officer’s knowledge of a 
particular location (e.g., park, warehouse district) and what activities should or should not 
be expected there after a particular time (e.g., after hours).  Finally, “Information” refers 
to information provided by either a dispatcher or fellow officer (e.g., BOLO).  As 
depicted in Figure 2 (below), the main reason for forming suspicion was the behavior of 
the suspect(s).   In the overwhelming majority of cases, the officer told the observer that 
number 
of tours 
 
3 - 2
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


the behavior of the suspect(s) was the primary reason for forming suspicion. An analysis 
of the observers’ descriptions of behavior revealed that the most likely behavioral reason 
for forming suspicion of an individual/vehicle was a traffic violation (e.g., running a red 
light, driving with expired plates).    
More than 18% of the suspicions were stimulated by information provided by 
either a dispatcher or fellow officer (see Figure 2).  This information usually involved 
“Be on the Lookout” bulletins, or other information provided by the department or fellow 
officers concerning specific characteristics of suspects of crimes or vehicles thought to be 
related to suspected crimes.  An analysis of the observers’ descriptions of the types of 
information they used showed that the most likely types of information used for forming 
suspicion of an individual/vehicle was descriptions of personal characteristics, clothing, 
or descriptions of vehicles that were either stolen or thought to be used in a crime. 
 
Figure 2.  Main Reason for Forming Suspicion 
5.7% (n = 10)
66.1%
(n = 115)
9.8% (n = 17)
18.4% (n = 32)
0.0%
10.0%
20.0%
30.0%
40.0%
50.0%
60.0%
70.0%
Appearance
Behavior
Time and Place
Information
 
 
Nearly ten percent of the reasons given for becoming suspicious of a person were 
related to time and place (see Figure 2).  These cases involved an officer drawing on his 
or her knowledge of a particular location (e.g., park, commercial area) and what activities 
 
3 - 3
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


should or should not be expected there after a particular time (e.g., after hours).  An 
analysis of the observers’ descriptions of the situations which led officers to become 
suspicious revealed a wide variety of situations, including a car parked near a school in 
the woods at night, a car driving slowly in a warehouse district late at night, passengers in 
a car who do not match the ethnicity of the neighborhood they are driving in (especially 
at night). 
 
Finally, nearly six percent of the reasons given by the officers for becoming 
suspicious were related to the appearance of the person(s) (see Figure 2).  These 
indicators included distinctive dress, indicators of class, vehicle type, color, and 
condition.  An analysis of the observers’ descriptions of which characteristics of 
individuals or vehicles led officers to become suspicious revealed characteristics such as 
vehicles with heavily tinted windows, dirty or damaged vehicles, or individuals wearing 
gang colors or looking strung out like a drug addict.     
Description of Stops 
 
It is important to note that “forming suspicion” did not necessarily result in 
stopping an individual/vehicle.  As depicted in Figure 3, officers stopped the 
individual/vehicle under suspicion the majority of the time.  However, there were 
instances when officers did not make contact with the individual(s) under suspicion.  In 
cases where no stop was made, the officer’s continued observation of the suspect(s) 
convinced him/her that the original concern was unwarranted.   
 
Figure 3.  Number of Times Suspicion Resulted in Person/Vehicle Stop 
 
3 - 4
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


No
41%
(n = 71)
Yes
59%
(n = 103)
 
Given that officers formed suspicion 174 times (see Figure 1) and that, in this study, 
officers made a total of 103 stops we can calculate that officers made an average of less 
than one stop (X = .78; S.D. = .90) per ride on the basis of suspicion.  Figure 4 (below) 
provides a graphic depiction of the number of stops officers made per tour in this study. 
 
Figure 4.  Number of Times Officer Made Stop Based on Suspicion  
 
 
As the previous sections outline, there are two units of analysis in this study: (1) 
when an officer formed suspicion and (2) when an officer made a stop based on 
number 
of tours 
number of time officer made stop
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
 
3 - 5
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


suspicion.  In the following sections, we review suspicion in relation to the characteristics 
of areas patrolled, the persons encountered, and days and times, and undertake an 
analysis according to each of these units.  
Characteristics of the Areas in Which Suspicion Was Formed/Stops Were Made 
Officers were asked for their perceptions of the neighborhoods in which suspicion 
was formed or stops were made.  As shown in Table 1 (below), slightly more than one-
half of the time, suspicion was formed in residential areas.  Suspicion was formed less 
often in commercial areas, secluded areas, and “other” (most often a combination of 
residential and commercial areas) areas.  Observers queried officers regarding their 
perceptions of the locations in which they formed suspicion.  In particular, observers 
asked officers if they believed the area in which they formed suspicion was a “trouble” 
spot (i.e., usually a high crime or drug area).  As shown in Table 2 (below), most often 
suspicion was formed in areas not considered to troublesome or problematic by officers.  
Finally, officers were also asked for their opinion regarding the predominant racial 
makeup of the area in which they formed suspicion.  Figure 5 (below) provides the results 
of officer assessments of the areas in which they formed suspicion.  The majority of 
suspicions were formed in predominantly African-American areas of Savannah.  A very 
small number of cases involved suspicions formed in primarily Anglo areas of town.  
While most suspicions were formed in residential areas, the greatest percentage of 
stops occurred in commercial areas (see Table 1).  The majority of the time, officers 
made stops of individuals/vehicles in areas not considered particularly problematic (see 
Table 2).  Finally, the racial makeup of areas in which stops were made (see Figure 6) 
 
3 - 6
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


was relatively similar to those in which suspicion was formed: the majority of suspicions 
formed and stops made occurred in predominantly African-American areas of Savannah. 
Table 1.  Type of Area  
 
Suspicion Formed 
Stop Made 
N 
% 
N 
% 
Residential 
89 
51.1 
41 
39.8 
Commercial 
71 
40.8 
51 
49.5 
Secluded 
4 
2.3 
3 
2.9 
Other 
10 
5.7 
8 
7.8 
Total 
174 
100.0 
103 
100.0 
 
 
Table 2.  Officer Indicated Area Was a Trouble Spot 
 
Suspicion Formed 
Stop Made 
N 
% 
N 
% 
No 
101 
59.4 
54 
54.5 
Yes 
69 
40.6 
45 
45.5 
Total 
170 
100.0 
99 
100.0 
Figure 5.  Racial Makeup of Areas in Which Suspicion Was Formed 
56.7%
2.9%
40.4%
0.0%
10.0%
20.0%
30.0%
40.0%
50.0%
60.0%
African-American
White
Mixed
 
Figure 6.  Racial Makeup of Areas in Which Stops Were Made 
 
3 - 7
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


52.9%
2.9%
44.1%
0.0%
10.0%
20.0%
30.0%
40.0%
50.0%
60.0%
African-American
White
Mixed
 
Characteristics of the Individuals about Whom Suspicion Was Formed/Who Were 
 
Stopped  
 
Whenever an officer formed suspicion of an individual or vehicle, observers 
recorded information about the target.  Other than the variable of class, characteristics of 
citizens were recorded according to observers’ perceptions.  However, the observers 
often would confirm their perceptions by asking officers about the target.  For instance, 
observers would ask the officer if s/he was able to estimate or determine the race and age 
of the suspect.  The observer would provide the officers’ best estimate if no data, such as 
a driver’s license, were available.  To assess a suspect’s class, observers were trained to 
ask officers for their opinion of the socioeconomic status of the individual with whom 
they had come into contact.  Observers then probed to determine what factors the officer 
was taking into account when making his/her assessment.  Finally, officers were also 
asked whether they considered the suspect to be from the same social class, a lower social 
class, or higher social class as the officer. 
 
3 - 8
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Tables 3 through 8 (below) provide an indication of the demographic 
characteristics of the primary individual about whom officers formed suspicion or who 
was stopped by the police.  In the majority of cases, individuals were driving vehicles at 
the time suspicion was formed or stops were made (70% and 73.8%, respectively).  The 
majority of persons who aroused the suspicion of officers or who were stopped by police 
were male (see Table 3), minority group members (see Table 4), and averaged thirty-two 
years of age (see Table 5).  However, Blacks constituted a slightly higher percentage of 
suspicions (71.0%) than stops (68.9%), while whites had the opposite pattern (29.0 % of 
the suspicions and 31.1 % of the stops).  Tables 6 through 8 report information only on 
those citizens who were stopped as the officers could not determine this specific 
information when forming suspicion.  Table 6 presents officers’ assessments of the social 
status or class of the primary individual about whom s/he stopped.  As this table 
indicates, officers most often rated the person as having middle-class status.  A review of 
explanations provided by officers indicated that officers relied on a variety of cues to 
make this assessment, such as individual’s manner of speech, dress, the area of town in 
which s/he resided, or the condition, make, and/or model of the vehicle s/he was driving.  
Table 7 provides the results of officers’ assessments as to whether the suspect was of a 
lower class, the same class, or a higher class than them.  In the majority of cases, officers 
assessed the citizens to be of the same socioeconomic status.1  Finally, a small number of 
1   It should be noted that there were many missing cases for suspect class.  Many officers 
were reluctant to provide an assessment of the suspect’s socioeconomic status.  Officers 
were even more reluctant to indicate whether they felt the suspect’s class to be lower, 
higher, or the same as their own.   
 
                                                          
 
3 - 9
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


suspects was under the influence of alcohol or drugs at the time police became suspicious 
of them or when they were stopped (see Table 8). 
 
Table 3.  Suspect Gender 
 
Suspicion Formed 
Stop Made 
N 
% 
N 
% 
Male 
116 
73.9 
71 
68.9 
Female 
41 
26.1 
32 
31.1 
Total 
157 
100.0 
103 
100.0 
 
 
 
Table 4.  Suspect Race 
 
Suspicion Formed 
Stop Made 
N 
% 
N 
% 
Black 
110 
71.0 
71 
68.9 
White 
44 
29.0 
32 
31.1 
Total 
155 
100.0 
103 
100.0 
 
 
 
Table 5.  Average Age of Suspect 
 
 
N 
 
Minimum 
 
Maximum
 
Mean 
Std. 
Deviation
Suspicion Formed 
Age 
93 
10.0 
65.0 
31.90 
13.89 
Stop Made 
Age 
78 
10.0 
65.0 
32.24 
14.34 
 
 
Table 6.  Suspect Class 
 
Stop Made 
N 
% 
Low 
28 
32.6 
Medium 
54 
62.8 
High 
4 
4.7 
 
3 - 10
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Total 
86 
100.0 
 
 
Table 7.  Suspect Class Relative to Officer Class  
 
Stop Made  
N 
% 
Lower 
24 
31.6 
Same 
49 
64.5 
Higher 
3 
3.9 
Total 
76 
100.0 
 
Table 8.  Suspect Was Under the Influence of Alcohol/Drugs 
 
Stop Made 
N 
% 
No 
86 
87.8 
Yes 
12 
12.2 
Total 
98 
100.0 
 
 
Characteristics of Day and Time Suspicion Was Formed/Stops Were Made 
Observers documented the time whenever officers became suspicious of or made 
stops of individuals.  Later, using the U.S. Naval Observatory Astronomical Applications 
Department Data Services’ sunrise/sunset calculator, the time was coded to reflect 
whether it was prior to or after sunset.  This measure provides an approximation of the 
officer’s ability to make out certain suspect characteristics (e.g., race, gender, age) prior 
to making a stop of the individual.  The data revealed that a little over one-third of 
suspicions were formed when it was dark out (35.8%; n = 62).  The date of the tour was 
also noted.  Dates were then classified according to whether they fell on a day during the 
 
3 - 11
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


week (Sun.–Thurs.) or weekend (Fri.–Sat.).  In this study, the majority of suspicions were 
formed during the week rather than weekend (64.9%; n = 113) (see Figure 7).   The 
results were largely concordant regarding the time and day that stops occurred (see 
Figure 8), although stops were slightly more likely to occur on a weekday compared to 
suspicions. 
 
Figure 7.  Day and Time of Suspicion 
Dark at Time of Suspicion 
Suspicion Was Formed on Weekend 
Yes
36%
No
64%
No 
65%
Yes
35%
Figure 8.  Day and Time of Stop 
 
Dark at Time of Stop  
Stop Was Made on Weekend 
Yes
36%
No
64%
No
76%
Yes
24%
 
Outcomes of Stops 
 
3 - 12
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


 
This study collected limited data on the results of the officers’ stop.  Figure 9 
(below) provides an indication of whether the officer used physical coercion or force 
against the suspect, the suspect offered resistance to the police, the police issued a 
warning or ticket, the suspect was frisked or searched, and/or police arrested the suspect 
during one of the 103 stops.  Here, force is defined as the use of any physical coercion 
and includes such tactics as “come along holds,” and the use of pressure points (but not 
the use of handcuffs).  This liberal definition is used as higher levels of force are 
extremely rare.  As this figure indicates, the most common outcomes were either the 
issuance of a ticket (35.0%; n = 36) or a warning (28.2%; n = 29). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.  Outcomes of Stops Based on Suspicion 
 
3 - 13
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


4.9%
6.8%
24.3%
28.2%
35.0%
9.7%
0.0%
5.0%
10.0%
15.0%
20.0%
25.0%
30.0%
35.0%
Force used 
Suspect resisted
Suspect Frisked/Searched
Warning issued
Ticket issued
Suspect arrested
 
It was suspected that there might be a high degree of correlation between the 
various outcome measures described above.  In order to explore this possibility, 
correlational analyses were performed on the data.  The results of these analyses are 
presented in Table 9 (below).  As this show table shows, there were significant 
relationships between a suspect resisting, being frisked or searched, arrested, and the 
officer having to resort to the use of force.  On the other hand, these outcomes were not 
correlated with the suspect receiving a warning or a ticket—indicating that these types of 
encounters are likely quite different in nature.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 9.  Correlations between Outcome Variables 
 
3 - 14
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


 
Suspect 
Resisted  
Suspect 
Frisked 
Force 
Was 
Used 
Suspect 
Searched
Suspect 
Issued 
Warning
Suspect 
Issued 
Ticket 
Suspect 
Arrested
Suspect 
Resisted 
1.000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Suspect 
Frisked 
 .476*** 1.000 
 
 
 
 
 
Force 
Was 
Used 
 .836***  .398*** 1.000 
 
 
 
 
Suspect 
Searched 
 .281** 
 .611***  .214* 
1.000 
 
 
 
Suspect 
Issued 
Warning 
-.171 
-.157 
-.143 
-.149 
1.0000 
 
 
Suspect 
Issued 
Ticket 
-.119 
-.087 
-.168 
 .140 
-.375*** 
1.000 
 
Suspect 
Arrested 
 .563***  .579***  .536***
 .629*** 
-.135 
 .032 
1.000 
• 
p < .05; ** P < .01; *** p < .001 
 
 
Suspect Resistance and Outcome 
It is instructive to get a closer look at the specific outcome variables that are 
significantly related to suspect resistance: being frisked or patted down, the officer using 
force on the suspect, searching the vehicle, and arresting the suspect.  The data in Table 
9a, indicate that only 19% of the suspects who offer no resistance were frisked or patted 
down.  However, 100% of the suspects who resisted were frisked.     
Table 9a.  Breakdown of Suspects Who Resisted on Officer Conducted Patdown of 
Suspect. 
 
 
No Patdown 
Patdown 
Total 
No Resistance 
    77  (81%) 
18  (19%) 
  95  (100%) 
Resistance 
    ----- 
  7  (100%) 
    7  (100%) 
Total 
    77  (76%) 
25  (24%) 
102  (100%) 
Significance Level = .000 
 
 
3 - 15
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Further, suspects who resisted had force used against them 71% of the time, while none 
of the suspects who complied with the officer’s demands had force used against them 
(see Table 9b).   
Table 9b.  Breakdown of Suspects Who Resisted on Officer Use of Force on Suspect. 
 
 
No Force 
Force Used 
Total 
No Resistance 
    95  (100%) 
   ----- 
  95  (100%) 
Resistance 
      2  (29%) 
  5  (71%) 
    7  (100%) 
Total 
    97  (95%) 
  5  (5%) 
102  (100%) 
Significance Level = .000 
 
Only 8% of the suspects who offered no resistance had their vehicles searched, compared 
to vehicle searches being conducted on 43% of the resisters (see Table 9c).  Finally, in 
Table 9d, the data indicate that only 5% of the suspects who did not resist were arrested, 
compared to 71% of the resisting suspects getting arrested (see Table 9d). 
 
Table 9c.  Breakdown of Suspects Who Resisted on Officer Searched Vehicle. 
 
 
No Search 
Searched Vehicle 
Total 
No Resistance 
    87  (92%) 
  8  (8%) 
  95  (100%) 
Resistance 
      4  (57%) 
  3  (43%) 
    7  (100%) 
Total 
    91  (89%) 
11  (11%) 
102  (100%) 
Significance Level = .005 
 
 
 
Table 9d.  Breakdown of Suspects Who Resisted on Officer Arrested Suspect. 
 
 
No Arrest 
Suspect Arrested 
Total 
No Resistance 
    90  (95%) 
  5  (5%) 
  95  (100%) 
Resistance 
      2  (29%) 
  5  (71%) 
    7  (100%) 
Total 
    92  (90%) 
10  (10%) 
102  (100%) 
Significance Level = .000 
 
A question of interest when analyzing the outcome of police stops concerns 
whether the presence of onlookers affects the officer’s behavior or the outcome of the 
 
3 - 16
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


stop.  There were onlookers for 50 of the 102 stops observed in this study.  Most of the 
onlookers were citizens who where just passing by during the stop, some who stopped to 
see what was happening, and others who knew the suspects.  In a few cases, the 
onlookers were other police officers.  In Table 9e, correlations were computed on 
“whether the stop was visible to others” and the various outcome variables.  Two of the 
outcome variables were significantly correlated to the visibility of the stop: suspect 
frisked and suspect arrested.  It is interesting that both are positive correlations, 
signifying that when the stop is visible to others, there is a greater likelihood of the 
suspect being frisked by the police and of being arrested (see Table 9e).   
 
Table 9e.  Correlations between “Stop Being Visible to Others” and Outcome 
Variables 
 
Suspect 
Resisted  
Suspect 
Frisked 
Force 
Was 
Used 
Suspect 
Issued 
Warning 
Suspect 
Issued 
Ticket 
Suspect 
Arrested 
Stop visible 
to others? 
.120 
.216* 
.139 
-.016 
.049 
.268** 
*p < .05; ** P < .01 
 
  
More specific breakdowns on the two significant correlations indicated that stops 
visible to others resulted in suspects being patted down 34% of the time, more than twice 
the percentage for stops in which there were no onlookers (see Table 9f).  Further, only 
2% of the stops not visible to others resulted in the suspect being arrested, while arrests 
were made in 18% of the stops which were visible to others (see Table 9g).  Apparently, 
when stops are visible to others, officers may feel more pressure to respond with 
patdowns and arrests than when there are no onlookers present. 
 
 
3 - 17
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Table 9f.  Breakdown of Stops Visible to Others on Officer Conducted Patdown of 
Suspect. 
 
 
No Patdown 
Patdown 
Total 
Not  Visible to Others 
    44  (85%) 
  8  (15%) 
  52  (100%) 
Stop Visible to Others 
    33  (66%) 
17  (34%) 
  50  (100%) 
Total 
    77  (76%) 
25  (24%) 
102  (100%) 
Significance Level = .025 
 
Table 9g.  Breakdown of Stops Visible to Others on Officer Arrested Suspect. 
 
 
No Arrest 
Suspect Arrested 
Total 
Not  Visible to Others 
    50  (98%) 
  1  (2%) 
  51  (100%) 
Stop Visible to Others 
    41  (82%) 
  9  (18%) 
  50  (100%) 
Total 
    91  (90%) 
10  (10%) 
101  (100%) 
Significance Level = .007 
 
Another outcome of interest was the nature of the interaction between the police 
officer and primary suspect.  Observers collected detailed information on the character of 
the encounter, such as suspect and officer demeanor at the beginning and end of an 
encounter, whether either actor was disrespectful toward the other during the course of 
the encounter, who displayed disrespect first, and the nature or “cause” of this disrespect.  
Information about the nature of the interaction between the officer and primary suspect is 
discussed under the subheadings of demeanor and disrespect. 
Demeanor 
Observers recorded the demeanor of suspects and officers at various points during 
the encounter.  Figure 10 (below) depicts the demeanor of officers and suspects at the 
beginning of encounters.  Officers acted more positively toward suspects than suspects 
did towards officers.  While only 5% (n = 5) of officers had a negative initial demeanor, 
14% (n = 14) of suspects were negative at the beginning of the encounter with the police.  
Next, observers noted whether either the demeanor of police officers or suspects changed 
 
3 - 18
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


during the course of the encounter.  Figure 11 (below) demonstrates that suspect and 
officer demeanor changed at approximately the same rate during their interaction; in 
roughly one-fourth of all cases, the officer and suspect changed their demeanor during the 
course of the encounter.  
  
Figure 10.  Officer and Suspect’s Initial Demeanor 
 
Officer’s Initial Demeanor 
 
Negative
5%
Neutral
46%
Positive
49%
 
 
Suspect’s Initial Demeanor  
 
Negative
14%
Neutral
54%
Positive
32%
 
 
Figures 12 and 13 (below) provide graphic representations of the manner in which 
officer and suspect demeanor changed during the course of their interaction.   Figure 12 
provides an indication of the nature of demeanor change for officers and reveals that the 
demeanor of officers improved (i.e., negative to positive, negative to neutral, neutral to 
positive) in half of the cases (50%; n = 11).  In the remaining fifty-percent of cases (n = 
11), officer demeanor changed for the worse (i.e., neutral to negative, positive to 
negative, positive to neutral).  
 
 
  
 
3 - 19
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Figure 11.  Officer/Suspect Demeanor Changed During Encounter 
 
 
Officer’s Demeanor Changed  
 
No
78%
Yes
22%
 
Suspect’s Demeanor Changed 
 
No
77%
Yes
23%
 
 
 
Figure 12.  Nature of Officers’ Demeanor Change 
13.6%
22.7%
13.6%
31.8%
9.1%
9.1%
0.0%
10.0%
20.0%
30.0%
40.0%
Positive to Neutral
Positive to Negative
Neutral to Positive 
Neutral to Negative
Negative to Neutral
Negative to Positive 
 
The nature of suspect’s change in demeanor was also evenly divided between 
changes for the better and for the worse.  In just over half of encounters  (52%; n = 12), 
suspects’ attitudes improved as their interaction with officers progressed, while in the 
remaining 48% of cases (n = 11) the demeanor of suspects worsened. 
 
 
3 - 20
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Figure 13.  Nature of Suspects’ Demeanor Change 
8.7%
4.3%
21.7%
13.0%
30.4%
4.3%
17.4%
0.0%
10.0%
20.0%
30.0%
40.0%
Positive to Neutral
Positive to Negative
Neutral to Negative
Negative to Worse
Neutral to Positive 
Negative to Neutral
Negative to Positive 
 
 
Figure 14.  Officer and Suspect’s Final Demeanor 
 
Officer’s Final Demeanor 
 
Negative 
6%
Neutral
39%
Positive
55%
 
Suspect’s Final Demeanor  
 
Negative
15%
Neutral
44%
Positive
41%
 
Figure 14 (above) depicts the demeanor of officers and suspects at the end of 
encounters.  Officers tended to hold more positive attitudes toward suspects than vice 
versa.  Over half (55%; n = 56) of the officers had a positive final demeanor, 39% (n = 
40) were neutral toward suspects, and a small percentage (6%; n = 6) had a negative 
demeanor at the end of the encounter.  In contrast, only 41% (n = 41) of suspects had a 
positive demeanor at the end of their encounter with the police.  A slightly larger 
 
3 - 21
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


percentage (44%; n = 45) was neutral toward officers, and 15% (n = 15) of suspects had a 
negative demeanor at the conclusion of their encounter with the police. 
In order to better understand the reasons behind the change in demeanor of 
suspects and officers, observers were instructed to provide written descriptions of any 
changes in demeanor from the beginning to end of encounters.  Table 10 (below) 
provides a sampling of the descriptions recorded by observers.  Of these descriptions, 
perhaps most notable are observers’ descriptions of the change in officers’ demeanors.  
Regardless of whether officers’ demeanors changed for the better or worse, officers 
overwhelmingly appeared to be responding to the attitude/demeanor displayed by the 
suspect.   
Table 10.  Descriptions of Officer and Suspect Demeanor Change during Encounter 
 
Descriptions of Officer Demeanor Change 
 
 
 
 
Demeanor 
Improved by 
End of 
Encounter 
 
• Officer referred more than once to how polite and respectful she was 
• By end of encounter, officer and suspect were talking about boxing 
• Once woman started talking, police officer calmed down 
• Officer was happy the driver was nice and polite (he said driver was 
actually thankful about being told about tag) 
• Officer relaxed after more contact with car occupants 
• Officer became friendlier as encounter went on 
• Officer got nicer as suspect got more cooperative 
• Officer shared laugh with suspect, talked about more than traffic stop 
• Pleased suspect was cooperative 
• Realized driver was just scared; driver was polite and cooperative 
 
 
Demeanor 
Worsened 
by End of 
Encounter 
 
• After suspects became hostile, officer became more stern 
• Officer became impatient and agitated with man 
• Officer became more loud and serious when suspect didn't 
immediately comply 
• Officer abandoned attempts to be pleasant and was just impersonal 
• When driver was an ass, the officer stopped trying to be nice and just 
issued ticket 
 
 
 
3 - 22
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


 
Descriptions of Suspect Demeanor Change 
 
 
Demeanor 
Improved by 
End of 
Encounter 
 
• At first individual was defensive, but then said he understood and 
didn't argue 
• Suspect calmed down during encounter, was happy she only got 
warning 
• Even after being put in car, suspect came out smiling, asking 
questions, friendly 
• She was happy she only got a warning 
• She was happy/relieved she didn't get a ticket 
• Suspect got more cooperative after he realized he needed to comply 
• Woman seemed relieved she wasn't being pulled over for something 
else 
• He shared a laugh with the officer and talked about more than the 
stop 
• Suspect was confused until he saw his tag was actually gone, then 
lightened up 
• He was uneasy/offended at first, but talking to officer at end of 
encounter about boxing 
 
 
 
Demeanor 
Worsened 
by End of 
Encounter 
 
• Woman became hostile after she got the ticket 
• Suspect became more belligerent toward officers 
• At first, individual was cooperative, then mad/abusive, neutral by end 
of encounter 
• Suspect got angry and started cussing after he was told he'd be there  
awhile 
• Suspect rolled her eyes and shook her head (showed non-verbal 
negative attitude). 
 
 
 
In addition to providing a description of the nature of the change in demeanor 
among officers and suspects in this study, observers were also asked to document 
whether there was a specific point when the officer lost the cooperation of the suspect 
under observation. Similarly, they were asked to identify whether when the suspects’ 
behavior had a negative impact on the officer.  In cases when either was true, observers 
were asked to describe the circumstances in narrative form.     
 
3 - 23
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Figure 15 (below) indicates that officers did something to negatively impact the 
behavior of the suspect in a little over ten percent (11%; n = 11) of cases.  In these cases, 
observers were asked to describe the action(s) officers took to affect suspects’ behavior.  
Some actions taken by officers are described below: 
• Officer corrected woman and said she had run red (not yellow) light 
• Gave her ticket 
• Reacted negatively after continually interrupted by suspect 
• Officer searched vehicle, found drugs, and arrested suspect 
• Stopped her 
• Stopped man 
• Told suspect he'd have to wait there awhile 
• Told suspect he would have to place him in back seat of squad car 
• Tried to stop individual (and had to chase and fight him) 
• Wanted to question suspect 
 
It is impossible to determine why the citizens became upset with the officers and whether 
the citizens were reacting to the officers’ actions or their own plight.  
Figure 15.  Officer Did Something to Negatively Impact Behavior of Suspect 
No
89%
Yes
11%
 
 
Figure 16 (below) provides an indication of the frequency with which suspects did 
something that negatively impacted on the behavior of officers in this study.  As this 
figure demonstrates, suspects took action(s) that had a negative influence on the behavior 
 
3 - 24
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


officers in this study at nearly twice the rate than did officers toward suspects.  In almost 
one-fifth (19%; n = 19) of encounters between officers and suspects in this study, the 
suspect took an action that negatively impacted the officer’s behavior.  
 
Figure 16.  Suspect Did Something to Negatively Impact Behavior of Officer 
No
81%
Yes
19%
 
Again, observers were asked to provide a narrative description of the actions taken by 
suspects that led to this outcome.  Examples of the descriptions provided by observers are 
found below: 
• Suspect acted suspicious, hesitant, reluctant 
• Argued with officer, saying light was yellow not red 
• Didn't roll window down all the way, and only talked through the back window 
(offered no explanation for behavior) 
• Failure to immediately pull over, didn't put on seat belt even after getting ticket 
for it 
• Suspect ran 
• Individual was scared, so stopped in middle of road, which made officer think he 
was going to run 
• Suspect involved police in chase 
• Suspect jumped out of vehicle in order to tell police officer his fiancee was a cop 
• Individual kept interrupting officer 
• He lied to officer 
• Man refused help, frustrated officer 
• Man ran from officers, fought with them, was verbally abusive, spit at officers 
• Suspect resisted arrest 
 
3 - 25
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


• Suspect started cursing, said he would get a lawyer to stop the harassment 
• Suspect was being uncooperative 
• Man threatened officer with father's supposed influence 
• Man tried to explain and get out of ticket 
• Suspect was offended because he was stopped and asked questions about his 
activities 
• Individual would not respond to officer 
 
Unfortunately, it was not possible to determine why the citizens or police officers 
responded to each other’s actions, and whether those actions and reactions were justified.   
Disrespect.   
Information on disrespect was also collected regarding the police/citizen 
encounter.  While assessments of officer and suspect demeanor were overall assessments 
of the attitudes of the suspects and officers at various points during the encounter, 
disrespect referred to particular incidents.  In other words, observers were asked to note if 
either the officer or suspect displayed disrespect, either in words or actions, toward the 
other during the course of their interaction.  Examples of verbal disrespect would include 
cussing, swearing, or insulting.  Disrespect might also be displayed through actions (e.g., 
rolling eyes, walking away while being spoken to).  Some examples of disrespect 
exhibited by suspects in this study are presented in Table 11. 
 
Table 11.  Examples of Suspect Disrespect 
 
 
 
Disrespectful 
Language 
• Argumentative, told officer to stop harassing him 
• Cussing, loud voice 
• Derogatory comments (suspect told officer to “quit 
fucking with niggers in the hood”) 
• Started cursing while talking to officers 
• Threatened officer  
• Verbally abusive toward officers 
 
 
 
 
• Ignored officer (would not speak to him) because he was 
mad about being pulled over 
 
3 - 26
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


 
Disrespectful Behavior 
• Kept interrupting officer 
• Led police on foot chase 
• Refusal to follow orders, turned back to officer 
• Refused to let other officer arrest him; started to walk 
away 
• Would not stop to talk to police officer initially, didn't 
follow instructions (e.g., taking hands out of pockets) 
 
As indicated in Figure 17 (below), very few officers (4.4%; n = 4) were 
disrespectful toward the person they stopped.  Of the four cases where an officer was 
disrespectful to the citizen, only one was assessed as being unprovoked; in the remaining 
instances, officers were reacting to disrespect exhibited by the citizen.  While the overall 
percentage of suspects who displayed disrespect to the police was also relatively low, 
suspects were disrespectful at over twice the rate (13.2%; n = 12) as officers. 
 
Figure 17.  Displays of Disrespect between Officer and Suspect 
   
 
Officer Was Disrespectful to Suspect 
 
No
96%
Yes 
4%
 
Suspect Was Disrespectful to Officer 
 
No
87%
Yes
13%
 
 
 
While descriptive information of police-citizen encounters based on suspicion is 
useful, it is also important to examine the factors that are associated with the decision to 
stop a suspected individual.  In the following section of this report, we provide the results 
 
3 - 27
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


of bivariate analyses of the factors associated with the decision to stop a suspected 
individual/vehicle, as well as the factors associated with the results (e.g., use of force, 
suspect resistance) and nature of encounters (e.g., demeanor, disrespect) outlined in this 
study. 
Factors Associated with the Decision to Stop a Suspected Individual/Vehicle   
 
As shown in Figure 3, when officers formed suspicion, they also tended to initiate 
a stop of the individual/vehicle (59%).  Table 12 presents the correlations between the 
decision to stop an individual/vehicle and many of the variables discussed in the previous 
sections of this report.   These variables have been categorized as, characteristics of the 
area in which suspicion was formed, characteristics of the day and time when suspicion 
was formed, characteristics of the suspect, characteristics of the suspicion, and officer 
characteristics. 
A total of eight factors was significantly associated with the likelihood that an 
officer would make a stop based on suspicion.  Two characteristics of the area in which 
suspicion was formed were found to be significant.  When the area in which the officer 
became suspicion of an individual was commercial, the officer was more likely to stop 
the individual.  In contrast, officers were less likely to make stops when they formed 
suspicion in residential areas.  One characteristic of the day and time when suspicion was 
formed was significantly related to the likelihood that officers would make a stop.  When 
the suspicion was formed on a weekend day versus a day during the week, the officers 
were significantly less likely to make a stop based on suspicion.  This makes sense; given 
that workloads are higher on weekends, thus reducing the time officers have available to 
do anything but respond to radio calls for service. This pattern seems to reflect the shift 
 
3 - 28
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


patterns and workloads of officers: it would be logical to expect more discretionary stops 
for suspicion at times when there are fewer calls for service. 
 
Table 12.  Factors Correlated with the Decision to Stop a Suspected 
Individual/Vehicle 
 
Variable 
Correlation 
Significance 
Level 
Characteristics of Area 
 
Public 
.098 
 
Type of Area 
     Commercial 
     Residential  
     Secluded 
     Other 
  
.213 
               -.273 
.049   
.170 
 
** 
*** 
Predominantly African-American 
-.093 
 
Trouble Spot 
.117 
 
Characteristics of Day and Time 
 
Dark at Time of Stop 
.002 
 
Stop Occurred on Weekend 
-.272 
*** 
Characteristics of Suspect 
 
Gender (male) 
-.156 
 
Race (black) 
-.063 
 
Age 
.056 
 
Class 
.000 
 
Under Influence of Alcohol/Drugs 
.000 
 
Characteristics of Suspicion 
 
Reason for Forming Suspicion 
       Appearance  
       Behavior 
       Time and Place 
       Information 
 
-.147 
.393 
-.199 
-.240 
 
 
*** 
** 
*** 
Characteristics of Officer 
 
Gender (female) 
-.097 
 
Race (white) 
.094 
 
Age 
.226 
** 
Tenure 
.008 
 
Education (high school degree) 
.189 
* 
* p < .05; ** p < .01; *** p < .001 
 
 
3 - 29
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


None of the suspect characteristics examined significantly influenced the 
likelihood of a stop.  In other words, officers were equally as likely to stop individuals 
whether they were male or female, African-American or white, young or old, or 
perceived to be of a low or high socioeconomic status.  The type of area in which the 
observation was made had a significant effect on whether a stop was made by the officer 
(see Table 12a).  Suspicions were significantly less likely to result in stops in residential 
areas (46% of the time) when compared to the other types of areas, which ranged from 
72% to 80% of the time). 
    
Table 12a.  Breakdown of Type of Area on Decision to Stop the Vehicle. 
 
 
No 
Yes 
Total 
Residential 
  48  (54%) 
  41  (46%) 
  89  (100%) 
Commercial 
  20  (28%) 
  51  (72%) 
  71  (100%) 
Secluded 
    1  (25%) 
    3  (75%) 
    4  (100%) 
Other 
    2  (20%) 
    8  (80%) 
  10  (100%) 
Total 
  71  (41%) 
103  (59%) 
174  (100%) 
Chi Squared = .004 
 
Stops were significantly related to whether the observation occurred during the 
weekend or not (see Table 12b).  Suspicions resulted in actual stops 69% of the time 
during the weekdays, but only 41% of the time during the weekend (Friday and Saturday 
nights).  Perhaps, weekend nights are far busier times for law enforcement activities and 
officers cannot follow up on suspicious behaviors they observe as often as during the less 
busy time periods. 
Table 12b.  Breakdown of Time of Observation on Decision to Stop the Vehicle. 
 
No 
Yes 
Total 
Not Weekend 
  35  (31%) 
  78  (69%) 
113  (100%) 
Weekend (Fri/Sat night) 
  36  (59%) 
  25  (41%) 
  61  (100%) 
Total 
  71  (41%) 
103  (59%) 
174  (100%) 
Chi Squared = .000 
 
3 - 30
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


The nature of the suspicion also was influential in determining the relative 
likelihood that an officer would make a stop (see Table 12c).  
Table 12c.  Breakdown of Primary Reason Officer Formed Suspicion on Decision to 
Stop the Vehicle. 
 
 
No 
Yes 
Total 
Appearance 
    7  (70%) 
    3  (30%) 
  10  (100%) 
Behavior 
  31  (27%) 
  84  (73%) 
115  (100%) 
Time and Place 
  12  (71%) 
    5  (29%) 
  17  (100%) 
Specific Information 
  21  (66%) 
  11  (34%) 
  32  (100%) 
Total 
  71  (41%) 
103  (59%) 
174  (100%) 
Chi Squared = .000 
 
Officers were significantly more likely to make stops when they had formed 
suspicion on the basis of the suspect’s behavior (75% of the time), but significantly less 
likely to make a stop if they had formed suspicion on the basis of time and place (29%) or 
information (34%).   
Finally, two officer characteristics were associated with making a stop of an 
individual.  Older officers and officers with a high school education were significantly 
more likely to make stops than younger and more educated officers.  Officers with a high 
school education made stops in 70% of the incidents that they defined as suspicious, 
significantly higher than the percentages for the more educated officers (see Table 12d). 
Table 12d.  Breakdown of Officer’s Education Level on Decision to Stop the Vehicle. 
 
 
No 
Yes 
Total 
High School Diploma 
  23  (30%) 
  53  (70%) 
  76  (100%) 
Associate Degree 
  22  (48%) 
  24  (52%) 
  46  (100%) 
Bachelor’s Degree 
  21  (46%) 
  25  (54%) 
  46  (100%) 
Master’s Degree + 
    5  (83%) 
    1  (17%) 
    6  (100%) 
Total 
  71  (41%) 
103  (59%) 
174  (100%) 
Chi Squared = .025 
 
 
3 - 31
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


The mean age of officers making stops after forming suspicion is 34.5 years, significantly 
older than the mean of officers forming suspicion but not making a stop (31.3) (see Table 
12e).  
Table 12e.  Breakdown of Officer’s Age on Decision to Stop the Vehicle. 
 
 
N 
Mean 
Standard Deviation 
Did Not Stop Vehicle 
  70 
31.3 
4.48 
Stopped Vehicle 
102 
34.5 
8.02 
Total 
172 
33.2 
6.97 
Significance Level = .003 
 
Factors Associated with the Results of Stops 
 
Table 13 presents the results of correlation analyses performed on a number of 
variables (e.g. characteristics of the area, time of day, characteristics of suspects and 
officers, and reasons for becoming suspicious) that may have an impact on the results of a 
stop (e.g. suspect resisted, suspect frisked, force was used, vehicle searched, suspect 
issued a warning, suspect issued a ticket, and suspect arrested).  These analyses revealed 
that many of these variables were related to specific stop outcomes. 
 
Characteristics of the Area 
 
Characteristics of the area did not affect most of the stop outcomes, but did have 
an impact on whether or not the suspect was frisked.  Suspects were more likely to be 
frisked if the area was private and when the area was residential (see Table 13a).  In 
private locations, 67% of the stops resulted in the suspect being patted down compared to 
only 22% of the suspects receiving similar treatment in public locations. 
Table 13a.  Breakdown of Private/Public Location on “Stop Resulted in a Patdown.” 
 
 
No Patdown 
Patdown 
Total 
Private Location 
    2  (33%) 
  4  (67%) 
    6  (100%) 
Public Location 
  76  (78%) 
21  (22%) 
  97  (100%) 
Total 
  78  (76%) 
25  (24%) 
103  (100%) 
Chi Squared = .030 
 
3 - 32
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Further, 37% of the suspects stopped in residential areas were frisked, while only 12% of 
those stopped in commercial areas were patted down (see Table 13b).  There were too 
few incidents in secluded and “other” areas to give a reliable percentage.   
 Table 13b.  Breakdown of the Type of Area Observed on “Stop Resulted in a 
Patdown.” 
 
 
No Patdown 
Patdown 
Total 
Residential 
  26  (63%) 
15  (37%) 
  41  (100%) 
Commercial 
  45  (88%) 
  6  (12%) 
  51  (100%) 
Secluded 
    1  (33%) 
  2  (67%) 
    3  (100%) 
Other 
    6  (75%) 
  2  (25%) 
    8  (100%) 
Total 
  78  (76%) 
25  (24%) 
103  (100%) 
Chi Squared = .014 
 
Finally, suspects stopped in commercial areas were slightly more likely to be issued a 
ticket (45%) than suspects stopped in residential areas (25%) (see Table 13c). 
Table 13c.  Breakdown of the Type of Area Observed on “Officer Issued a Ticket.” 
 
 
No Ticket 
Ticket 
Total 
Residential 
  30  (75%) 
10  (25%) 
  40  (100%) 
Commercial 
  28  (55%) 
23  (45%) 
  51  (100%) 
Secluded 
    3  (100%) 
----- 
    3  (100%) 
Other 
    5  (63%) 
  3  (37%) 
    8  (100%) 
Total 
  66  (65%) 
36  (35%) 
102  (100%) 
Chi Squared = .080 
 
There were two characteristics of areas that did not make a difference on any of the stop 
results: the racial makeup of the area and areas the officer thought were “trouble spots.”  
Also, neither of the time measures affected stop outcomes: stops made after dark and 
stops on weekend nights. 
 
Suspect Characteristics   
 
In terms of suspect characteristics, some were significantly correlated with the 
likelihood of certain outcomes, but not others.  Only one suspect characteristic was not 
related to any of the seven outcome variables: race.  This indicates that all measured 
 
3 - 33
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


outcomes of stops were not affected by the race of the suspect.  Gender was related to the 
likelihood of being frisked and receiving a ticket.  Thirty-two percent of the male 
suspects were frisked, while only 6% of female suspects were patted down, resulting in a 
five times greater likelihood of males being frisked (see Table 13d). 
 
Table 13d.  Breakdown of Driver’s Gender on “Stop Resulted in a Patdown.” 
 
 
No Patdown 
Patdown 
Total 
Males 
  48  (68%) 
23  (32%) 
  71  (100%) 
Females 
  30  (94%) 
  2  (6%) 
  32  (100%) 
Total 
  78  (76%) 
25  (24%) 
103  (100%) 
Chi Squared = .003 
 
 
However, the figures in Table 13e indicate that females who were stopped were nearly 
twice as likely as males to be issued a traffic ticket (53% versus 27%).    
 
Table 13e.  Breakdown of Suspect’s Gender on “Officer Issued a Ticket.” 
 
 
No Ticket 
Ticket 
Total 
Males 
  51  (73%) 
19  (27%) 
  70  (100%) 
Females 
  15  (47%) 
17  (53%) 
  32  (100%) 
Total 
  66  (65%) 
36  (35%) 
102  (100%) 
Chi Squared = .011 
 
 
Age was related to the likelihood of being frisked and the vehicle being searched.  
Younger persons were significantly more likely to be frisked or have their vehicle 
searched than older individuals. The average age of drivers who were patted down is 25 
years, compared to an average age of 35 years for drivers not patted down (see Table 
13f).   
  
 
 
 
3 - 34
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Table 13f.  Breakdown of Driver’s Age on “Stop Resulted in a Patdown.” 
 
 
N 
Mean 
Standard Deviation 
No Patdown 
  59 
34.5 
14.46 
Patdown 
  19 
25.2 
11.65 
Total 
  78 
32.2 
14.34 
Significance Level = .012 
 
There is a similar pattern for the searching of vehicles.  The average age of drivers who 
had their vehicles searched is 22 years, while drivers who did not have their vehicles 
searched averaged 34 years of age (see Table 13g). 
 
Table 13g.  Breakdown of Driver’s Age on “Officer Searched Vehicle.” 
 
 
N 
Mean 
Standard Deviation 
No Search 
  70 
33.5 
14.62 
Search 
    8 
21.5 
  2.73 
Total 
  78 
32.2 
14.34 
Significance Level = .024 
 
 
The perceived social class of the suspect was related to only one outcome 
variable, but the one which is the most severe: being arrested.  Stopped suspects 
perceived by the officer to be lower class were arrested 25% of the time, while suspects 
perceived to be middle class were arrested only 6% of the time (see Table 13h).  Only 
four suspects were perceived to be in the upper class, but none of them was arrested. 
 
Table 13h.  Breakdown of Suspect’s Social Class on “Officer Arrested Suspect.” 
 
 
No Arrest 
Arrest 
Total 
Perceived as Low 
  21  (75%) 
  7  (25%) 
  28  (100%) 
Perceived as Middle 
  51  (94%) 
  3  (6%) 
  54  (100%) 
Perceived as High 
    4 (100%) 
---- 
    4  (100%) 
Total 
  76  (88%) 
10  (12%) 
  86  (100%) 
Chi Squared =.026. 
 
 
3 - 35
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


  
The suspect characteristic most consistently related to the results of stops was 
whether the suspect was under the influence of alcohol or drugs at the time of the stop.  
When this was the case, the suspect was significantly more likely to resist the officer, to 
be frisked, have force used against him/her, to have their vehicle searched, and to be 
arrested.  More specifically, suspects under the influence of alcohol or drugs were about 
ten times more likely to resist (33%) than suspects not under the influence (3%) (see 
Table 13i).    
 
Table 13i.  Breakdown of “Suspect Under the Influence of Alcohol/Drugs” on 
“Suspect Resisted.” 
 
 
No Resistance 
Suspect Resisted 
Total 
Not Under the Influence 
  83  (97%) 
  3  (3%) 
86  (100%) 
Under the Influence 
    8  (67%) 
  4  (33%) 
12  (100%) 
Total 
  91  (93%) 
  7  (7%) 
98  (100%) 
Chi Squared = .004 
 
Further, suspects under the influence were about five times more likely to be patted down 
(75%) than other suspects (15%) (see Table 13j), and  more than twelve times (25%) 
more likely to have force used against them during the encounter with the police than 
suspects not under the influence (2%) (see Table 13k). 
 
Table 13j.  Breakdown of “Suspect Under the Influence of Alcohol/Drugs” on “Stop 
Resulted in a Patdown.” 
 
 
No Patdown 
Patdown 
Total 
Not Under the Influence 
  73  (85%) 
13  (15%) 
86  (100%) 
Under the Influence 
    3  (25%) 
  9  (75%) 
12  (100%) 
Total 
  76  (78%) 
22  (22%) 
98  (100%) 
Chi Squared = .000 
 
 
 
3 - 36
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Table 13k.  Breakdown of “Suspect Under the Influence of Alcohol/Drugs” on 
“Officer Used Force.” 
 
 
No Force 
Force 
Total 
Not Under the Influence 
  84  (98%) 
  2  (2%) 
86  (100%) 
Under the Influence 
    9  (75%) 
  3  (25%) 
12  (100%) 
Total 
  91  (95%) 
  5  (5%) 
98  (100%) 
Chi Squared = .012 
 
Police officers decided to search the vehicles of 50% of the suspects under the influence 
of alcohol or drugs, but only 5% of the vehicles of other suspects, a ten times greater 
likelihood. 
 
Table 13l.  Breakdown of “Suspect Under the Influence of Alcohol/Drugs” on 
“Officer Searched Vehicle.” 
 
 
No Search 
Search 
Total 
Not Under the Influence 
  82  (95%) 
  4  (5%) 
86  (100%) 
Under the Influence 
    6  (50%) 
  6  (50%) 
12  (100%) 
Total 
  88  (90%) 
10  (10%) 
98  (100%) 
Chi Squared = .000 
 
 
Finally, the suspects under the influence of alcohol or drugs were fourteen times more 
likely to be arrested (42%) than suspects not under the influence ( 3%) (see Table 13m).   
 
Table 13m.  Breakdown of “Suspect Under the Influence of Alcohol/Drugs” on 
“Officer Arrested Suspect.” 
 
 
No Arrest 
Arrest 
Total 
Not Under the Influence 
  83  (97%) 
  3  (3%) 
86  (100%) 
Under the Influence 
   7   (58%) 
  5  (42%) 
12  (100%) 
Total 
  90  (92%) 
  8  (8%) 
98  (100%) 
Chi Squared = .001 
 
 
 
 
3 - 37
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Reasons for Forming Suspicion 
With regard to the process of forming a suspicion, when the reason for forming 
suspicion was behavior (versus appearance, time and place, or information), suspects 
were significantly less likely to resist, have force used against them, and be frisked.  On 
the other hand, they were significantly more likely to be issued a ticket.  More 
specifically, only 2% of the suspects who were selected by the officer for observation 
because of their behavior ended up resisting the officer (See Table 13n).  Compare this 
figure to the 45% of suspects who resisted when the officer began observing them 
because of specific information received by the officer about the situation.  There were 
too few cases involving suspicion that was based on appearance or time and place to 
allow valid comparisons with these categories.   
 
Table 13n.  Breakdown of the Reasons the Officer Formed Suspicion on “Suspect 
Resisted.” 
 
 
No Resistance 
Resistance 
Total 
Appearance 
    3  (100%) 
---- 
    3  (100%) 
Behavior 
  81  (98%) 
  2  (2%) 
  83  (100%) 
Time and Place 
    5  (100%) 
---- 
    5  (100%) 
Specific Information 
    6  (55%) 
  5  (45%) 
  11  (100%) 
Total 
  95  (93%) 
  7  (7%) 
102  (100%) 
Chi Squared = .000 
 
 
Patdowns were more likely to result when the officer had specific information  
(e.g. BOLO) that led them to become suspicious (82%) when compared to all the other 
reasons for forming suspicion (see Table 13o).  Suspicions formed strictly on the 
behavior of the suspects only resulted in patdowns 16% of the time.   
 
 
 
 
3 - 38
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Table 13o.  Breakdown of the Reasons the Officer Formed Suspicion on “Stop 
Resulted in a Patdown.” 
 
 
No Patdown 
Patdown 
Total 
Appearance 
    2  (67%) 
  1  (33%) 
    3  (100%) 
Behavior 
  71  (85%) 
13  (16%) 
  84  (100%) 
Time and Place 
    3  (60%) 
  2  (40%) 
    5  (100%) 
Specific Information 
    2  (18%) 
  9  (82%) 
  11  (100%) 
Total 
  78  (76%) 
25  (24%) 
103  (100%) 
Chi Squared = .000 
 
Officer use of force occurred most of the time when officers had specific information that 
led them to become suspicious (4 out of the 5 instances of force) (see Table 13p).   
 
Table 13p.  Breakdown of the Reasons the Officer Formed Suspicion on “Officer 
Used Force.” 
 
 
No Force 
Force 
Total 
Appearance 
    3  (100%) 
---- 
    3  (100%) 
Behavior 
  82  (99%) 
  1 (1%) 
  83  (100%) 
Time and Place 
    5  (100%) 
---- 
    5  (100%) 
Specific Information 
    7 (64%) 
  4  (36%) 
  11  (100%) 
Total 
  97  (95%) 
  5  (5%) 
102  (100%) 
Chi Squared = .000 
 
Issuing tickets, on the other hand, came mostly from suspicions formed because 
of the behavior of the suspects (41%) of the time and involving 34 of the 36 instances 
where tickets were issued.   
 
Table 13q.  Breakdown of the Reasons the Officer Formed Suspicion on “Officer 
Issued a Ticket.” 
 
 
No Ticket 
Ticket 
Total 
Appearance 
    1  (33%) 
  2  (67%) 
    3  (100%) 
Behavior 
  49  (59%) 
34  (41%) 
  83  (100%) 
Time and Place 
    5  (100%) 
---- 
    5  (100%) 
Specific Information 
  11  (100%) 
---- 
  11  (100%) 
Total 
  66  (65%) 
36  (35%) 
102  (100%) 
Chi Squared = .011 
 
3 - 39
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Table 13r.  Breakdown of the Reasons the Officer Formed Suspicion on “Officer 
Arrested Suspect.” 
 
 
No Arrest 
Arrest 
Total 
Appearance 
    3  (100%) 
----- 
    3  (100%) 
Behavior 
  76  (92%) 
  7  (8%) 
  83  (100%) 
Time and Place 
    5  (100%) 
---- 
    5  (100%) 
Specific Information 
    8  (73%) 
  3  (27%) 
  11  (100%) 
Total 
  92  (90%) 
10  (10%) 
102  (100%) 
Chi Squared = .184  
 
This makes sense, since the behavior that the officer observed most often was a 
traffic violation.  When information was the basis of suspicion, suspects were 
significantly more likely to resist, have force used against them, be frisked and arrested.  
When information was the reason that officers became suspicious of an individual, the 
suspect was significantly less likely to be issued a ticket. 
Characteristics of the Officer 
In a perfect world, where all officers are perfectly trained and follow policies and 
procedures exactly as specified, we would expect officer characteristics not to be much of 
a factor in officer decision-making.   In this study, only two officer characteristics 
influenced the results of stops, and each influenced only one outcome.  The first is the 
officer’s race, which influenced the likelihood of suspects receiving a ticket.  White 
officers are significantly more likely to issue tickets than their minority counterparts.  
More specifically, out of all the stops made by White officers, 45% ended up issuing the 
suspect a ticket.  The same figure for non-White officers is 20% (see Table 13t).  
Therefore, White officers were more than twice as likely to issue tickets during their 
stops as were other officers. 
 
 
 
3 - 40
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Table 13t.  Breakdown of Officer’s Race on “Officer Issued a Ticket.” 
 
 
No Ticket 
Ticket 
Total 
Non-White 
  32  (80%) 
  8  (20%) 
  40  (100%) 
White 
  34  (55%) 
28  (45%) 
  62  (100%) 
Total 
  66  (65%) 
36  (35%) 
102  (100%) 
Chi Squared = .008 
 
 
The second officer characteristic to have an influence on the outcome of stops is 
the officer’s length of tenure in the police department.  Officers’ tenure was correlated 
with the resistance offered by suspects: officers with longer tenure are more likely to 
have a suspect offering resistance.  Specifically, officers making stops where the suspect 
resisted had an average of 9.3 years on the job, while officers on stops with no resistance 
had an average of just 3.8 years (see Table 13s).  Either the more senior officers are 
handling cases with a greater likelihood of suspect resistance (perhaps deployment) or 
they are doing something that creates more resistance from the suspects (e.g. rougher 
treatment, less patience).   
 
 
Table 13s.  Breakdown of Officer’s Tenure in Department on “Suspect Resisted.” 
 
 
N 
Mean 
Standard Deviation 
No Resistance 
  95 
3.8 
4.48 
Resistance 
    7 
9.3 
7.57 
Total 
102 
4.2 
4.90 
Significance Level = .004 
 
 
 
3 - 41
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Table 13.  Factors Associated with the Results of Stops 
 
Variable
Suspect
Resisted  
 
Suspect 
Frisked 
Force Was 
Used 
Suspect 
Searched 
Suspect 
Issued 
Warning 
Suspect 
Issued Ticket 
Suspect 
Arrested 
Characteristics of Area 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Public 
 .068 
-.246* 
 .057 
-.048 
-.027 
 .097 
 .082 
Type of Area 
     Residential  
     Commercial 
     Secluded 
     Other 
 
 .100 
-.039 
-.047 
-.079 
 
 .234* 
-.289** 
 .171 
 .005 
 
 .097 
-.045 
-.040 
-.066 
 
 .040 
-.091 
 .127 
 .017 
 
-.017 
 .022 
 .019 
-.022 
 
-.173 
 .205* 
-.129 
 .013 
 
 .005 
 -.066 
-.057 
 .149 
Predom. African-American 
 .026 
 .035 
 .126 
 .011 
-.010 
-.015 
 .050 
Trouble Spot 
 .068 
 .099 
 .070 
-.129 
 .156 
 .055 
-.033 
Characteristics of Day and Time 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dark at Time of Stop 
-.038 
 .095 
-.073 
 .003 
 .035 
-.159 
-.106 
Stop Occurred on Weekend 
-.151 
-.162 
-.126 
-.122 
 .163 
 .122 
-.183 
Characteristics of Suspect 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gender (male) 
 .184 
 .282** 
 .154 
 .164 
-.042 
-.252* 
 .152 
Race (black) 
-.067 
 .135 
-.042 
 .028 
-.042 
-.031 
-.061 
Age 
-.023 
-.282* 
 .000 
-.255* 
 
 .147 
 .060 
-.047 
Class
-.147
-.173 
-.192
-.124
.046 
-.047 
-.281**
Alcohol/Drugs 
 .380*** 
 .470*** 
 .338** 
 .491*** 
-.098 
-.084 
 .457*** 
Characteristics of Suspicion 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reason for Forming Suspicion 
       Appearance  
       Behavior 
       Time and Place 
       Information 
 
-.047 
-.368*** 
-.062 
 .531*** 
 
 .037 
-.431*** 
 .083 
 .464*** 
 
-.040 
-.358*** 
-.052 
 .507*** 
 
 .127 
-.160 
 .068 
 .084 
 
-.110 
 .134 
 .058 
-.149 
 
 .114 
 .248* 
-.168 
-.257** 
 
-.057 
-.096 
-.075 
 .204* 
Characteristics of Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gender (female) 
-.047 
-.098 
-.040 
-.060 
 .148 
-.129 
-.057 
Race (white) 
-.100 
-.095 
-.097 
-.040 
-.117 
 .257** 
-.073 
Age 
 .121 
 .080 
 .021 
 .005 
-.069 
 .188 
-.114 
Tenure 
 .283** 
 .119 
 .121  
-.082 
-.025 
 .025 
-.034 
Education (high school degree) 
 .111 
 .006 
 .041 
-.104 
.183 
 .027 
-.072 
* p < .05; ** p < .01; *** p < .001 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 - 42
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Factors Associated with Demeanor/Disrespect 
Bivariate analyses were performed in order to determine whether suspect or officer 
characteristics were correlated with the demeanor and disrespect variables.  Five demeanor 
variables were examined: (1) final suspect demeanor, (2) final officer demeanor, (3) suspect’s 
demeanor worsened over course of encounter, (4) officer’s demeanor worsened over course of 
encounter, and (5) citizen displayed disrespect to the officer.  The variable “officer showed 
disrespect to the citizen” is not included because only one officer showed disrespect to a citizen, 
making an analysis meaningless.  Results of these analyses are presented in Table 14 (below).  
Results indicated that final suspect demeanor was correlated with officer tenure.  This 
relationship was inverse; as officer tenure increased, the less likely that the suspect’s final 
demeanor would be positive.  More specifically as shown in Table 14a, suspects with a negative 
demeanor at the end of the police-citizen encounter had officers with an average of nearly eight 
years of tenure in the department.  In contrast, suspects with either neutral or positive demeanors 
at the conclusion of their encounters with the police had officers with an average of only about 
3½ years tenure in the police department.  Perhaps, more experienced officers have less patience 
with suspects, resulting in more negative suspects at the conclusion of encounters. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 - 43 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Table 14.  Factors Related to Officer/Suspect Demeanor and Disrespect 
 
 
 
Final 
Suspect 
Demeanor 
Final 
Officer 
Demeanor 
Suspect’s 
Demeanor 
Worsened 
Officer’s 
Demeanor 
Worsened 
Citizen 
Displayed 
Disrespect 
Characteristics 
of Suspect 
(n=101) 
(n=102) 
(n=103) 
(n=103) 
(n=103) 
Gender (male) 
-.115 
-.011 
-.107 
  .164** 
-.048 
Race (black) 
-.023 
-.046 
-.040 
  .096 
-.048 
Age 
  .003 
-.070 
  .180* 
  .042 
  .037 
Class 
  .149 
  .290*** 
  .004 
 -.034 
-.124 
Alcohol/Drugs 
-.036 
-.134 
  .064 
  .163* 
  .145 
Characteristics 
of Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
Gender 
(female) 
  .019 
-.045 
  .127 
  .127 
  .117 
Race (white) 
-.107 
-.046 
-.104 
  .024 
-.063 
Age 
-.145 
-.141 
  .100 
  .152 
  .094 
Tenure 
-.243*** 
  .017 
  .188** 
  .220*** 
  .241*** 
Education 
(high school 
degree) 
  .025 
-.113 
-.104 
  .084 
  .036 
* p < .12; ** p < .10; *** p < .05 
 
Table 14a.  Breakdown of Officer’s Tenure in Department on “Suspect’s Final Demeanor.” 
 
 
N 
Mean 
Standard Deviation 
Negative 
  15 
7.73 
6.71 
Neutral 
  45 
3.76 
4.66 
Positive 
  41 
3.46 
3.91 
Total 
101 
4.23 
4.92 
Significance Level = .010 
 
Final officer demeanor was positively correlated with suspect class, with a positive final 
officer demeanor more likely when the suspect was of a higher social class.  More specifically, 
only 39% of the officers ended their encounter with a positive demeanor when they judged the 
suspect to be of lower social class (see Table 14 b).  This is compared to more than 60% of 
 
3 - 44 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


officers ending their encounters with a positive demeanor when they perceive the suspect’s 
social class a middle class or higher.  
Table 14b.  Breakdown of Suspect’s Social Class on “Officer’s Final Demeanor.” 
 
 
Negative 
Neutral 
Positive 
Total 
Perceived as Low 
    5  (18%) 
12  (43%) 
11  (39%) 
  28  (100%) 
Perceived as Middle 
    1  (2%) 
20  (37%) 
33  (61%) 
  54  (100%) 
Perceived as High 
    ----- 
  1  (25%) 
  3  (75%) 
    4  (100%) 
Total 
    6  (7%) 
33  (38%) 
47  (55%) 
  86  (100%) 
Chi Squared =.053 
 
Two factors significantly increased the likelihood that suspect demeanor would worsen 
over the course of the encounter: the suspect’s age and the officer’s tenure.   Suspect demeanor 
was more likely to worsen when the suspect was older and officer had more experience on the 
force.  More Specifically, the average age of suspects is more than 8 years greater in cases in 
which the suspect’s demeanor worsened throughout the encounter (see Table 14c).   
 
Table 14c.  Breakdown of Suspect’s Age on “Suspect’s Demeanor Worsened.” 
 
 
N 
Mean 
Standard Deviation 
Did not Worsen 
  69 
31.32 
13.98 
Worsened 
    9 
39.33 
15.97 
Total 
  78 
32.24 
14.34 
Significance Level = .115 
 
Table 14d.  Breakdown of Officer’s Tenure in Department on “Suspect’s Demeanor 
Worsened.” 
 
 
N 
Mean 
Standard Deviation 
Did not Worsen 
    92 
3.93 
0.50 
Worsened 
    11 
6.91 
1.59 
Total 
  103 
4.25 
0.48 
Significance Level = .057 
 
 
3 - 45 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Officer’s tenure followed a pattern similar to the one for suspect’s age.  Specifically, in 
Table 14d, the mean officer tenure is less than four years for the cases where the suspect’s 
demeanor did not worsen and nearly seven years for cases for which the suspect’s demeanor 
worsened.  Clearly, the longer the officer has been on the force, the more likely the suspect’s 
demeanor would worsen over the course of the encounter with the police.   
Three of the officer or suspect characteristics examined significantly increased the 
likelihood that the officer’s demeanor would worsen during the encounter: the gender of the 
suspect, whether or not the suspect was high on alcohol or drugs, and the tenure of the officer 
(see Table 14).  More specifically, an officer’s demeanor was more likely to worsen when the 
suspect was a male.  For example, only 3% of the officers had worsening demeanors when the 
suspect was a female, compared to 14% when the suspect was a male (see Table 14e).  In 
addition, an officer’s demeanor was more likely to worsen over the course of the encounter when 
the suspect was intoxicated  (25%), than when the suspect was sober (9%) (see Table 14f).  
Apparently, officers were more likely to lose their patience with male suspects and suspects who 
were intoxicated. 
 
Table 14e.  Breakdown of Suspect’s Gender on “Officer’s Demeanor Worsened.” 
 
 
Not Worse 
Worsened 
Total 
Female Suspect 
  31  (97%) 
  1  (3%) 
  32  (100%) 
Male Suspect 
  61  (86%) 
10  (14%) 
  71  (100%) 
Total 
  92  (89%) 
11  (11%) 
103  (100%) 
Chi Squared = .087 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 - 46 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Table 14f.  Breakdown of Suspects Under the Influence on “Officer’s Demeanor 
Worsened.” 
 
 
Not Worse 
Worsened 
Total 
Not Under the Influence 
  78  (91%) 
  8  (9%) 
  86  (100%) 
Under the Influence 
    9  (75%) 
  3  (25%) 
  12  (100%) 
Total 
  87  (89%) 
11  (11%) 
  98  (100%) 
Chi Squared = .107 
 
 
Finally, when the officer had longer tenure in the department, it was more likely for their 
demeanor to worsen over the course of the police-citizen interaction.  Specifically, officers 
whose demeanor worsened had an average of 7.36 years on the force.  Compare this to the mean 
of 3.88 years on the force for officers whose demeanor did not worsen (see Table 14g). 
 
Table 14g.  Breakdown of Officer’s Tenure on “Officer’s Demeanor Worsened.” 
 
 
N 
Mean 
Standard Deviation 
Did not Worsen 
    92 
3.88 
  4.30 
Worsened 
    11 
7.36 
  8.12 
Total 
  103 
4.25 
  4.91 
Significance Level = .026 
 
Disrespect on the part of the citizen was more likely when the officer with whom he/she 
was interacting had greater tenure.  In Table 14h, we can see that the mean tenure of officers in 
encounters in which the citizen showed disrespect is nearly twice  (3.8 versus 7.5) that of officers 
experiencing no disrespect.   
 
Table 14h.  Breakdown of Officer’s Tenure on “Citizen Displayed Disrespect to Officer.” 
 
 
N 
Mean 
Standard Deviation 
No Disrespect 
  91 
3.82 
  4.62 
Showed Disrespect 
  12 
7.50 
  5.99 
Total 
103 
4.25 
  4.91 
Significance Level = .014 
 
 
3 - 47 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Citizen’s Demeanor and Outcome of the Stop 
 
 
Finally, we address the question of whether the citizen’s demeanor or level of respect 
shown toward the officer affected the outcome of the stop with respect to whether the officer 
gave the citizen a ticket or actually arrested the citizen.  The observer’s evaluation of the 
citizen’s initial demeanor  (positive, neutral, or negative) is not significantly related to being 
ticketed or arrested (see Table 14i).  The relationship was not significant, but showed that 
citizens who were judged as neutral by the observer received more tickets and or arrests (46%) 
than others.  That is, citizens who displayed a positive initial demeanor toward the officer, as 
judged by the observers, were less likely to receive a ticket or be arrested than citizens either 
negative or neutral toward the officer.  Since the relationship was not statistically significant, 
these differences may not hold up when replicated in similar situations.       
 
 
Table  14i.  Observer’s Evaluation of Suspect’s Initial 
Demeanor and Outcome of the Stop 
 
Citizen’s Initial  
Demeanor 
No Ticket 
or Arrest 
Ticket 
and/or 
Arrest 
Total 
Negative 
 
  8  (57%) 
  6  (43%) 
  14  (100%) 
Neutral 
 
29  (54%) 
25  (46%) 
  54  (100%) 
Positive 
 
22  (69%) 
10  (31%) 
  32  (100%) 
Total 
 
59  (59%) 
41  (41%) 
100  (100%) 
Chi Squared = .386 
 
 
 
Another measure of the citizen’s demeanor was the observer’s evaluation of whether or 
not the citizen was disrespectful or not throughout the entire police/citizen interaction. This 
measure of citizen demeanor was not significantly related to the outcome of the stop (see Table 
 
3 - 48 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


14j), but citizens who were judged disrespectful toward the officer received more tickets and 
arrests than other citizens.  Fifty-eight percent of the citizens showing disrespect received a ticket 
or were arrested by the officer while only 39% of the respectful citizens received a ticked or 
were arrested.  However, just as the earlier findings, these are not statistically significant and 
therefore may not hold up in other similar studies.   
 
 
Table  14j.  Observer’s Evaluation of Suspect’s Attitude 
and Behavior and Outcome of the Stop 
 
Citizen 
Disrespected 
Officer? 
No Ticket 
or Arrest 
Ticket 
and/or 
Arrest 
Total 
No 
 
55  (61%) 
35  (39%) 
  90  (100%) 
Yes 
 
  5  (42%) 
  7  (58%) 
  12  (100%) 
Total 
 
60  (59%) 
42  (41%) 
102  (100%) 
Chi Squared = .225 
 
 
 
Finally, our measure of the officer’s evaluation of the citizen’s demeanor was analyzed .  
Officers were asked if they thought the citizen was respectful or disrespectful toward them 
during the encounter.  Using this measure, we found a significant relationship between citizen 
demeanor and the outcome of the stop (see Table 14k).  Sixty-seven percent of the citizens 
judged by the officers as disrespectful were given a ticket or arrested compared to only 38% of 
the respectful citizens.  According to this measure, which is based on the officer’s evaluation, 
citizens being disrespectful were nearly twice as likely to be ticketed or arrested than citizens 
showing no disrespect. 
 
 
 
 
3 - 49 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


 
 
Table  14k.  Officer’s Evaluation of Suspect’s Attitude 
and Behavior and Outcome of the Stop 
 
Citizen’s Attitude 
toward the Officer 
No Ticket 
or Arrest 
Ticket 
and/or 
Arrest 
Total 
Disrespectful 
 
  4  (33%) 
  8  (67%) 
  12  (100%) 
Respectful 
 
56  (62%) 
34  (38%) 
  90  (100%) 
Total 
 
60  (59%) 
42  (41%) 
102  (100%) 
Chi Squared = .056 
 
 
 
Measuring citizen demeanor is a difficult task that can be affected by the type of measure, 
when the behavior is observed and who assesses the behavior.  Although some of our data do not 
permit definitive statements, they do show the complexity of the issue and the need for further 
research. In this case, it was the officer’s evaluation of the citizen’s demeanor throughout the 
encounter that significantly affected the outcome of the stop. 
 
Description of Officers  
 
In the Savannah study, forty-nine officers were observed over the course of 132 rides.  
Most officers in this study were male.  White/Caucasian officers were the most common 
racial/ethnic group of officers, followed by African-American officers.  The average age of 
officers in this study was 35 years old.  Officers had an average of 5.2 years on the police force.  
Nearly half of officers had a high school diploma as their highest level of education; the 
remaining officers had either an associate's degree or a bachelor's degree.  More detailed 
information is provided in Tables 15-19 (below). 
 
 
3 - 50 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


4.1 
Table 15.  Officer Gender 
 
 
N 
 
% 
Male 
44 
89.8 
Female 
5 
10.2 
Total 
49 
100.0 
 
 
Table 16.  Officer Race 
 
N 
 
% 
Anglo 
28 
57.1 
African-American 
18 
36.7 
Other 
3 
6.1 
Total 
 
49 
100.0 
 
 
 
Table 17.  Officer Years of Service 
 
N 
 
Minimum 
 
Maximum
 
Mean 
Std. 
Deviation
Tenure 
49 
1.00 
21.00 
5.24 
4.87 
 
Table 18.  Officer Age 
 
N 
 
Minimum 
 
Maximum
 
Mean 
Std. 
Deviation
Age 
49 
22.00 
52.00 
34.96 
7.49 
 
 
 
Table 19.  Officer Education 
  
 
N 
 
% 
H.S. diploma 
23 
46.9 
Associate degree 
14 
28.6 
Bachelor's degree 
10 
20.4 
Master’s degree 
2 
Total 
49 
100.0 
 
After officers were observed for a shift, each observer filled out Section B of the Officer 
Form (see Appendix A).  These data were generated by each observer recording his/her overall 
assessment of the officer's style of decision-making, or more specifically, the factors that the 
 
3 - 51 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


officer took into account when forming suspicion of the target. It should be noted that this was an 
overall assessment of the officer, and not an assessment of the officer with regard to any one 
particular incident.     
 
Figure 18 shows the observers' perceptions of the importance of appearance in officer 
decision-making.  “Appearance,” referring to things such as distinctive dress, indicators of class, 
and the like, appeared to be an important factor to the majority of officers, with most officers 
rating appearance of a medium priority (44.2%; n = 19) rather than high priority (18.6%; n = 8). 
Observers' explanations of these ratings were qualitatively analyzed to provide some 
insight into the reasons officers considered appearance important or unimportant.  The following 
are some explanations given by officers who rated appearance as a medium or high priority: 
• Despite ethnicity, if someone is wearing all black clothing, this is an indication that they 
are up to no good 
• Officer is well acquainted with people and places in his beat; he can tell based on 
appearance who "doesn't belong" 
• Person who looks "different" raises suspicion (e.g., white person in black neighborhood) 
 
 
In contrast, officers who rated appearance to be of low priority typically provided one of two 
explanations: (1) that most people encountered looked similar enough to render appearance 
meaningless as a factor that might arouse suspicion [e.g., “Everyone in my beat (residential and 
predominantly black) wears the same ‘uniform of the day’—a white muscle shirt with black 
pants.”] or (2) that they did their best not to judge people based on their appearance (e.g., “I do 
not make any assumptions based on a person's appearance; I treat everyone equally until after a 
stop.”). 
 
 
 
 
3 - 52 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Figure 18.  Importance of Appearance in Forming Suspicion 
37.2%
44.2%
18.6%
0.0%
25.0%
50.0%
75.0%
100.0%
High priority
Medium priority
Low priority
 
Figure 19 (below) depicts the relative influence of behavior in the formulation of 
suspicion by the police officers in this study.  Most officers described behavior as playing a 
significant role in their decision-making.  Nearly half of officers (48.8%; n = 21) reported that 
behavior was a high priority and an additional one-third (27.9%; n = 12) stated that behavior was 
a medium priority in forming suspicion.  Again, observers' explanations of their ratings were 
qualitatively analyzed to provide some insight into the importance of behavior in forming 
suspicion.  The following are examples of comments provided by officers who treated behavior 
as being of medium or high importance in forming suspicion:  
• Police officer stated that he watches out for the “felony stare” (i.e., getting nervous when 
they see a police car, making every effort to avoid the police). 
• Police officer said that behavior is very important to him because he can tell when a 
person is lying to him.  He can tell this by the way they act. 
• Police officer said he can tell if someone has done something just by how they respond to 
him. 
• “It is very important to tell if they are fidgeting.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 - 53 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Figure 19.  Importance of Behavior in Forming Suspicion 
23.3%
27.9%
48.8%
0.0%
25.0%
50.0%
75.0%
100.0%
High priority
Medium priority
Low priority
 
 
Analyses conducted on the importance of time and place in officer decision-making (see 
Figure 20) revealed that, in a little over one-quarter of cases, time and place were irrelevant in 
whether officers formed suspicion (26.2%; n = 11).  An examination of narrative descriptions of 
the reasons observers gave for their ratings showed that when observers rated time and place 
unimportant, it was usually because officers were not observed forming suspicion or making 
stops, or because the officers appeared to be driven solely by the behavior of individuals. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 - 54 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Figure 20.  Importance of Time and Place in Forming Suspicion 
26.2%
38.1%
35.7%
0.0%
25.0%
50.0%
75.0%
100.0%
High priority
Medium priority
Low priority
 
 
On the other hand, time and place was either of medium (38.1%; n = 16) or high (35.7%; 
n = 15) priority for the majority of officers observed in this study.  Most often, this was related to 
people/vehicle(s) being out of place given a particular location at a given time.  For instance, 
officers often relied on their knowledge of a particular location (e.g., park, warehouse district) 
and what activities should or should not be expected there after a particular time (e.g., after 
hours) to form suspicion.  For example: 
• Certain places have higher incidence of crimes; people who look out of place (e.g., white 
person in black neighborhood) get stopped. 
• Pays close attention at night because people can use the dark to their advantage to aid 
them committing crimes. 
• People who look out of place are very suspicious, especially white people in a black 
neighborhood. 
• Persons who were where they shouldn't be (e.g., juveniles on a school playground at 
night) got stopped 
 
Observers were also asked to rank the importance that information might play in 
determining the decision-making of police officers.  As shown in Figure 21, a small number 
 
3 - 55 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


(14.6%; n = 6) of observers rated that information rarely played a role in whether officers formed 
suspicion.  In contrast, observers rated the great majority of officers as treating information as a 
high priority. 
 
Figure 21.  Importance of Information in Forming Suspicion 
14.6%
14.6%
70.7%
0.0%
25.0%
50.0%
75.0%
100.0%
High priority
Medium priority
Low priority
 
 
Observers were instructed to inquire as to whether officers relied on any “working rules” 
that guided officers’ decision-making or behavior during a shift.  Approximately three-fourths 
(77.1%; n =37) of the officers observed in this study reported using some type of working rule(s) 
that help them identify suspicious persons or determine how to handle a particular situation.  
Below we provide some examples of the working rules used by the officers in this study: 
• This police officer stated he liked to go after stolen vehicles because “you can get guns, 
drugs, and robbery suspects from these stops.” 
• Police officers stops drivers based on whether they broke the law or not.  He decides 
whether to give a warning or a ticket based on the suspect's demeanor, although he likes 
to avoid giving tickets or making arrests. 
• This officer stated that he would issue a warning to the first African-American person he 
stopped, and also to the first Caucasian he stopped (then he would begin to ticket).  He 
did this so no one could say he was unfair to any race.  He stressed fairness. 
 
3 - 56 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


• Officer said he takes the demeanor of individual into account when deciding what to do 
to him/her. 
 
Multivariate Analysis of Officer’s Decision-making2 
One final analysis was conducted to examine the relative strength of determinants of 
officers’ decision making with regard to forming suspicions and making traffic stops.  This 
required combining all the independent variables into a single analysis to examine the relative 
weight of each, when controlling for the effects of all of the other variables.  We examined the 
role that officer and suspect demographics, characteristics of the area, and the mode of 
transportation played in officers making these decisions.  For example, an officer’s view of a 
suspect would vary if a civilian were driving a car compared to walking.  Specifically, we assess 
whether the officer’s race, level of education, and tenure on the police force affected their 
reasons for forming suspicion.  Additionally, we assess the relationship between the type of 
suspicion, the suspect’s race, the racial makeup of the neighborhood, and the perception of the 
neighborhood’s level of dangerousness, the type of action in which a suspect was engaged, and 
their mode of transportation.   
Dependent Variables 
 
There were 174 situations in which officers formed suspicion.  For the purposes of this 
analysis we are interested in examining the predictors of the type of suspicion a police officer 
formed and whether the suspicion resulted in a stop.  Therefore, we divided suspicion into 
behavioral and non-behavioral categories.  The interest in this analysis of suspicions is to explain 
2 We would like to thank Brian Renner for his useful comments.  As a result, we have modified the discussion of the 
missing data that may also be relevant for explaining the multivariate analysis.  We do not include an overall model 
chi-square because the pseudo R2 is based on the chi-square fit.  The value the pseudo R2 in the present model of 
non-behavioral suspicion is quite large (.487) and statistically significant.  In addition, there is no statistical reason 
to eliminate coefficients that that have values of 1 in the confidence interval.  Collinearity diagnostics on the current 
model indicate that collinearity was not a problem with the analysis.  In addition, we did not conduct a reverse 
stepwise logistic regression analysis because we wanted to examine the independent effect of each variable. 
 
 
                                                          
 
3 - 57 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


the different criteria for making decisions to stop citizens when these decisions are based on  
non-behavioral and behavioral criteria. Behavioral criteria include specific actions by citizens 
that are either illegal or interpreted by the officer as objectively suspicious. One example of a 
behavioral criterion for suspicion would be observing the commission of a traffic offense.  
Obviously, not all police officers stop all traffic violators, but an observed traffic violation 
clearly justifies an officer making a stop.  Non-behavioral criteria included officers’ concern 
about appearance, time and place, and descriptive information provided to the officer.  These 
suspicions based on non-behavioral criteria do not necessarily provide a clear justification for a 
stop. Therefore, stops based on non-behavioral criteria are especially interesting to understand 
because they provide a stronger basis for understanding the social and psychological dynamics 
behind the forming of suspicion. These non-behavioral suspicions were coded to equal 1.  Stops 
of citizens were dummy coded to equal 1 and 0 if the citizen were not stopped.  Because the 
dependent variables in this study are dichotomous we model the process using logistic 
regression.   
Independent Variables 
As noted above, the research literature suggests that demographic characteristics of 
officers are important factors in police decision-making.  Therefore, we include measures of the 
race, level of education, and number of years in-service for each observed officer.  Race of the 
officer was dummy coded to equal 1 if the officer was White.  Education of officers was coded 
into the dummy variable for which 1 equals some level of college education (e.g., associates, 
bachelors, or masters degree).   The number of years the officer had worked for the police 
department was included as a continuous variable.  Research also suggests that racial 
characteristics of suspects and the racial composition of an area police are patrolling are 
 
3 - 58 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


important ingredients in their decision-making process.  We included a dummy measure of race 
of suspect that equals 1 if the civilian were Black.  In terms of neighborhood composition, we 
included a dummy variable that equals 1 if the neighborhood were classified as predominately 
Black. These neighborhood racial categories were based upon the police officers’ perceptions of 
the area they were patrolling.  We also included a measure of the officers’ perception of the 
neighborhood that indicated whether the area appeared to be “troubled.”  Troubled 
neighborhoods were coded to equal 1.  Because the mode of transportation may influence 
whether officers can see suspects and/or form a suspicion, we included a dummy variable coded 
to equal 1 if the suspect were driving an automobile.  Finally, because officers may form 
suspicion or perform stops based on suspect behavior, we include a measure of whether the 
suspect committed a traffic offense.  Cases involving traffic offenses were dummy coded to 
equal 1. The purpose of this variable is to allow us to select out cases for which suspicion was 
formed for non-behavioral reasons.  There were additional variables that were collected in this 
study that would be germane to include in the analysis, such as distinctive dress, vehicle type, 
vehicle condition, and BOLO.  Unfortunately, there were too much missing data on these factors 
to include them in the multivariate analysis.  
 
Results of the Multivariate Analyses 
 
Table 20 includes the descriptive statistics for the dependent and explanatory variables of 
this sub-sample.  Thirty-four percent (N=59) of the observations involved a non-behavioral 
suspicion.  Stops of suspicious persons were coded to equal 1.  Fifty-nine percent (N=103) of the 
suspicions recorded involved stopping the suspect.   Fifty-six percent of officers were white.  
Approximately 29 percent of the officers earned at least a bachelor’s degree.  On average, police 
 
3 - 59 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


officers have 4.2 years of experience on the force.  In approximately 41 percent of cases, the 
officers indicated that the area was ‘troubled.’  Seventy-one percent of suspects were Black.  In 
forty-seven percent (N=82) of suspicions, the suspect committed a traffic offense.  Seventy 
percent of suspects were driving a car.  Fifty-seven percent of the suspicions were formed in 
predominately Black neighborhoods.   Two separate logistic regression models were estimated to 
examine the relationship between the explanatory variables, non-behavioral suspicions and stops. 
Table 20.  Descriptive Statistics of Variables 
Variable 
Mean 
SD 
Min 
Max 
Non-behavioral suspicion  
.339 
.474         
0           
1   
Stops of citizens  
.591  
.492          
0 
1   
Traffic offense     
.471 
.500           
0 
1 
Black citizen  
.709   
.455   
0 
1 
White officer     
.563   
.497           
0 
1 
College education of officer  
.298  
.459  
0 
1 
Suspect in car  
.70 
.459          
0 
1 
Troubled neighborhood      
.405    
.492           
0 
1 
Black neighborhood  
.567    
.496          
0 
1 
Officers years in service  
4.224   
4.233               
1 
21 
 
 
The results from the logistic regression models are displayed on Table 21.  The results 
indicate that suspect and officer demographic variables play an important role in forming non-
behavioral suspicion.  Officers are significantly more likely to form a non-behavioral suspicion 
when the suspect is Black (b=1.49; p<.05).  The odds of a non-behavioral suspicion being 
 
3 - 60 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


formed were 4.4 times greater if the suspect were Black. There was no relationship between the 
race of the officer and the likelihood of forming a non-behavioral suspicion.  The longer the 
officers had been on the police force the more likely they were to form non-behavioral 
suspicions (b=.100; p<.10).  If a suspect were in a car, it is more likely that a police officer 
would form a non-behavioral suspicion (b=2.08; p<.05).  That is, when a citizen is in a car, 
officers were 8.0 times as likely to form a non-behavioral suspicion.  In contrast, if a suspect 
were observed committing a traffic offense (behavior), then suspicion was significantly less 
likely to be formed for non-behavioral reasons (b=-5.40; p<.05).  The racial composition of the 
neighborhood and the perception of it being troubled had no influence on forming non-
behavioral suspicions.   These results suggest that suspect race and method of transportation play 
an important role in the types of suspicion that police officers form.  Importantly, however, these 
data do not allow us to examine a number of factors that may be related the effect of citizen race 
on non-behavioral suspicion, such as wearing gang colors or extreme tinting on vehicle 
windows.  
  Table  21.  Predictors of Non-Behavioral Suspicions 
Variable 
Odds Ratio
Z –value 
95% Confidence Interval 
 Traffic offense     
.004         
5.627    
.0044  -- .004      
Black citizen  
4.447 
2.134    
1.129 -- 17.516 
White officer     
.418 
-1.457    
.129 -- 1.351 
College education of officer  
1.992 
1.138    
.607 --  6.529 
Suspect in car  
8.073 
2.999    
2.061 -- 31.613 
Troubled neighborhood      
1.090 
.141    
.324 -- 3.664 
Black neighborhood  
.711     
-.543    
.208 -- 2.427 
 
3 - 61 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Officers years in service  
1.112 
1.670    
.981 -- 1.261 
Pseudo R2 
.487 
 
 
 
To provide a more meaningful interpretation of the results a series of predicted probabilities were 
calculated for the average case.  For example, for the average case the probability of non-
behavioral suspicion was .18.  If a suspect was Black and an officer was white then the 
probability of a non-behavioral suspicion was .19.  If a suspect and officer were Black the 
probability of a non-behavioral suspicion increased to .36 (see Figure 22).  The probability of a 
non-behavioral suspicion was only .05 if the officer and suspect were white.  These findings 
clearly illustrate that non-behavioral suspicions are most common when a suspect and an officer 
are both Black, and least common when an officer and suspect are white.   
Figure 22.  Probability of Non-Behavioral Suspicions: By Office and 
Suspect Race
0.192
0.363
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
White
Officer/Black
Suspect
Black
Officer/Black
Suspect
Percent
 
 
To see if the reasons for types of suspicion formed are the same as those for stops, we 
include the same set of predictors in the model for stops.  The results from the model are 
 
3 - 62 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


displayed in Table 22.  In contrast to the predictors of the type of suspicion, suspect and officer 
demographics play no role in the reasons for stopping suspicious persons.  In fact, the only 
variable that significantly predicts stopping suspicious persons is if someone committed a traffic 
offense (b=2.35; p<.05), a behavior that can always justify a stop.  Predictably, the risk of being 
stopped was 10.5 times more likely if the suspect committed a traffic offense.   
Table 22.  Predictors of Citizen Stops 
Variable 
Odds Ratio
Z –value 
95% Confidence Interval 
 Traffic offense     
10.551       
4.342 
3.642 -- 30.563 
Black citizen  
.919 
-.187 
.379 -- 2.226 
White officer     
1.269 
.544 
.537 -- 2.995 
College education of officer  
.692 
-.804 
.282 --1.696 
Suspect in car  
.503 
-1.324 
.182 --1.390 
Troubled neighborhood      
1.531 
.938 
.628 --3.732 
Black neighborhood  
.710 
-.761 
.293 -- 1.716 
 Officers years in service  
1.023 
0.459 
.925 -- 1.133 
Pseudo R2 
.170 
 
 
 
In terms of predicted probabilities, the results indicate that the probability of being stopped was 
.87 if the suspect committed a traffic offense and only .39 if no traffic offense had been 
committed (see Figure 23).  These findings clearly illustrate that the factors that lead to forming 
a non-behavioral suspicion is different from that which leads police officers to stop suspicious 
persons.  In fact, it appears that officers often form suspicions of persons for factors that do not 
result in actual stopping and questioning citizens.   
 
3 - 63 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Figure 23.  Probability of Stops: By Traffic Offense
0.873
0.665
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Traffic
No Traffic
Percent
 
Reasons for Forming Suspicion 
 
Using the results from the logistic regression models that predicted suspicions, we turn to 
an examination of the criteria for the officers’ decisions of non-behavioral suspicion.  We 
examine the predicted probabilities from the logistic regression model of non-behavioral 
suspicion.  We examine the cases where the probability of non-behavioral suspicion ranked in 
the 90th percentile or above. In other words, these are the cases where there was a 90% or greater 
chance that the officer formed a non-behavioral suspicion. There were a total of 13 cases that 
met this criterion.  The narrative descriptions of the reasons that officers formed suspicions in 
these cases are informative.  For example, in one case the officer formed suspicion because the 
suspect was driving a motor vehicle that fit the description of a “G-ride” – heavily tinted 
windows, custom rims, and a flashy paint job.  Four out of these thirteen cases involved vehicles 
that matched a BOLO (be on the lookout) call.  One case involved a suspect who was in the 
vicinity of a robbery and shooting that had occurred recently.  Two cases involved suspects who 
 
3 - 64 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


appeared to act nervous when officers pulled next to their cars.  Another case involved a woman 
hiding in the “shadows of a known prostitution area.”  The narrative descriptions of cases 
indicate that the probability of non-behavioral suspicion was greatly influenced by officers 
having pre-existing information on suspects or events where civilians were in areas of known 
criminal activity, or where civilians acted nervous when the police approached.   
Reasons for Stopping Suspects 
Similar to the previous analysis, we examined the descriptions of the officers' rational for 
stops for cases where the predicted probability of stopping a citizen ranked in the 90th percentile 
or above.  In other words, these were cases based on the logistic regression model that had the 
highest probability of being stopped by the police.  There were a total of 10 cases that met this 
criterion.  The narrative descriptions of these cases show that “traffic offenses” were the 
predominate reason that officers stopped citizens.  Eight out of the 10 cases involved stops based 
on traffic offenses.  The two exceptions involved a case where a citizen was stopped because the 
citizen matched a description of a robbery suspect and a case where a citizen was "hanging 
around a locked trailer in a parking lot."  Three cases involved citizens who were stopped 
because of speeding.  The other cases involved running red lights, stop signs, and expired or 
altered vehicle tags.  The narrative descriptions of these cases indicate that the probability of 
stopping a citizen was greatly influenced by officers observing citizens committing traffic related 
offenses.  Importantly, these narrative descriptions indicate further evidence that the reasons for 
non-behavioral suspicion differ from those that cause the police to stop citizens.   
 
 
 
 
3 - 65 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


How Citizens View Their Interactions with the Police 
 
In addition to the coded information our interviewers obtained from observing the 
interactions between officers and citizens and questioning officers specifically, this study also 
attempted to contact citizens to ask them about their perceptions of their interaction with the 
police.  This was an attempt to get the citizen’s point of view and to allow us to determine how 
many encounters resulted in inconsistent versions when comparing police and citizens points of 
view.  Also, it is important to determine what citizens are thinking and why they engaged in the 
behavior they did during the police/citizen interaction and how they interpreted the officer’s 
behavior.   
 
The police officers were instructed to ask the citizens at the conclusion of their 
interaction if they were willing to talk directly to an observer.  If the citizen agreed, the observer 
would ask the citizen to give the interviewer their phone number so the interviewer could contact 
them at a later time to ask them some questions about their interaction with the officer.  Although 
a majority of citizens agreed to participate in this phase of the study, observers were only able to 
complete 15 interviews.  A significant number of citizens who were asked to participate refused 
to give out their phone number to the interviewer, others gave the interviewer incorrect or non-
working phone numbers.  Still others refused to talk with the interviewers when they called.  
Many citizens thought the observers were lawyers, able to help them with their case.  When they 
found out the observers were interested in asking them about their impressions of the interaction 
with the police officer, and not able to help them, they refused to cooperate further. As a result, 
we have a small and suspect sample of respondents for this phase of the study.  This sampling 
problem allows us only to draw a few general conclusions from the data we obtained.  
 
3 - 66 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Unfortunately, this approach was unsuccessful in obtaining what had the potential to be very 
important information from the citizens’ perspective about their interactions with the police. 
 
In general these respondents had favorable views of their interactions with the Savannah 
police officers. Out of the 15 respondents only 1 indicated that the officer’s demeanor was “rude 
and defensive.”  Fourteen out of the fifteen respondents indicated that the officers demeanor was 
“professional,” “friendly,” and “straightforward.”  In general, these results suggest from a small 
and self-selected group of citizens, that the impressions of their interaction with the police were 
positive in nature.  Because of the low response rate of this survey, however, it is unclear 
whether the majority of citizens, who interacted with the police, shared the same positive view.   
 
 
3 - 67 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Chapter 3 Appendix A 
Precinct-Level Analyses 
 
In this appendix, the results are presented for each of the four precincts of the 
Savannah Police Department.  These findings must be understood within the context of 
the features of the areas under examination. Results are presented in the same order as the 
department-wide findings.   
 
Description of Suspicion 
 
Figure A-1.  Average Number of Times Suspicion Was Formed per Tour by 
Precinct 
 
1.33
1.44
1.37
1.09
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
Precinct 1
Precinct 2
Precinct 3
Precinct 4
 
In Precinct 1, officers form suspicion between 0 and 7 times per shift, with an 
average of 1.33 suspicions formed per tour.  In Precinct 2, the range of suspicions formed 
per tour was 0-4 and the average number of suspicions formed was 1.44.  In Precinct 3, 
the range was also 0-4, with a slightly higher average number of suspicions form per tour 
(1.37).  Finally, the average number of suspicions form per tour was lowest in Precinct 4, 
 
3 App. 1 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


with officers forming suspicion an average of 1.09 times per tour. Officers form 
suspicion between 0 and 3 times per tour in this precinct. 
While there was variation among the precincts in the average number of times a 
suspicion was formed per tour, these differences were not significantly different. 
Characteristics of the Area in Which Suspicion Was Formed 
Table A-1.  Type of Area in which Suspicion Was Formed 
 
Precinct 1 
Precinct 2 
Precinct 3 
Precinct 4 
N 
% 
N 
% 
N 
% 
N 
% 
Residential 
11 
30.6 
30 
56.6 
38 
61.3 
10 
43.5 
Commercial 
23 
63.9 
17 
32.1 
22 
35.5 
9 
39.1 
Secluded 
2 
5.6 
3 
5.7 
1 
1.6 
0 
0.0 
Other 
0 
0.0 
3 
5.7 
1 
1.6 
4 
17.4 
Total 
36 
100.0 
53 
100.0 
62 
100.0 
23 
100.0 
 
Crosstabular analyses reveal that officers in the various precincts were 
significantly different from one another in that officers formed suspicion in different 
types of areas (χ2 = 22.303; df = ; p. = .008).  For Precincts 2, 3, and 4, the greatest 
number of suspicions was formed in residential areas.  This contrasts with Precinct 1, 
where the majority of suspicions were formed in commercial areas. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 App. 2 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Table A-2.  Officer Indicated Area Was a Trouble Spot 
 
Precinct 1 
Precinct 2 
Precinct 3 
Precinct 4 
N 
% 
N 
% 
N 
% 
N 
% 
No 
16 
45.7 
27 
50.9 
46 
78.0 
12 
52.2 
Yes 
19 
54.3 
26 
49.1 
13 
22.0 
11 
47.8 
Total 
35 
100.0 
53 
100.0 
59 
100.0 
23 
100.0 
 
Crosstabular analyses reveal that officers in the various precincts differ in their 
opinion as to whether a suspicious stop occurred in trouble spots (χ2 = 13.222; df = 3; p. 
= .004).  While precincts 1, 2, and 4 were similar in the distribution of suspicions across 
areas considered troublesome or “normal,” Precinct 3 was significantly different from the 
others, as fewer suspicions were formed in areas officers considered trouble spots. 
Figure A-2.  Racial Makeup of Areas in Which Suspicion Was Formed 
 
69%
60%
62%
3%
2%
2%
29%
39%
36%
74%
17%
9%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
Precinct 1
Precinct 2
Precinct 3
Precinct 4
African-American
White
Mixed
 
 
3 App. 3 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


The precincts are significantly different in terms of the racial makeup of the areas 
in which suspicion was formed (χ2 = 18.640; df = 6; p. = .005).  In this case, officers in 
Precinct 4 formed far fewer suspicions in predominantly African-American areas and far 
more suspicions in white and racially mixed areas compared to officers in the other 
precincts. 
Characteristics of the Individuals about Whom Suspicion Was Formed 
Table A-3.  Suspect Gender 
 
Precinct 1 
Precinct 2 
Precinct 3 
Precinct 4 
N 
% 
N 
% 
N 
% 
N 
% 
Female 
8 
22.9 
9 
20.0 
12 
21.4 
12 
57.1 
Male 
27 
77.1 
36 
80.0 
44 
78.6 
9 
42.9 
Total 
35 
100.0 
45 
100.0 
56 
100.0 
21 
100.0 
 
The precincts are significantly different from one another in terms of the gender 
of the persons about whom they became suspicious (χ2 = 12.180; df = 3; p. = .007).  In 
Precincts 1, 2, and 3 police formed suspicion of males at far greater rates than they 
formed suspicion of females.  The majority of suspicions formed by officers in Precinct 4 
involved female suspects at a rate of almost three times greater. 
Table A-4.  Suspect Race 
Precinct 1 
Precinct 2 
Precinct 3 
Precinct 4 
N 
% 
N 
% 
N 
% 
N 
% 
Other 
16 
45.7 
10 
22.7 
8 
14.5 
11 
52.4 
African-
American 
19 
54.3 
34 
77.3 
47 
85.5 
10 
47.6 
Total 
35 
100.0 
44 
100.0 
55 
100.0 
21 
100.0 
 
3 App. 4 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


 
There are significant differences among the precincts in terms of the race of the 
persons about whom they became suspicious (χ2 = 16.735; df = 3; p. = .001).  In Precincts 
1, 2, and 3, the majority of suspicions were formed of African-American suspects. This is 
different than Precinct 4, where the majority of suspicions involved suspects of an 
“other” racial/ethnic background.   
 
Table A-5.  Suspect Class 
 
Precinct 1 
Precinct 2 
Precinct 3 
Precinct 4 
N 
% 
N 
% 
N 
% 
N 
% 
Low 
11 
42.3 
5 
29.4 
9 
30.0 
3 
23.1 
Middle 
15 
57.7 
12 
70.6 
21 
70.0 
6 
46.2 
High 
0 
0.0 
0 
0.0 
0 
0.0 
4 
30.8 
Total 
26 
100.0 
17 
100.0 
30 
100.0 
13 
100.0 
 
There are significant differences among the precincts terms of the class of the 
individuals about whom the police formed suspicion  (χ2 = 24.785; df = 6; p. = .000).  
Precinct 4 was significantly different from the others, with more suspicion formed of 
persons of higher-class status than the other three precincts. 
Table A-6.  Suspect Class Relative to Officer Class  
Precinct 1 
Precinct 2 
Precinct 3 
Precinct 4 
N 
% 
N 
% 
N 
% 
N 
% 
Lower 
8 
32.0 
5 
31.3 
8 
28.6 
3 
42.9 
Same 
16 
64.0 
11 
68.8 
19 
67.9 
3 
42.9 
 
3 App. 5 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Higher 
1 
4.0 
0 
0.0 
1 
3.6 
1 
14.3 
Total 
25 
100.0 
16 
100.0 
28 
100.0 
7 
100.0 
 
There are no significant differences in the relative class of the suspect compared 
to the officer by precinct. 
Table A-7.  Average Age of Suspect 
 
Precinct 1 
Precinct 2 
Precinct 3
Precinct 4 
Age 
34.76 
26.47 
28.52 
35.95 
 
Statistical analyses revealed no significant differences among precincts in the age 
of the individuals about whom suspicion was formed. 
Table A-8.  Suspect Was Under the Influence of Alcohol/Drugs 
 
Precinct 1 
Precinct 2 
Precinct 3 
Precinct 4 
N 
% 
N 
% 
N 
% 
N 
% 
No 
20 
83.3 
13 
76.5 
35 
94.6 
18 
90.0 
Yes 
4 
16.7 
4 
23.5 
2 
5.5 
2 
10.0 
Total 
24 
100.0 
17 
100.0 
37 
100.0 
20 
100.0 
 
There are no significant differences in the sobriety of the individuals about whom 
a suspicion was formed by precinct. 
 
3 App. 6 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Characteristics of Day and Time Suspicion Was Formed 
Table A-9.  Suspicion Was Formed on Weekend  
 
Precinct 1 
Precinct 2 
Precinct 3 
Precinct 4 
N 
% 
N 
% 
N 
% 
N 
% 
No 
21 
58.3 
27 
50.9 
43 
69.4 
22 
95.7 
Yes 
15 
41.7 
26 
49.1 
19 
30.6 
1 
4.3 
Total 
36 
100.0 
53 
100.0 
62 
100.0 
23 
100.0 
 
Crosstabular analyses reveal that the precincts are significantly different from one 
another by the day of week when suspicion was formed.  Precinct 4 was significantly 
different from the others, with far more suspicions formed during the week than the other 
three precincts (χ2 = 15.310; df = 3; p. = .002). 
Table A-10.  Dark at Time of Suspicion 
 
Precinct 1 
Precinct 2 
Precinct 3 
Precinct 4 
N 
% 
N 
% 
N 
% 
N 
% 
No 
19 
52.8 
33 
63.5 
38 
61.3 
21 
91.3 
Yes 
17 
47.8 
19 
36.5 
24 
38.7 
2 
8.7 
Total 
36 
100.0 
52 
100.0 
62 
100.0 
23 
100.0 
 
Crosstabular analyses reveal that the precincts were significantly different from 
one another in terms of time at which police formed suspicion (χ2 = 9.631; df = 3; p. = 
.022).  In this case, officers in Precinct 4 formed the fewest number of suspicions during 
nighttime hours compared to officers in Precincts 1, 2, and 3. 
 
3 App. 7 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Bases for Suspicion  
 
Figure A-3.  Main Reason for Forming Suspicion 
 
3%
8%
5%
9%
92%
45%
63%
83%
6%
28%
21%
9%
0%
11%
0%
19%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Precinct 1
Precinct 2
Precinct 3
Precinct 4
Appearance
Behavior
Time and Place
Information
 
 
The precincts are significantly different from one another in terms of the reasons 
for which police formed suspicion (χ2 = 27.224; df = 9; p. = .001).  Suspicions formed on 
the basis of suspect behavior were most common in Precinct 1, while suspicion based on 
information was most likely in Precinct 2. 
 
3 App. 8 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Description of Stops 
 
Figure A-4.  Suspicion Resulted in Person/Vehicle Stop 
 
61.3%
87.0%
75.0%
34.0%
0.0%
20.0%
40.0%
60.0%
80.0%
100.0%
Precinct 1
Precinct 2
Precinct 3
Precinct 4
 
The precincts are significantly different from one another in terms of the reasons 
for which police form suspicion.  (χ2 = 25.145; df = 3; p. = .000).  In this instance, 
suspicions were far less likely to result in a stop in Precinct 2 compared to Precincts 1, 3, 
and 4. 
 
Figure A-6.  Average Number of Stops Made per Tour by Precinct 
0.96
0.85
0.95
0.50
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Precinct 1
Precinct 2
Precinct 3
Precinct 4
 
 
3 App. 9 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


 
There are no statistically significant differences in the number of stops based on 
suspicion made per tour by precinct. 
Outcomes of Stops 
 
Although there are differences among precincts by outcomes, none of the differences was 
statistically significant.   
Figure A-7.  Use of Coercion 
 
5.9%
0.0%
7.9%
5.0%
0.0%
2.5%
5.0%
7.5%
10.0%
Precinct 1
Precinct 2
Precinct 3
Precinct 4
 
 
Figure A-8.  Suspect Resisted 
 
0.0%
11.8%
7.9%
10.0%
0.0%
2.0%
4.0%
6.0%
8.0%
10.0%
12.0%
14.0%
Precinct 1
Precinct 2
Precinct 3
Precinct 4
 
 
 
3 App. 10 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Figure A-9.  Suspect Frisked 
 
18.5%
38.9%
23.7%
20.0%
0.0%
5.0%
10.0%
15.0%
20.0%
25.0%
30.0%
35.0%
40.0%
Precinct 1
Precinct 2
Precinct 3
Precinct 4
 
 
Figure A-10.  Suspect/Vehicle Searched 
 
7.4%
16.7%
10.5%
10.0%
0.0%
2.0%
4.0%
6.0%
8.0%
10.0%
12.0%
14.0%
16.0%
18.0%
Precinct 1
Precinct 2
Precinct 3
Precinct 4
 
 
 
3 App. 11 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Figure A-11.  Warning Issued 
 
18.4%
25.0%
41.2%
37.0%
0.0%
5.0%
10.0%
15.0%
20.0%
25.0%
30.0%
35.0%
40.0%
45.0%
Precinct 1
Precinct 2
Precinct 3
Precinct 4
 
 
 
Figure A-12.  Suspect Issued Ticket 
40.7%
23.5%
34.2%
40.0%
0.0%
5.0%
10.0%
15.0%
20.0%
25.0%
30.0%
35.0%
40.0%
45.0%
Precinct 1
Precinct 2
Precinct 3
Precinct 4
 
 
 
 
3 App. 12 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Figure A-13.  Suspect Arrested 
 
5.3%
10.0%
17.6%
11.1%
0.0%
4.0%
8.0%
12.0%
16.0%
20.0%
Precinct 1
Precinct 2
Precinct 3
Precinct 4
 
 
Factors Associated with the Decision to Stop a Suspected Individual/Vehicle   
 
Tables A-10 to A-13 present the results of crosstabular analyses of the 
relationship between the decision to stop an individual/vehicle and many of the variables 
discussed above.   These variables have been categorized as characteristics of the area in 
which suspicion was formed, characteristics of the day and time when suspicion was 
formed, characteristics of the suspect, characteristics of the suspicion, and officer 
characteristics.1 Variables that significantly impact officers’ likelihood of making a stop 
of an individual or vehicle are highlighted and presented in bold font. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 Crosstabular analyses were not performed for the suspect characteristics of age, class, 
and alcohol/substance use, or for the officer characteristics of age or tenure, as their level 
of measurement (i.e., interval) violated the assumptions necessary to perform these 
analyses. 
 
                                                 
 
3 App. 13 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Table A-10.  Precinct 1:  Factors Correlated with the Decision to Stop a Suspected 
Individual/Vehicle (Direction and Significance) 
 
 
Variable 
% Resulting  
in Stop 
Significance 
Level 
Characteristics of Area 
Type of Area 
     Commercial  
     Residential 
     Secluded 
     Other 
 
66.7% 
25.9% 
0.0% 
7.4% 
 
.460 
Racial Makeup of Area 
     African-American 
     White 
     Other 
 
73.1% 
0.0% 
26.9% 
 
.194 
Trouble Spot  
     Yes 
     No 
 
57.7% 
42.3% 
 
.492 
Characteristics of Day and Time 
Dark at Time of Stop 
     Yes 
      No 
 
44.4% 
55.6% 
 
.563 
Stop Occurred on Weekend 
     Yes 
      No 
 
33.3% 
66.7% 
 
.079 
Characteristics of Suspect 
Gender  
     Male 
      Female 
 
70.4% 
29.6% 
 
.080 
Race  
     African-American 
     Other 
 
44.4% 
55.6% 
 
782 
Characteristics of Suspicion 
Reason for Forming Suspicion 
     Appearance 
     Behavior 
     Time and Place  
     Information 
 
0.0% 
92.6% 
0.0% 
7.4% 
 
.159 
Characteristics of Officer 
Gender  
     Female 
     Male 
 
5.0% 
95.0% 
 
.692 
Race  
     Other 
      White 
 
50.0% 
50.0% 
 
.590 
 
3 App. 14 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Education  
     High School degree 
     > H.S. diploma 
 
70.0% 
30.0% 
 
.907 
 
As shown in Table A-10, none of the factors examined here significantly 
influenced whether officers in Precinct 1 would make stops based on suspicion.   
Table A-11.  Precinct 2:  Factors Correlated with the Decision to Stop a Suspected 
Individual/Vehicle (Direction and Significance) 
 
Variable 
%  Resulting  
in Stop 
Significance 
Level 
Characteristics of Area 
Type of Area 
     Commercial  
     Residential 
     Secluded 
     Other 
 
38.9% 
44.4% 
11.1% 
5.6% 
 
.236 
Racial Makeup of Area 
     African-American 
     White 
     Other 
 
61.1% 
0.0% 
38.9% 
 
.763 
Trouble Spot 
     Yes 
     No  
 
44.4% 
55.6% 
 
.630 
Characteristics of Day and Time 
Dark at Time of Stop 
     Yes 
     No 
 
55.6% 
44.4% 
 
.038 
Stop Occurred on Weekend 
     Yes 
     No 
 
33.3% 
66.7% 
 
.101 
Characteristics of Suspect* 
Gender  
     Male 
     Female 
 
83.3% 
16.7% 
 
.648 
Race  
     African-American 
     Other 
 
88.9% 
11.1% 
 
.126 
Characteristics of Suspicion 
Reason for Forming Suspicion 
     Appearance 
     Behavior 
     Time and Place  
     Information 
 
0.0% 
72.2% 
11.1% 
16.7% 
 
 
.035 
 
3 App. 15 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Characteristics of Officer 
Gender  
     Female 
     Male 
 
5.6% 
94.4% 
 
.342 
Race  
     Other 
     White 
 
55.6% 
44.4% 
 
.200 
Education  
     High School degree 
     > H.S. diploma 
 
44.4% 
55.6% 
 
.105 
 
In Precinct 2, two variables were significantly related to the likelihood that 
officers would make a stop based on suspicion.  First, officers were significantly more 
likely to make a stop when it was dark at the time they became suspicious of an 
individual/vehicle.  Second, the likelihood that a stop would be made varied according to 
the reasons officers had for forming suspicion. Officers were most likely to make a stop 
when they based their suspicion on the individual’s behavior and least likely to make a 
stop when they became suspicious of an individual/vehicle based on their appearance. 
 
Table A-12.  Precinct 3:  Factors Correlated with the Decision to Stop a Suspected 
Individual/Vehicle (Direction and Significance) 
 
 
 
 
Variable 
% 
 Resulting  
in Stop 
 
Significance 
Level 
Characteristics of Area 
Type of Area 
     Commercial  
     Residential 
     Secluded 
     Other 
 
50.0% 
44.7% 
2.6% 
2.6% 
 
 
.129 
Racial Makeup of Area 
     African-American 
     White 
     Other 
 
55.3% 
2.6% 
42.1% 
 
.298 
Trouble Spot 
     Yes 
     No 
 
34.3% 
65.7% 
 
.006 
 
3 App. 16 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Characteristics of Day and Time 
Dark at Time of Stop 
     Yes 
     No 
 
34.2% 
65.8% 
 
.360 
Stop Occurred on Weekend 
     Yes 
     No 
 
23.7% 
76.3% 
 
.135 
Characteristics of Suspect* 
Gender  
     Male 
     Female 
 
73.7% 
26.3% 
 
.195 
Race  
     African-American 
     Other 
 
81.6% 
18.4% 
 
.223 
Characteristics of Suspicion 
Reason for Forming Suspicion 
     Appearance 
     Behavior 
     Time and Place  
     Information 
 
2.6% 
76.3% 
7.9% 
13.2% 
 
 
.054 
Characteristics of Officer 
Gender  
     Female 
     Male 
 
N/A (all officers were male) 
 
N/A 
Race  
     Other 
     White 
 
52.6% 
47.4% 
 
.005 
Education  
     High School degree 
     > H.S. diploma 
 
36.8% 
63.2% 
 
.331 
 
Two variables significantly influenced the likelihood that officers in Precinct 3 
would make a stop of a suspected individual/vehicle.  First, officers were significantly 
less likely to make a stop when they formed suspicion in areas they considered to be 
“trouble spots.”  Second, officers who were members of a minority group were 
significantly more likely to make stops than their white counterparts. 
 
 
 
 
3 App. 17 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Table A-13.  Precinct 4:  Factors Correlated with the Decision to Stop a Suspected 
Individual/Vehicle (Direction and Significance) 
 
 
 
Variable 
% 
 Resulting  
in Stop 
 
Significance 
Level 
Characteristics of Area 
Type of Area 
     Commercial  
     Residential 
     Secluded 
     Other 
 
40.0% 
40.0% 
0.0% 
20.0% 
 
.590 
Racial Makeup of Area 
     African-American 
     White 
     Other 
 
15.0% 
10.0% 
75.0% 
 
.661 
Trouble Spot  
     Yes 
     No 
 
50.0% 
50.0% 
 
.590 
Characteristics of Day and Time 
Dark at Time of Stop 
     Yes 
     No 
 
10.0% 
90.0% 
 
.567 
Stop Occurred on Weekend 
     Yes 
     No 
 
5.0% 
95.0% 
 
.692 
Characteristics of Suspect* 
Gender  
     Male 
     Female 
 
45.0% 
55.0% 
 
.375 
Race  
     African-American 
     Other 
 
45.0% 
55.0% 
 
.283 
Characteristics of Suspicion 
Reason for Forming Suspicion 
     Appearance 
     Behavior 
     Time and Place  
     Information 
 
10.0% 
85.0% 
0.0% 
5.0% 
 
.245 
 
Characteristics of Officer 
Gender  
     Female 
     Male 
 
5.0% 
95.0% 
 
.692 
Race  
     Other 
     White 
 
50.0% 
50.0% 
 
.590 
 
3 App. 18 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Education  
     High School degree 
     > H.S. diploma 
 
70.0% 
30.0% 
 
.907 
 
None of the variables examined here significantly influenced the decision to stop 
a suspect for officers in Precinct 4. 
 
3 App. 19 
 
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


Ch. 4  Conclusions and Policy Implications 
 
 
 
Research on the police has relied on observational strategies to develop rich and 
important information on the behavior of the police and the public they serve in a natural setting.  
Our study with the Savannah, Georgia, Police Department is based upon the ideas and data-
collection instruments developed in the earlier research efforts and exemplified in the POPN 
study (Mastrofski et al., 1998).  One of the major differences between the two sets of research is 
the selection of police-citizen interactions used for analyses.  While all police-citizen interactions 
were used in POPN, we decided to limit our analytical sample to those discretionary actions taken 
by the police when forming suspicion and stopping citizens. In other words, our units of analysis 
are the formation of officer suspicion and the stops that follow the formed suspicion.  The 
purpose of this chapter is to present conclusions from our methodological approach and our data 
analysis. We will also present the limited policy implications that emerge from our study. 
Methodology 
 
The present effort focuses on officer behavior and, where possible, citizen actions.  Our 
approach draws on the various ways researchers have observed the behavior and interaction 
among actors in various settings.  Relying on the general principles of observational research and 
content analysis, we incorporated Staged Activity Analysis (Cromwell et al., 1991) and Protocol 
Analysis (Worden and Brandl, 1990) into a hybrid methodology.  This approach to collecting the 
data was successful in that the police accepted the ride-along observers and the method enabled 
them to establish the rapport necessary to collect the required information.  In fact, many 
observers reported very cooperative relations with the officers.  Another goal of the research was 
to receive comparable cooperation from the citizens who interacted with the police.  
Unfortunately, our efforts to contact and interview the citizens were less successful than our 
ability to get information from the police officers.  This approach, while difficult to implement, 
provides an important source of information about police-citizen interactions.  Future research 
 
4 - 1
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


should attempt not only to obtain observational information from both the police officer and 
citizen but to get both parties’ interpretations and impressions of what happened and how it 
impacted them and their reaction.  A good data set, incorporating both points of view, can provide 
information on possible inconsistencies in how these actors view each other, their behavior, the 
immediate situation, and the broader environment. 
Data Analysis 
 
From our descriptive analyses, several conclusions emerged:   
1).  Officers formed suspicions quite infrequently.  Most officers only formed one 
suspicion per shift, but the average was 1.3 per shift. It was very unusual for an officer to 
form more than three suspicions per shift.     
2).  For the most part officers were forming suspicions using legitimate criteria.  In the 
majority of cases, the officer told the observer that the behavior of the suspect(s) was the 
primary reason for forming suspicion. An analysis of the observers’ descriptions of 
behavior revealed that the most likely behavioral reason for forming suspicion of an 
individual/vehicle was a traffic violation (e.g., running a red light, driving with expired 
plates).  
3).  Forming a suspicion did not necessarily result in a stop.  Stops were made a majority 
of the time (less than one per shift), however there were instances when continued 
observation of the suspect(s) convinced the officer that the original concern was 
unwarranted.   
4).  While deployment patterns were not part of the analyses, it is likely that they are an 
important factor in explaining where most suspicions and stops occurred.  The 
characteristics of areas where most suspicions were formed and most stops were made 
are as follows: the majority of suspicions were formed in residential areas, and the 
 
4 - 2
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


greatest percentage of stops occurred in commercial areas. While the majority of the 
suspicions and stops were made in areas not considered particularly dangerous, they did 
occur in predominantly African-American areas. 
5).  The demographic characteristics of the citizen about whom officers formed suspicion 
or who was stopped were young minorities.  However, Blacks constituted a slightly 
higher percentage of suspicions than stops, while whites had the opposite pattern.   
6).  During the stops, officers acted more positively toward suspects than suspects did 
towards officers.  Only a few of the officers had a negative initial demeanor or acted 
disrespectfully towards the citizen.  However, these suspects were nearly three times 
more likely than the officers to be negative and twice as likely to be disrespectful at the 
beginning of an encounter.  Suspect and officer demeanor changed at approximately the 
same rate during their interaction, with half turning more negative and the other half 
turning more positive.  Officers appeared to be responding to the attitude/demeanor 
displayed by the suspect.   
 
Measuring citizen demeanor is a difficult task that can be affected by numerous 
factors, including the type of measure, when the behavior is observed, and who assesses 
the behavior.  Although some of our data do not permit definitive statements, they do 
reveal the complexity of the issue and the need for further research. In this data, it was 
the officer’s evaluation of the citizen’s demeanor throughout the encounter that 
significantly affected the outcome of the stop.  According to this measure, citizens being 
disrespectful were nearly twice as likely to be ticketed or arrested compared to citizens 
not showing disrespect to the officer. 
 
4 - 3
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


7).  Officers were significantly more likely to make stops when they had formed 
suspicion on the basis of a suspect’s behavior, rather than on the basis of time and place, 
information or appearance.  Suspect characteristics, such as gender, ethnicity, socio-
economic status, and age, did not significantly influence the likelihood of a stop after a 
suspicion was formed. However, non-behavioral suspicions were most common when a 
suspect and an officer were both Black, and least common when an officer and suspect 
were white 
8).  Only two officer characteristics, age and education, were important determinants of 
the decision to make a stop.  Older officers and officers with a high school education 
were significantly more likely to make stops than younger and more educated officers. 
Interestingly, white officers were more than twice as likely to issue tickets during their 
stops as were other officers.  
9).  Suspects under the influence of alcohol or drugs negatively influenced the interaction 
and outcome.  Suspects under the influence of alcohol or drugs at the time of the stop 
were significantly more likely to resist the officer, to be frisked, have force used against 
him/her, to have their vehicle searched, and to be arrested.   
10).  Most officers reported that they had working rules to help them identify suspicious 
persons or to determine how to handle a particular situation.   
11).  While most officer decisions were based on behavioral criteria, decisions based on 
the non-behavioral criteria were also important.  In contrast to officer decisions based on 
behavioral criteria, the small percentage of decisions based on non-behavioral criteria can 
be explained by suspect and officer demographic variables. For example, officers were 
 
4 - 4
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


significantly more likely to form a non-behavioral suspicion when the suspect was Black 
and when the officer had longer tenure.    
12).   Most of the stops were routine and resulted in no consequence for the citizen.  
When there was a consequence, the most common was a warning or ticket.  In less than 
10% of the stops an arrest was made.  Further, coercion against the citizen was seldom 
used and citizen resistance was uncommon.  Frisking or searching suspects was more 
common than coercion or force, but most often was subsequent to an arrest or due to 
suspect resistance.  Coercion was never used unless the suspect offered resistance. 
 
Policy Implications and Future Research  
 
This final section addresses the policy implications derived from our findings and 
makes suggestions for future research.  Our findings have important policy implications 
regarding the management of police officer discretionary time, and the data-driven 
decision making skills of the officers.  The policy implications of our research are in 
many ways similar to findings in other observational studies.  Engle and Worden (2003) 
report that changing police officers’ attitudes alone will not change their behavior on the 
street.  It is clear that if changes are desired, managers must provide training to educate 
officers about their actions.  This training must be supported by close supervision to 
assure that the desired behavior is taking place, and accountability to assure officer 
compliance.   
 
In the analysis of our observations, very few problematic attitudes and behaviors 
surfaced.  As in any observational research on the police, most of the officers’ time was 
spent in routine activities with routine outcomes.  It is from the few problematic 
 
4 - 5
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


interactional patterns that our policy suggestions are based.  The Savannah study failed to 
uncover serious or major flaws in how the police managed their interactions with citizens.  
However, in any organization, there is always room for improvement. 
 
Since officers form suspicions relatively infrequently, it may be necessary to 
create a workload analysis to determine how officer discretionary time is used.  We did 
not record the times officers spent responding to radio calls and other service so it may be 
that very little time exists for discretionary stops and the formation of suspicions.  
However, managers may be able to encourage officers to use their available time more 
efficiently, effectively, and productively. 
 
As our research is the first to address the formation of suspicion, it is difficult to 
determine the value of these decisions.  Our data show that not all suspicions resulted in 
an official response.  This could mean that some of the criteria used by officers to form 
suspicion are proper and valuable while other criteria are unfounded and inefficient.  
Clearly, more attention and research needs to be done in this area, but managers and 
officers can benefit from our limited understanding of the process of forming suspicion 
and making stops.  Once this area of research has matured, managers will be able to 
develop data-based training to assist their officers in becoming more effective. 
 
We learned that citizens are more likely than officers to have a negative demeanor 
and show disrespect to an officer at the beginning of an encounter.  We also learned that 
officers often react to a citizen’s negativity.  It is important to train, supervise, and 
reinforce officers’ understanding of these interactions.  In other words, officers should be 
prepared to deal effectively with a negative attitude from a citizen, rather than allowing 
the citizen’s disrespect to pull them into a downward spiral.   
 
4 - 6
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


 
Officers formed the majority of their suspicions based on citizen behavior.  
However, there were many times when officers became suspicious about citizens based 
on non-behavioral criteria.  Since these are the most problematic, officers need to 
understand their likely outcome and consequences of such actions.  In other words, they 
must be made aware that people are more likely to be angry and resentful of the police 
officer who becomes suspicious without behavior cues.  Training and role-play activities 
could help officers and managers understand the process of forming suspicion.  In 
addition, special attention should be focused on managing intoxicated citizens as they the 
most likely to have a bad attitude and resist officer’s actions. 
 
We also learned about the prevalent nature of working rules that govern officer 
behavior.  Police managers must be aware of these “rules” and make sure that they are 
consistent with both departmental policy and its mission statement. 
 
Citizens should be educated not to have an “attitude” when they are in contact 
with the police and not to resist their orders.  Rather than put the police in a position to 
coerce or use force, citizens should limit their questioning of police authority during their 
interactions and comply with reasonable police orders.  Citizens who feel that the police 
have abused their authority or have used inappropriate language or force should file 
formal complaints against officers in the appropriate forum. 
Future Research 
 
Improving observational research of the police has been a goal of everyone who 
has attempted to observe and classify police behavior.  Notably, Mastrofski and Parks 
(1990) suggest that researchers include the cognitive decision processes police use in 
exercising their discretion. They state:   
 
4 - 7
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


 
The method we propose would direct quantitative behavioral research toward 
theory more closely wedded to the officer’s street-level perspective. We thus advocate 
the merging of what have been two parallel but often separate modes of inquiry: the 
behavioral and quantitative with cognitive and mostly qualitative. Focusing on the 
decision maker enables researchers to see more clearly the ways in which the numerous 
situational, organizational, individual and environmental factors play on the choices made 
(1990: 492). 
 
 
Although their plea was made more than a decade ago, their suggestions have not 
been fully met.  Our study of the Savannah police officers addresses many of these issues 
and incorporates the study of cognitive processes.  While we were able to advance the 
methodology, there remains much work to be done in this field of study.  For example, 
future research should attempt not only to obtain process data from both the police officer and 
citizen but also to study both parties’ interpretations of the events in order to show the reactions 
of each impacted the other.  Similarly, future research can address possible inconsistent versions 
of the same event.   
 
While it is always important to improve or make more successful our established 
observational methodology, it is also necessary to open new avenues of investigation.  As 
we and other researchers have discussed, establishing contact and building rapport with 
police managers and officers is difficult but can be done well.  There are always ways to 
improve and make more effective our current observational techniques.  In the social 
sciences, for example there are new approaches being developed and tested.  It is 
important that we all are aware of these innovative techniques and ideas and that we 
integrate them into our research designs whenever possible. 
 
 
 
References 
 
4 - 8
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. 


 
 
 
Cromwell, Paul, James Olson and D=Aunn W. Avary. Breaking and Entering: An 
Ethnographic Analysis of Burglary.  Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications. 1991. 
 
Engle, Robin and Robert Worden.  Police Officers’ Attitudes, Behavior, and Supervisory 
Influences: An Analysis of Problem Solving. Criminology 41: 131 - 166 (2003). 
 
Worden, Robert and Steven Brandl. Protocol Analysis of Police Decision-Making: Toward a 
Theory of Police Behavior. American Journal of Criminal Justice XIV: 297 – 318 (1990). 
 
Mastrofski, Stephen, Roger Parks, Albert Reiss, Robert Worden, Christina DeJong, 
Jeffrey Snipes and William Terrill.  Systematic Observation of Public Police: Applying 
Field Research Methods to Policy Issues. Washington, DC: National Institute of Justice. 
1998. 
 
Mastrofski, Stephen and Roger Parks. Improving Observational Studies of Police. 
Criminology 28: 475 - 496 (1990). 
 
 
 
4 - 9
This document is a research report submitted to the U.S. Department of Justice. This report has not 
been published by the Department. Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. Department of Justice.