I Wouldn't Send My Dog To That Hospital!
MABEL: ''Glad you could come to lunch, Delores, it's good to see you. How have you been doing since the knee surgery?'' 
DELORES: ''Oh Mabel, it's lucky I made it out of that place alive. I wouldn't send my dog to that horrible hospital!'' 
MABEL: ''Oh dear! Why is that?'' 
DELORES: ''After my surgery, I was in pain all the time and it took them all day to bring my pain medication! Nobody ever told me when the doctor would come in or when I could go home! There never seemed to be enough nurses!'' 
This conversation between two women about a healthcare experience reflects some of the things that commonly go wrong in healthcare settings. Sometimes, consideration of just a few simple factors that affect a patient's perception of his care can make all the difference between a bad experience and a good one. Let's take a look at these. 
											
 
 
   Simple factors can prevent a bad patient experience 
  
  
   
   |  | 
 
  
An Industry With High Stakes
The healthcare industry is an evolving and dynamic industry. It's an endeavor that does not involve the sale of widgets, but instead, it deals with the healing of illness and the alleviating of human suffering. It involves cutting-edge science as well as empathy, insight and compassion. 
Good Staffing Is Basic To Safe Healthcare Delivery
Adequate staffing in healthcare facilities contributes to both a better nursing work environment and to patient safety and satisfaction. The job simply cannot get done right if there are not enough people to do it. 
Implementation of Minimum Nurse-Patient Ratios
During recent decades, the corporate, profit-driven management of healthcare has resulted in many restructurings, with cuts in both budgets and staffing, and the quality of healthcare suffered. As a result, California became the first state in the U.S. to make minimum nurse-patient ratios a law in 1999. This means that one nurse can have only a certain maximum number of patients to care for, depending upon the area worked. The law, AB 394, was not fully implemented until January of 2004. Since that time, the positive results of this legislation have been documented by many studies. One of these studies showed that ''every one additional patient added to a hospital staff nurse's workload is associated with a seven percent increase in hospital mortality''. 
Another study done in 2010 at the University of Pennsylvania also reported that the new California nurse-patient ratios ''accompanied a lower likelihood of inpatient death within 30 days of hospital admission than in New Jersey or Pennsylvania.'' 
Unfortunately, even though hospitals usually have a target number of nurses to staff a given number of patients on a unit, this can vary from shift to shift, and hospitals that want to cut corners don't always plan well for it. But those variations can also mean trouble. A study published in the New England Journal of Medicine found that a ''patient...exposed to three nursing shifts with below target staffing'' resulted in a ''six percent higher risk of mortality''. 
Culture of Communication
In the healthcare setting, there is no place for secrets or dishonesty. If the staff members are afraid to report a concern about a patient or a mistake that was made in care because of hostile management, then these problems cannot be learned from and corrected. It is crucial that a healthcare facility have a culture of open communication. 
Communication With Patients
Communication failures in healthcare are much more than just an inconvenience. They can be matters of life and death. A communication failure or a general lack of rapport between the provider and patient are nearly always central to any medical malpractice lawsuit. According to the research organization CRICO Strategies, such failures were a major cause in 30 percent of the malpractice cases they examined, involving 1,744 deaths. So what can be done to improve communication between staff members themselves, and between staff and patients? 
SBAR Communication And Bedside Report
The change-of-shift nursing report can be given at the bedside with the patient's participation to ensure that he is kept updated on the plan of care. Any questions that the patient has about his care can also be addressed at that time. 
SBAR communication is a method that can be used between staff members. It's a way of making sure that all bases are covered when addressing a patient problem. The acronym SBAR stands for: