Early in his second term, President Trump issued an Executive Order instructing the Secretary of Health & Human Services (HHS) to “take all appropriate actions” to stop the provision of treatment for gender dysphoria to children. A separate Executive Order barred the use of federal funds to promote “gender ideology.” Shortly following these executive orders, HHS proposed, and then finalized, a regulation prohibiting health insurers from treating so-called “sex trait modification procedures” as an “essential health benefit” (EHB) under the Affordable Care Act (ACA). Although 21 states have filed suit to enjoin this provision and other parts of the regulation, this provision will, if allowed to go into effect, apply to benefits for plan year 2026.
The size of the transgender population is small (an estimated 0.5% to 1.5% of the U.S. population), and the cost of covering treatment for gender dysphoria is low. However, barring health plans from covering such treatment will expose individuals who need these services to significant out-of-pocket burdens. Transgender individuals, on average, have lower incomes than non-transgender individuals, making higher costs a greater barrier to getting the care they need.
This expert perspective describes the regulatory changes to EHB policy and discusses key considerations for state officials charged with implementing this policy.
EHB Basics: Establishing a “Benchmark” Plan and State Defrayal Requirements
Under the ACA, individual and small-group market insurers must cover a minimum set of 10 categories of benefits, referred to as “essential health benefits,” that are similar to those included in a “typical” employer-based plan.[1] This benefit package is also the foundation on which other ACA protections are based: federal law standards for cost-sharing, including a maximum out-of-pocket cap, apply to EHB but not to benefits outside this package.[2] Similarly, the amount of a Marketplace enrollee’s premium tax credit (PTC) is tied to the premium cost of EHB and PTCs may not be used to pay for covered benefits in addition to EHB.[3]
To implement the EHB provision of the ACA, HHS largely delegated to states the responsibility to determine the items and services that would comprise an EHB “benchmark” plan.[4] All plans sold in the individual and small-group market need to cover benefits that are “substantially similar” to the benchmark plan.[5] States may update their benchmark plan as often as they wish, subject to the approval of HHS. States may also mandate that insurers cover benefits in addition to EHB, but if they do so, federal law requires the state to defray the cost of such benefits. Long-standing federal rules make clear that states, not HHS, identify any benefits that are in addition to EHB.[6]
What’s in the Final Rule? Excluding Treatment for Gender Dysphoria From EHB
Until publication of the final Marketplace Integrity regulation, HHS has only explicitly prohibited EHB status for a very limited number of services: abortion, non-pediatric dental or eye exam services, long-term nursing care, and non-medically necessary orthodontia.[7] In this rule, HHS expands this prohibition to include coverage of “sex-trait modification procedures,” beginning in plan year 2026. The agency asserts, contrary to available evidence, that these services are not “typically” covered by employer-based plans, and therefore ineligible for inclusion in the EHB. The final rule notes that states will be required to defray the cost of those services if covered as non-EHB.
HHS’ final rule adopts a novel definition of the term “sex-trait modification procedures” that exists nowhere in clinical guidelines, billing codes, or insurers’ medical necessity standards. The rule defines this term as follows:
“any pharmaceutical or surgical intervention that is provided for the purpose of attempting to align an individual’s physical appearance or body with an asserted identity that differs from the individual’s sex either by
(1) intentionally disrupting or suppressing the normal development of natural biological functions, including primary or secondary sex-based traits; or
(2) intentionally altering an individual’s physical appearance or body, including amputating, minimizing or destroying primary or secondary sex-based traits such as the sexual and reproductive organs.
Such term does not include procedures undertaken
(1) to treat a person with a medically verifiable disorder of sexual development, or
(2) for purposes other than attempting to align an individual’s physical appearance or body with an asserted identity that differs from the individual’s sex.”
Legal Challenge: 21 States Sue to Block Marketplace Rule
On July 17, 2025, 21 states led by the Attorney General of California sued in federal court to block implementation of the Marketplace rule, including the provision discussed here. The Attorneys General (AGs) are asking the court to either enjoin or stay the regulation ahead of the August 25, 2025 effective date of the rule’s major provisions.
In challenging the rule, the AGs argue that this new policy is based on insufficient evidence, departs from longstanding HHS policy of encouraging state flexibility over the EHB standard, and violates the Administrative Procedure Act. In diverging from its longstanding deference to states, the AGs note that HHS’ abrupt decision to exclude “sex-trait modification procedures” from EHB is “highly disruptive, interferes with the states’ ability to regulate healthcare, and will force states to re-evaluate their benchmark plans.”
The states underscore the significant operational complexities inherent in excluding from EHB a set of services that span multiple benefit categories (such as, for example, prescription drugs, ambulatory services, and hospitalization) and may be medically necessary for transgender and non-transgender patients alike. The rule will require insurers to parse whether, for example, a prescription drug is being used for the medically necessary treatment of gender dysphoria, or to treat some other condition such as precocious puberty, menopause, or cancer.
Implementation Requirements: Considerations for States
In finalizing its rule, HHS acknowledges that establishing an effective date of plan year 2026 for this policy requires insurers to alter their plan filings well after state deadlines for filing 2026 proposed plans and rates. Further, states and insurers must navigate this process concurrent with a court case that could block the rule in the plaintiff states.
Determining the Non-EHB Portion of the Plan Premium for PTC Calculations
In most states, Marketplace insurers are required to submit for review their proposed plans and rates for the next benefit year by mid-July (some states require submissions even earlier, in May or June). These filings must include a breakdown of the portion of the premium attributable to covering EHB and non-EHB benefits.[8] The calculation of an enrollee’s PTC is based solely on the cost of the premium for the EHB benefits. The enrollee or state must pay the portion of the premium associated with any items and services covered in addition to EHB. Although HHS updated its instructions for insurers on how to undertake this calculation on June 30, 2025 (after the Marketplace rule was finalized), these instructions do not provide guidance on whether or how insurers should account for the rule’s new policy on sex-trait modification procedures.
Several analyses have shown that the cost of covering these services for the treatment of gender dysphoria is nominal, resulting in little to no impact on the PTC calculation or proposed premium. This is in part because a small proportion of the population is transgender, and medically necessary treatment for gender dysphoria is highly individualized, meaning that most patients do not receive every possible service outlined in the existing standard of care. HHS recognizes this minimal impact in the final rule by noting that defrayal costs associated with this policy will be “very small,” “miniscule,” and potentially “cost-neutral” in part due to low utilization.[9]
Defraying the Cost of Benefit Mandates
Under federal rules for state defrayal, Marketplace insurers are required to quantify and report to the state the cost attributable to each benefit provided in addition to EHB; such calculations must be actuarially sound and performed in accordance with accepted actuarial principles and methodologies.[10]
HHS identified five states that it claims explicitly mandate coverage of treatment for gender dysphoria in their EHB benchmark plans: California, Colorado, New Mexico, Vermont, and Washington.[11] The final Marketplace rule notes that if a state explicitly mandates coverage for this care outside of the EHB-benchmark plan, the state is required to defray the cost of that benefit. As noted above, the cost of doing so is likely to be nominal. If a state does not separately mandate coverage of these services as EHB, the final rule confirms there is no defrayal obligation.[12]
States will likely need to consider any explicit coverage mandates, state and federal nondiscrimination requirements, and other relevant laws or court orders in assessing their defrayal obligations. Under federal rules, the state, not HHS, determines whether a state benefit mandate is in addition to EHB.
*The author thanks Katie Keith, Justin Giovannelli, and Kellan Baker for their thoughtful review and comments on a draft of this piece.
[1] The 10 categories of benefits are: ambulatory patient services; emergency services; hospitalization; maternity and newborn care; mental health and substance-use disorder services, including behavioral health treatment; prescription drugs; rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices; laboratory services; preventive and wellness services and chronic disease management; and pediatric services, including oral and vision care.
[2] The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, Pub. L. 111-148, §1302(a)(2) and (3).
[3] 45 CFR § 155.170.
[4] 45 CFR §156.100.
[5] 45 CFR § 156.115(a)(1).
[6] 45 CFR § 155.170(a)(3). This regulation also provides that a benefit mandated by a state for the purpose of complying with federal requirements, such as the federal prohibition on discrimination based on sex, is considered EHB. 45 CFR § 155.170(a)(2). See also Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, “Frequently Asked Questions on Defrayal of State Additional Required Benefits,” Oct.23, 2018; https://www.cms.gov/cciio/resources/fact-sheets-and-faqs/downloads/faq-defrayal-state-benefits.pdf.
[7] 45 CFR § 156.115(d). In 2024, HHS amended this rule to allow states to require coverage of non-pediatric dental services as part of EHB, effective for plan year 2027.
[8] 45 CFR § 156.470.
[9] 90 Fed. Reg. 27074, 27220 (Jun. 25, 2025). HHS further notes that, when Colorado updated its EHB benchmark plan to clarify and standardize the coverage of treatment for gender dysphoria, actuarial analyses showed a 0.04% cost impact. Id.
[10] 45 CFR § 155.170(c).
[11] 90 Fed. Reg. 27074, 27154 (Jun. 25, 2025).
[12] Ibid.