Professional Development and Advancement 
of Employees with Disabilities
As the composition of the American workforce continues to change, it is imperative that all employers’ human resource 
practices evolve in order to retain and advance top talent. One component of this shift must include strategies to attract 
and retain employees with disabilities, especially in light of the increased likelihood of disability with age and the “graying” of 
the workforce.
This  research-to-practice  brief  discusses  key  workforce  trends  and  common  workplace  barriers, and provides 
recommendations for fully incorporating employees with disabilities into career development and advancement programs.
The Employer Assistance and Resource Network on Disability (EARN) is a resource for employers seeking to recruit, hire, retain and 
advance qualified employees with disabilities. It is funded by the U.S. Department of Labor’s Office of Disability Employment Policy 
under a cooperative agreement with The Viscardi Center. For more information, visit AskEARN.org.
Preparation of this item was fully funded by the United States Department of Labor, Office of Disability Employment Policy in the 
amount of $9,241,750 (five year total grant amount) under Cooperative Agreement No. OD26451-14-75-4-36. 
This document does not necessarily reflect the views or policies of the U.S. Department of Labor, nor does mention of trade names, 
commercial products, or organizations imply endorsement by the U.S. Government.


2
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND ADVANCEMENT OF EMPLOYEES WITH DISABILITIES
Workforce Trends
The total size of the U.S. workforce is growing, but is doing so unevenly. While the proportion of the workforce 
under the age of 44 has been declining steadily over the last several decades, the proportion over the age of 45 has 
steadily increased (see Figure 1).
The aging of the workforce is an especially important consideration for employers, given the increased likelihood of 
workers acquiring disabilities as they age (see Figure 2).  Employers will be challenged to address disability-related 
workplace concerns in order to retain and attract highlyskilled workers.
In addition to these demographic trends, the behavior of workers in general has changed in recent decades. 
In particular, workers are increasingly willing to seek career advancement opportunities outside their current 
employer and are less likely to stay with a single employer to climb the traditional “career ladder,” making the 
recruitment of qualified employees more competitive in many fields. Many individuals are also opting to work 
longer, creating a workforce that now spans four generations.
These workforce trends have direct bearing on the work of the human resource professionals tasked with 
recruiting, hiring and retaining the most highly qualified talent available to their organizations. Employers and 
agencies that invest in training, development, and career advancement opportunities for all employees can greatly 
increase their chances of attracting and retaining highly valued employees, and employers that are proactive in 
their approach to employees with disabilities have an added advantage.
Composition of the Employment Population by Age
Figure 1. Composition of the Employed Population, by age. 2
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
1980 
       1990 
2000 
            2010
Age 16-44
Age 45-69
Percent of Employed Individuals


3
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND ADVANCEMENT OF EMPLOYEES WITH DISABILITIES
Acknowledgement
This research brief is based on Rising through the Ranks: Professional 
Development and Advancement of Employees with Disabilities, a white 
paper written by the Disability Policy Research Center at West Virginia 
University. The project was funded by the Office of Disability Employment 
Policy, U.S. Department of Labor.
Organizational Barriers to Employing People with Disabilities 
While many employers recognize the importance of disability employment 
in increasing their ability to tap into new labor pools, less attention has 
been paid to recruiting individuals with disabilities and to retention and 
advancement strategies for these employees. Even federal employers and 
federal contractors, who are required to meet disability employment 
obligations, have made little progress in this arena.4,5 Nondiscrimination 
requirements that apply to all employers and all aspects of employment, 
including opportunities for advancement, make it critical that employers 
ensure that employees with disabilities are provided with access to career 
development and advancement opportunities.
Traditionally, employment of individuals with disabilities has been thought 
to present a particular challenge for employers because of assumed 
personal barriers among this population. Recent research, however, 
suggests that many of these challenges may be created by human 
resource departments themselves.4,5 Examples of such practices that may 
unnecessarily limit recruitment and employment of qualified employees, 
including individuals with disabilities, include: creating jobs that are 
excessively specialized or which have very narrowly defined qualifications; 
and failing to effectively identify, select and retain the best performing 
employees.6
In addition, there are workplace practices and attitudes that create barriers for employees with disabilities.
These include:
• Limited HR and manager knowledge of how to make a reasonable accommodation, or lack of responsiveness to
 
employee accommodation requests
• Company and application websites that are not accessible to individuals with disabilities
 
• Negative supervisor and co-worker attitudes toward employing people with disabilities
 
• Lack of employee training opportunities
 
7
Facts about Employing People 
with Disabilities8
• Workers with disabilities have
 
similar attendance to workers
without disabilities
• Most accommodations are free
 
or cost less than $600
• Workers with disabilities adjust
 
to workplaces just like those
without disabilities
• Workers compensation rates will
 
not increase
• Medical insurance rates will not
 
increase
• Training for employees with
 
disabilities is not significantly
more difficult or expensive
• Supervising an employee with a
 
disability is not more difficult
• Workers with disabilities perform
 
as well as employees without
disabilities
• Fair salaries are the same for
 
employees with and without
disabilities
• Termination of an employee with
 
a disability should be done in the
same way as with any employee


4
Percent of Employed Population with a Disability, by Age
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
16-24
Percent
Age
25-34
35-44
45-54
55-64
65-69
Figure 2. Percent of the Employed Population with a Disability, by age. 1,3,4
Successful Retention and Advancement Strategies
There are a multitude of programs intended to encourage professional development and advancement among all 
employees. These same programs can and should be open to employees with disabilities.
Career Ladder Programs
Career ladder programs create a defined pathway for employees interested in advancement. Within these 
programs organizations define “rungs” based on levels of experience and education. As employees acquire skills 
and training, they advance up the ladder until they retire, reach the highest level, leave the organization or opt not 
to progress further.
Career ladder programs can provide incentives and motivation for employees to stay with their employer and can 
be useful for organizations’ succession planning.
Merit Pay
In merit pay systems employees undergo performance evaluations periodically and salary increases are granted 
(or not) based on performance. Merit pay systems allow employers to reward individual employees for their effort, 
contributions and professional growth. These systems incentivize high performance and communicate clearly to 
low performers that their work is below expectations.
In the federal government merit systems are referred to as Performance-Based Pay Systems (PPS). PPS 
demonstration projects have shown that they require significantly more effort than longevity systems, but as 
performance management improves, ability to recruit and retain high quality workers increases and pay and 
performance are more closely linked.11
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND ADVANCEMENT OF EMPLOYEES WITH DISABILITIES


5
Example Career Ladder9
Accountant 2
Bachelor’s Degree and 
related work experience
Accountant 1
Bachelor’s Degree
Lead Supervisor
Related Work Experience
Receptionist
Short-term on the Job 
Training
Book-keeping Clerk
Moderate-term on the 
Job Training
Office Manager
Related Work Experience
Training and Development
Training and development opportunities are key to employee advancement and simultaneously create a larger 
pool of qualified candidates for internal recruitment efforts. Continual job training expands employee knowledge, 
improves job performance and helps companies adapt better to rapid changes in technology, the economy and the 
composition of the workforce.1
Mentoring and Coaching Programs
Mentoring and coaching have become common practices at many organizations and can have a broad impact on 
employees at all levels as well as on organizations’ bottom line. Some of the impacts of these programs include:
• Projection of strong and positive employer brand
• Advancement of talented employees
• Greater employee loyalty
• Increased retention
• Promotion of underrepresented candidates12
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND ADVANCEMENT OF EMPLOYEES WITH DISABILITIES


6
Rotational Assignments
Rotational assignment systems help employees gain additional skills and knowledge by allowing them to perform 
various jobs within the organization. These programs can help prepare employees for lateral moves, which can be 
especially useful for employers unable to advance all employees through a traditional career ladder.
Tuition Assistance, Corporate Universities and E-Learning
Tuition assistance allows employees to return to school and obtain the new skills necessary for advancement. In this 
way, employers are able to fill vacancies internally and retain employees with institutional knowledge. In addition, 
tuition assistance programs can be more cost-effective than external recruiting.13,14
Some organizations opt to offer classes directly to their employees on topics necessary for career advancement 
as an alternative to tuition assistance.14 E-learning strategies can be especially convenient for employers to offer 
training to employees.
Professional Associations and Organizations
Involvement with professional organizations can assist employees in career development and in staying current on 
topics relevant to their field by providing resources, training, conferences and support. Many employers encourage 
or require that their employees become members of professional associations or organizations.
Ensuring Opportunities are Open to Employees with Disabilities
Access to Programs
Successful retention and advancement strategies are the same for all employees regardless of disability status, but 
it is important that employers ensure that employees with disabilities also have equal access to these opportunities.
Some innovative practices that have been adopted to ensure access include:
• Formation of a task force to:
– Analyze processes and essential functions of positions
– 
• Use of resources to help eliminate fears or discomfort employees may have about working with people with
 
 
disabilities
• Rewards for supervisors and managers for implementing management practices that support
 
 disability 
employment, including hiring and mentoring people with disabilities
• Use of assistive technologies for meetings, including real-time captioning and video conferencing
 
• Offering or requiring disability awareness training as a portion of human resource management training
 
• Establishing Employee Resource Groups
 
Making Accommodations
The provision of reasonable accommodations is an ongoing rather than a one-time occurrence and is especially 
critical to the career advancement of employees with disabilities. To permit participation in training opportunities 
necessary for a promotion, accommodations may be required. The same is true when an employee is assigned to a 
new position.
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND ADVANCEMENT OF EMPLOYEES WITH DISABILITIES


7
Employers often accommodate workers with and without disabilities in order to build a loyal, dedicated, and 
productive workforce.15
Common accommodations include:
• Flexible work schedules
• Training materials in alternative formats or in accessible locations
• Software to allow efficient manipulation of data
• Ergonomic chairs to alleviate back pain
• Wrist supports to reduce the effects of repetitive stress disorders
• Telecommuting to reduce stress or other issues associated with commuting to work
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND ADVANCEMENT OF EMPLOYEES WITH DISABILITIES


8
Conclusion
As the composition of the American workforce continues to change, it is 
imperative that human resource practices evolve in order to retain and 
advance top talent. One component of this shift must include strategies 
to advance and retain employees with disabilities, especially in light of the 
increased likelihood of acquiring a disability with age and the “graying” of 
the workforce. While strategies for ensuring professional development are 
similar for all employees, employers must educate themselves on issues of 
access and accommodation for employees with disabilities in order to best 
capitalize on the employment of this population.
About this Series
Professional Development and 
Advancement of Employees with 
Disabilities is part of a series of 
briefs presenting the practical 
implications of recent research 
in disability employment. Each 
brief focuses on a key issue for 
employers, presenting background, 
research findings and key 
recommendations.
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND ADVANCEMENT OF EMPLOYEES WITH DISABILITIES


9
References
1 Society for Human Resource Management. (2008). Research Quarterly: Strategic Training and Development: A Gateway to Organizational 
Success. Retrieved from http://www.shrm.org/Research/Articles/Articles/Documents/0108rq.pdf 
2 Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2011). Current Population Survey: Labor force, employment, and unemployment statistics by age group, 1980-2011. 
Retrieved from http://data.bls.gov/pdq/querytool.jsp?survey=ln 
3 U.S. Census Bureau. (2009). American Community Survey, Public Use Microdata Sample. Retrieved from http://factfinder.census.gov/home/en/
acs_ pums_2009_1yr.html 
4 Hastings, R. (2008). EEOC urges government to find people with targeted disabilities. Retrieved from http://www.shrm.org/diversity/library_
published/nonIC/CMS_024296.asp 
/http://www.
eeoc.gov/federal/fsp2007/index.html
5 U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. (2008). Annual report on the Federal workforce fiscal year 2007. Retrieved from 
6 Lefkow, Dave. (2005). The future labor shortage. Ere. net. Retrieved from http://www.ere.net/2005/08/23/the-future-labor-shortage   
7 Bruyere, S., Erickson, W. & VanLooy, S. (2004). Comparative study of workplace policy and practices contributing to disability nondiscrimination. 
Cornell University Employment and Disability Institute Collection. Retrieved from http://digitalcommons.ilr.cornell.edu/cgi/viewcontent.
cgi?article=1103&context=edi/colleect    
8 Adapted from Herman, A. (2007). Fix attitudes and bust disability myths. Monster: Career Advice. Retrieved from http://career-advice.monster.
com/salary- trends/workers-with-disabilities/FixAttitudes-andBust- Disability-M/home.aspx 
9 Adapted from Turner, B. (2005). Career ladders help employees reach potential. Oregon Labor Market In- formation System: Oregon 
Employment Department. Retrieved from www.qualityinfo.org/pubs/olt/05/olt- 0705.pdf 
10 Clive, C. (2004). Does merit pay really reward performance? Society for Human Resource Management Compensation and Benefits Forum. 
Retrieved from http://www.shrm.org/rewards/library_published/com- pensation/nonIC/ CMS_ 010050.asp 
11 U.S. Office of Personnel Management. (2007).
Alternative personnel systems in the federal government: A status report on demonstration projects and other performance-based pay systems. 
Retrieved from http://www.opm.gov/demos/2007StatusReport_ on_DemonstrationProjects_and_OtherPerformance- BasedPaySystems.pdf 
12 Lockwood, N. (2004) The value of mentoring. Society for Human Resource Management: Knowledge Cen- ter. Retrieved from https://www.
shrm.org/hr-today/trends-and-forecasting/research-and-surveys/Documents/2016-Employee-Job-Satisfaction-and-Engagement-Report.pdf 
13 Hirning, D. (2008). America’s smartest companies. Encarta: Microsoft: Degrees and training. Retrieved from http://encarta.msn.com/encnet/
departments/elearning/?article=smartestcompanies    
14 Intel. (2008). Personal and professional development.
Life at Intel: Life and work. Retrieved from www.intel.com/lifeatintel/lifework/index.htm 
15 Job Accommodation Network. (2008). Employers’ practical guide to reasonable accommodations under the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
Retrieved from http://www.jan.wvu.edu/Erguide/  
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND ADVANCEMENT OF EMPLOYEES WITH DISABILITIES