Included under terms of UK Non-commercial Government License.
NCBI Bookshelf. A service of the National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health.
Tuffrey-Wijne I, Giatras N, Goulding L, et al. Identifying the factors affecting the implementation of strategies to promote a safer environment for patients with learning disabilities in NHS hospitals: a mixed-methods study. Southampton (UK): NIHR Journals Library; 2013 Dec. (Health Services and Delivery Research, No. 1.13.)
Identifying the factors affecting the implementation of strategies to promote a safer environment for patients with learning disabilities in NHS hospitals: a mixed-methods study.
Show details
Chapter summary
The study results in conjunction with existing literature suggest that patients with learning disabilities are at risk of experiencing avoidable harm when using NHS acute services. The problems appear to be widespread and can occur at any time point during the patient pathway. However, the incidence of patient safety issues experienced by patients with learning disabilities has not been quantified.
Patient safety issues were commonly described surrounding the following: lack of basic nursing care, in particular in relation to feeding, hydration and pressure area care; misdiagnosis, often due to diagnostic overshadowing and communication difficulties; delayed investigations and treatment; non-treatment decisions and inappropriate DNAR orders, which may be due to assumptions about the patient’s quality of life; and misuse of the Mental Capacity Act, including a lack of staff knowledge and problems with capacity assessments. This is not an exhaustive list.
There is a common thread of delays and omissions of care and treatment which could lead to preventable deterioration. As acts of omission are more difficult to recognise, capture and monitor than acts of commission, it may be difficult for organisations to monitor the safety of patients with learning disabilities. At present, incident reports are an insufficient way to assess the types and number of patient safety issues experienced by patients with learning disabilities in NHS acute hospitals.
The research team noted few formal complaints. Carers indicated a desire to put negative experiences behind them, and voiced concerns that the future health care of the person with learning disabilities might be affected by complaining.
Patient safety issues
This chapter presents those results of the study that are concerned with the specific patient safety issues (those issues that may cause harm) faced by patients with learning disabilities in NHS acute hospitals. As described in Chapter 4 (see Researching patient safety), patient safety is concerned with any issue that could have or did cause harm to a patient as a result of the health care received. It is estimated that around half of all patient safety issues are preventable.75
This chapter also reports on the findings concerning incidents and complaints involving patients with learning disabilities.
Examples of preventable deterioration
A number of examples of patient safety issues were recounted to the research team, some of which have already been described in this report. Further examples are given in Box 1.
Difficulties in establishing preventable deterioration
These examples, taken from all six study sites, demonstrate a wide variety of ways in which preventable deterioration may occur in different clinical settings within acute hospitals, and show that patients across the spectrum of learning disability have been affected. However, attributing failures in care to the existence of a patient’s learning disability is extremely complex and usually requires a full and detailed investigation and analysis, as is demonstrated by the reports of the Health Service Ombudsman2 and CIPOLD.3 Therefore, although many of the examples in Box 1 appear to demonstrate clear-cut service failure resulting in harm, the extent to which these failures are directly caused by discrimination against patients who have learning disabilities or lack of reasonable adjustment to accommodate their needs is difficult to assert with full confidence. Similarly, it is often the case that the ‘preventability’ of deterioration is difficult to define as, even with the best medical and nursing care, deterioration is often a natural consequence. For instance, it may be difficult to assert that the harm described in example E was indeed preventable.
Staff perceptions of patient safety and preventable deterioration
Most of the tangible examples of patient safety issues that had resulted in harm (rather than general descriptions of what might constitute a patient safety issue) were provided by carers. There may be a number of reasons for this. One issue was the apparent conscious or unconscious desire of hospital staff to paint their trust in a positive light and to focus on demonstrating the steps they had taken to improve the safety of care provided for people with learning disabilities. This may have been to the detriment of openly talking about any potential gaps in safety of care or areas for improvement. For example, within the clinical staff questionnaire, participants were asked whether patients with learning disabilities had deteriorated unnecessarily within the past 3 years. Just 2.9% of respondents (24 out of 825) indicated ‘yes’ in response to this question (see Appendix 4).
It also became clear throughout the interviews that a significant minority of clinical and managerial hospital staff did not think that patients with learning disabilities were at increased risk.
I think it’s the same as the safety for the rest of our patients, I don’t think that they are in any further risk than the rest of the patients that we see here.
P26, staff nurse
Your special need isn’t really going to kill you.
P54, ward manager
Analysis of patient safety issues identified in the study
Despite the difficulties described in Difficulties in establishing preventable deterioration and Staff perceptions of patient safety and preventable deterioration, the mixed-methods data gathered suggested that patients with learning disabilities are indeed at risk of experiencing patient safety issues in acute hospitals. A broad variety of safety issues were described. Synthesis of the data demonstrated that the following issues may be of particular significance to patients with learning disabilities (not in order of importance):
- lack of basic nursing care
- misdiagnosis
- delayed investigations and treatment
- non-treatment decisions and DNAR orders
- misuse of the Mental Capacity Act.
Lack of basic nursing care
Several carers and hospital staff described a lack of basic nursing care provided for patients with learning disabilities, or an over-reliance on carers to carry out nursing tasks (see Chapter 7). Concerns relating to basic nursing care were frequently raised around feeding and hydration, and pressure area care.
Feeding and hydration problems
Examples A, C and E in Box 1 described situations where patients had become severely dehydrated or malnourished in hospital. Examples were also given by carers describing patients who were known to have swallowing difficulties and required soft foods but did not have this nutritional requirement met.
Most importantly, his food has to be pureed. It was so hard for us to get that message across. It was in his [patient-held information document] but they lost it, so we had to keep telling them. They kept giving him solid food. It took such a long time before it was sorted.
P161, paid carer
Among respondents to the clinical staff questionnaire, 6.3% (52 out of 825) said that within the past 3 years a patient with learning disabilities did not get sufficient food or drink (see Appendix 4). Further examples were provided in staff interviews, in free text responses to the staff questionnaire and within incident reports.
Identifying patients with deteriorating nutritional needs has gone unnoticed for several days. This adds an unnecessary delay in referral and then starting a nasogastric tube feed.
P539, AHP (free text on questionnaire)
One person with learning disabilities reported being regularly passed by when breakfast or coffee was served (see also Table 6). She thought this was because staff did not want to look after someone with learning disabilities.
Pressure sores
A number of hospital staff and carers stated that patients with learning disabilities may be at particular risk of developing pressure sores during an inpatient stay (see, for instance, example G in Box 1). The following reasons for this were suggested: clinical settings may lack the equipment needed to turn patients; there may be delays in implementing equipment such as special mattresses; nursing staff may be unfamiliar with turning methods for patients who have physical deformities; nursing staff may wrongly assume that carers are able to assess and take care of the patient’s pressure areas; and patients may not be compliant with pressure area care.
Misdiagnosis
Examples B and D in Box 1 illustrate diagnostic overshadowing leading to misdiagnosis. Participants with learning disability expertise suggested that this was a particular risk when hospital staff failed to engage carers or LDLNs who can provide background information and aid communication.
Difficulties in communicating with the patient about symptoms and medical history were described as being crucial in contributing to misdiagnosis or diagnostic overshadowing. Examples of misdiagnosis of patients with learning disabilities had led to varying outcomes, ranging from no known harm through to serious harm.
I once found it difficult to assess a young patient with learning difficulties who appeared agitated after a head injury. I had to rely on the information given to me by the mother which was not accurate. The patient was discharged and returned a few hours later with an inter-cranial bleed. This could have been prevented if I had been able to assess the patient better and more thoroughly.
P581, emergency care practitioner (free text on questionnaire)
However, it should be noted that a number of hospital staff did not feel that patients with learning disabilities were at increased risk of misdiagnosis in comparison with other patients. This finding could, in part, be due to the relative infrequency of misdiagnosis coupled with the relative infrequency of caring for patients with learning disabilities. This is perhaps reflected in the results of the clinical staff electronic questionnaire (see Appendix 4), where only 1.2% of staff (10 out of 825) indicated that, within the past 3 years, a patient with learning disabilities had been misdiagnosed within their clinical area.
It may be of interest to note here that the CIPOLD report3 stated that:
. . . a small number of problems with diagnosing a person’s illness were due to misdiagnosis (7%).
p. 58. Reproduced with permission from Heslop P, Blair P, Fleming P, Hoghton M, Marriott A, Russ L. Confidential Inquiry into Premature Deaths of People with Learning Disabilities (CIPOLD): Final Report. Bristol: Norah Fry Research Centre; 2013
These were mostly cases of cancer being misdiagnosed as another illness, or doctors not challenging a provisional diagnosis as symptoms developed.
Delayed investigations and treatment
Examples A, B, C, D, F and H in Box 1 all provide examples of compromised patient safety which resulted in harm to the patient as a result of delayed investigations and delayed treatment. Contributory factors underpinning these examples and others were wide-ranging. There could be difficulties in accessing hospital services (for example, non-attendance of outpatient appointments); failure to provide the reasonable adjustments needed to enable the patient to have the investigation or treatment (see Chapter 6); poor staff attitudes, including assumptions about quality of life (see Misuse of the Mental Capacity Act); and issues around the patient’s ability to give consent or the correct implementation of the Mental Capacity Act (see Misuse of the Mental Capacity Act).
Other examples in relation to delayed treatment included the timely recognition and treatment of pain, and problems with medication.
Recognising and treating pain
A number of participants (including people with learning disabilities, hospital staff and carers) suggested that recognising and appropriately treating pain had been problematic.
A couple of times on [the ward] I tried to get their attention, I was in pain and needed medication. I had to get my mum to speak to them and she had to complain, saying I need medication for my pain.
P64, person with learning disabilities
Several nurses talked about the difficulty of assessing pain when a patient is unable to communicate verbally and the reliance they have on close carers to establish this. Similarly, some expert carers acknowledged these difficulties.
Medication
Of respondents to the staff questionnaire, 2.1% (17 out of 825) indicated that within the past 3 years a patient with a learning disability had been given the wrong medication or the wrong dose, or did not receive their medication.
Omissions of medication were a particularly common patient safety issue.
On a number of occasions the care staff would come in and find that the patient’s medication remained untaken on the side. When they checked this with the ward staff they would claim that the patient had taken it because the medication chart had been signed.
P44, paid carer
It was proposed that some patients with learning disabilities may be less likely to challenge the omission of their medication with ward staff.
They’d be less likely to challenge the error . . . a patient with a learning disability would be much more vulnerable in that situation.
P194, Head of PALS
The degree of patients’ compliance with treatment was also cited as a possible cause of drug omissions for patients with learning disabilities.
Furthermore, it was proposed that some nursing staff working in acute hospitals may be unfamiliar with certain medications commonly taken by people with learning disabilities for their comorbidities (for example, anti-epileptics and mood stabilisers) and lack understanding of the importance of such medications, which may contribute to the increased likelihood of omission.
In addition, several examples were given by patients with learning disabilities and their carers who had experienced problems relating to medication following discharge, and a small number of incident reports had been filed in relation to this issue. Problems included insufficient communication with the carers about medication changes, or discharge medication not being issued in an appropriate format.
This patient with a learning disability who has support at home was discharged without being given a copy of his discharge letter. His insulin regime had been changed by the doctors here which was highlighted on the discharge letter. His carers were not informed of the changes.
Incident report
She has to have tablets in blister packs . . . and they had changed her medication, so that all had to be set up before she left the hospital. I explained all of this to them and they said ‘no don’t worry, that will all be set up’. I went to collect her and there were no blister packs. They gave her a bag and tablets in boxes and as much as I wanted to take her home because she was so fed up, I couldn’t because she cannot read or write. She can’t administer from boxes. And they then claimed it takes three days for them to get the pharmacist to do these blister packs.
P200, family carer
Non-treatment decisions and ‘do not attempt resuscitation’ orders
There were examples (including example A in Box 1) where carers felt that decisions about whether or not to provide active treatment for patients with learning disabilities were being inappropriately influenced by staff assumptions about quality of life or by staff members’ fear of treating patients whom they perceived to be challenging. In such examples, treatment was provided at the carers’ utmost insistence, and patients who may otherwise have died were able to return home.
[The doctor in A&E] took me to one side and he said, ‘What sort of quality of life is she going to have if we pull her through this?’ And I said, ‘She’ll have a fantastic quality of life, she’s got close family, she’s got excellent carers, she’s got lots of things to look forward to in her life’. And he said, ‘Well, it’ll be up to the ICU [intensive care unit] team whether or not they’ll treat her, you do realise that she isn’t going to survive if we don’t treat her?’
P128, family carer
If my staff had not supported [patient], he would either be in a coma or dead because they just wouldn’t have given him any medical intervention.
P184, paid carer
Similarly, in some cases nursing staff and carers felt that DNAR orders were inappropriately based on staff assumptions about the quality of life of patients with learning disabilities.
One thing, personally, which upsets me the most – I know they have learning disabilities and it’s not very severe sometimes – but they just put all of them when they come in, ‘Not For Resus’.
P57, ward manager
Misuse of the Mental Capacity Act
The study results revealed a number of problems that clinical staff working in acute hospitals have with understanding and correctly implementing the Mental Capacity Act.30,31
Example F in Box 1 described incorrect use of the Mental Capacity Act. Other examples included patients being asked to sign a consent form (and obliging) without any explanation being given, despite staff having been told that the patient lacked literacy skills.
Furthermore, delays to investigation or treatment are often imposed while capacity is assessed or while a ‘best interest’ decision is being reached. One family carer described difficulties in trying to obtain a timely ‘best interest’ decision to enable her profoundly disabled son to have an urgent procedure to unblock his PEG feeding tube.
We literally ran round . . . What they should understand is that the PEG is his lifeline, the food, water, if that’s not working, he can’t swallow . . . and that’s where we run into trouble. People don’t always get it, they don’t understand that there’s urgency.
P123, family carer
Within the staff survey, 23.8% of clinical staff (196 out of 825) said that within the past 3 years certain tests or treatments were delayed because the patient was unable to give consent. Furthermore, 8.6% of clinical staff (71 out of 825) indicated that within the past 3 years certain tests or treatments were not given because the patient was unable to consent.
Many hospital staff appeared to misunderstand the Mental Capacity Act or lacked confidence in using it. Within the staff survey, staff were asked whether they felt confident in using the Mental Capacity Act; their responses can be found in Figure 13.
This uncertainty was not restricted to junior staff; during interviews a number of senior clinical staff highlighted difficulties in correctly following the Mental Capacity Act, which may result in harm or even patient death.
[The patient] had cancer and needed surgery. I didn’t realise that he didn’t have the capacity to say ‘no’ to the operation. He didn’t want the operation, and I just thought that was that. But [LDLN] came along and asked him, ‘What do you think will happen if you don’t have the operation?’ and he really didn’t know. He didn’t have the capacity. So it became a best interest decision, and we decided to do the operation.
P1289, consultant physician
Aside from the delays inherent in organising best interest meetings, where used these were generally thought to be productive. However, it appeared that the correct use of best interests meetings was still not ‘the norm’ in some settings.
Incident reports
Incident reports at the study sites
Incident report data were provided by five of the six study sites. Staff at the site that did not provide this information stated that they were unable to identify which incident reports involved patients with learning disabilities.
Qualitative analysis demonstrated that a wide range of incidents involving patients with learning disabilities had been reported. These spanned inappropriate management of perceived challenging behaviour; physical abuse towards hospital staff (sometimes resulting in injury and sometimes not); incorrect use of the Mental Capacity Act; delays to diagnostic tests; delays to treatment; drug errors and omissions; pressure sores; feeding problems; poor tracheostomy care; falls, accidents and injuries; hospital-acquired infections; safeguarding alerts; patients absconding/discharging against medical advice; treatment in an inappropriate clinical area; and unavailability of equipment.
Rudimentary assessment of the number of each type of incident reported revealed that staff often report tangible, physical patient safety issues (such as falls, pressure sores or medication errors), for which there may be a particular drive in favour of reporting at an organisational level. While this research did not seek to quantify the types of patient safety issues that are reported, cross reference to the other sources of data collated during the study may imply that important issues such as problems with feeding or hydration, or delays to patient care may be less readily identified than patient safety issues that require reporting.
Difficulties with using incident reports to monitor patient safety
It is known that incident reports tend to be biased towards certain patient safety incidents and the study results appear to concur with this. For example, some hospitals are excellent at reporting falls, as the need to do so has been widely promoted. There are, however, a vast number of potential reasons why some incident types may be under-reported. Acts of omission are a particular concern.
The study findings suggest that hospital staff are often unclear as to what the safety issues faced by people with learning disabilities are (see also Staff perceptions of patient safety and preventable deterioration). It can be suggested that this may make it difficult for staff to conduct thorough and appropriate risk assessments and safeguard against potential adverse events.
A further major difficulty in using incident reports to assess safety risks was the lack of effective systems for identifying patients with learning disabilities (as described in Chapter 5) and, therefore, accurately identifying all incident reports that involved patients with learning disabilities. Furthermore, discussions held throughout the course of the project revealed that hospital staff often felt that the person’s learning disability was not relevant to the incident and therefore failed to indicate the learning disability on the incident report.
For these reasons, incident reports which are specifically flagged as involving a patient with a learning disability are likely to be a small subset of the incidents that actually take place, and are consequently a poor method for monitoring patient safety issues in this group of people.
Complaints
Limited data were received on formal complaints made by people with learning disabilities or their carers. This is probably because of the sensitivity of this information, issues surrounding patient confidentiality, and the difficulty of identifying which complaints concern patients with learning disabilities. As a result of this, no complainants were directly invited to be interviewed for the study as was intended in the study protocol.
Of those formal complaints that the research team was notified of, one was made by a family carer who felt that the person’s personal hygiene needs had not been met and aggression had not been well managed; one was made by a family carer who felt that the person with learning disabilities had been inappropriately asked to sign a consent form which the patient did not understand; one was made by a family carer who reported a delay in A&E while waiting to see a specialist doctor; and one was made by a family carer with regards to a cancelled outpatient appointment. One trust was able to provide information about the number of complaints received but did not provide detail as to the type of complaints that were made. One trust described a process of ‘high flagging’ any complaints involving patients with learning disabilities, ensuring that a swift and thorough investigation was prioritised.
A small number of the carers and people with learning disabilities who were interviewed for the study suggested that they had previously made a formal complaint or that they may consider making a formal complaint in light of their recent hospital experience. The research team is unaware of whether or not the latter came to fruition. The outcomes of formal complaints were not always deemed satisfactory.
I put in a complaint to the hospital. They said they had investigated it, and I had a formal letter back from them. The outcome was – they have other patients to look after! (Transcriptionist note: participant doesn’t sound impressed with this).
P17, family carer
Carers indicated that they did not make complaints if they were dissatisfied with the hospital experience for two reasons: a desire to put the experience behind them and concerns that complaining might negatively affect the future health care of the person with learning disabilities.
It was just that this treatment of this lady – because her family and herself didn’t want to put in a complaint – I really felt that this is the only time that I could say anything for them on their behalf without making it too official; because they’re worried about repercussions basically. They’re worried that the hospital won’t want to treat them or the GP will strike them off.
P185, paid carer
Furthermore, the qualitative data demonstrate that a number of people raised concerns with hospital staff or with PALS about the care received by patients with learning disabilities which do not constitute formal complaints. In some cases this appeared to resolve concerns and in others it did not.
- Patient safety issues - Identifying the factors affecting the implementation of ...Patient safety issues - Identifying the factors affecting the implementation of strategies to promote a safer environment for patients with learning disabilities in NHS hospitals: a mixed-methods study
- Receipt Of Public Assistance By Mexican American And Cuban American Children In ...Receipt Of Public Assistance By Mexican American And Cuban American Children In Native And Immigrant Families - Children of Immigrants
Your browsing activity is empty.
Activity recording is turned off.
See more...