Credit Access in the United States  |  PAGE 1
Credit Access in the United States 
THE OPPORTUNITY INSIGHTS TEAM
 NON-TECHNICAL RESEARCH SUMMARY    JULY 2025
Differences in credit access by race, class, and place emerge early and persist throughout 
adulthood. These gaps have substantial impacts on opportunity and reflect not just 
disparities in income or wealth, but the lasting influence of childhood environments.
Access to credit can be a powerful tool for economic opportunity—
helping people buy homes, start businesses, or manage unexpected 
expenses. While credit is meant to support all individuals, and can 
be particularly useful for improving opportunity for those from 
disadvantaged backgrounds, prior research has shown access varies 
across groups. 
In a new study, (Bakker, DeLuca, English, Fogel, Hendren, Herbst), 
we assemble a new, large-scale anonymized dataset that 
links credit bureau records with U.S. Census and tax data for a 
representative sample of over 25 million Americans1. This integrated 
dataset provides a rare opportunity to study credit access using 
a truly representative sample of Americans—spanning different 
generations, income levels, racial backgrounds, and regions—with a 
level of detail not seen in prior research. 
We document significant differences in credit outcomes by race, 
class, and geography. In particular, Black Americans, individuals 
from low-income families, and those who grew up in Appalachia or 
parts of the South are more likely to have lower credit scores and 
more limited access to credit. These gaps emerge early, persist into 
adulthood, and remain stable through age 65. 
Credit score differences reflect real variation in repayment across 
groups. For example, between 2016 and 2020, 69% of Black 25-year-
olds were 90+ days delinquent, compared to 31% of white peers. These 
patterns are not fully explained by differences in income or wealth. 
Rather, we find that early-life environments—such as neighborhoods 
and communities where people grow up—play a powerful role in 
shaping financial behavior and on-time repayment later in life.
These findings suggest that adult credit access is shaped in 
childhood, as credit scores established by one’s mid-twenties—and 
the associated differences by race, class, and geography—persist 
throughout adulthood. Addressing credit gaps requires investing 
in communities well before children and young adults enter the 
credit system, as well as addressing structural factors that influence 
borrowing and repayment behaviors early in life.
KEY FINDINGS
•	 Credit score gaps emerge early, persist throughout 
adulthood, and broadly reflect repayment gaps. By 
age 25, scores differ by up to 140 points by race, 110 by 
class, and 100+ by geography. At the same age, 69% of 
Black and 60% of low-income individuals have fallen 90+ 
days behind—vs. 31% of white and 15% of high-income 
individuals.
•	 Credit scores understate true repayment gaps. 
At a 650 score, 61% of Black and 55% of low-income 
borrowers fall 90+ days delinquent—vs. 45% of white, 
42% of high-income, and 40% of Asian borrowers.
•	 Even with perfect repayment, credit scores are lower 
for certain groups. Black borrowers score 15 points lower 
than white peers with perfect repayment; low-income 
borrowers score 10 points below high-income peers.
•	 Repayment gaps persist despite similar financial 
profiles. Differences by race, class, and place remain 
even among individuals with the same income, wealth, 
marital status, job stability, and employer.
•	 Childhood environment and influences shape adult 
credit behavior. Each year a child spends in places 
where people tend to repay their loans increases their 
own likelihood of repayment. Across places, repayment 
rates are highly correlated with cross-class friendship.
Explore Credit Outcomes in the Opportunity Atlas 
 


Credit Access in the United States  |  PAGE 2
FINDING 1
Credit score gaps emerge early, persist throughout 
adulthood, and broadly reflect repayment gaps
By age 25, large differences in credit scores are evident across racial, 
socioeconomic, and geographic lines. The average credit score for 
Black individuals is approximately 100 points lower than it is for 
white individuals, and 140 points lower than it is for Asian individuals 
(Figure 1). Individuals from low-income families (bottom 20% of the 
parental income distribution) have an average credit score of 615, 
compared to 725 for those from high-income families (top 20%) 
(Figure 2). Geographic differences are similarly pronounced: among 
the 100 largest U.S. counties, average credit scores range from 724 in 
Bergen County, NJ to 627 in Baltimore, MD—a 97-point gap (Figure 3).
These differences in credit are not short-lived. As shown in Figures 
1 and 2, credit score gaps that appear by age 25 remain remarkably 
stable throughout adulthood. For example, the average credit score 
gap between Black and white individuals is 97 points at age 30 and 
92 points at age 60. Similar patterns hold across income groups and 
geographic regions, underscoring the long-term persistence of these 
differences.
Credit scores are designed to predict a borrower’s risk of non-
repayment using information from their credit history—such as 
past loan repayment behavior—but do not include data on race, 
class, geography, or income. Despite this, we find large differences 
in actual repayment outcomes by race, class, and childhood 
geography. By age 25, 69% of Black individuals have at least one 
90+ day delinquency on their credit report, compared to 45% of 
Hispanic, 31% of white, and 16% of Asian individuals. Similarly, 
60% of individuals from the bottom parental income quintile have 
a 90+ day delinquency, versus just 15% from the top quintile (Figure 
4). Most often, these late payments occur on credit cards, student 
loans, and other bills (e.g. phone bills) sent to collections.
FIGURE 1: Racial Gaps in Credit Scores Emerge Early 
and Persist Throughout Adulthood
FIGURE 3: Pronounced Geographical Differences in 
Credit Scores 
FIGURE 2: Class Gaps in Credit Scores Emerge Early and 
Persist Throughout Adulthood
FIGURE 4: Credit Score and Repayment Outcomes are 
Tightly Linked with Large Differences Across Groups
This figure shows average credit score (Vantage 4.0) by age and race 
throughout one’s life. Credit score and age are measured in 2020.
Download Figure
This figure shows the average credit score in Baltimore City, MD and Bergen 
County, NJ, which are the counties where individuals have the lowest and 
highest average scores across the 100 most populous counties in the U.S., 
respectively. To see data on every county in the U.S. visit the Opportunity Atlas 
or view a set of rankings in table III of the full paper.
Download Figure
This figure shows average credit score by the borrower’s parental income 
throughout adulthood. High-income refers to individuals whose parents 
earned in the top quintile of the income distribution, and low-income refers 
to those whose parents earned in the bottom quintile. Credit score and age 
are measured in 2020.
Download Figure
This figure shows the relationship between average credit score for 
individuals from different races and parental income levels and their 
likelihood of debt repayment at age 25.
Download Figure
627
724
Baltimore City, MD
Bergen County, NJ
High-income
Parental Income
Low-income
750
700
650
600
20
25
30
34
40
Age
Average Credit Score
30%
60%
90%
550
600
650
700
750
Asian
White
Hispanic
AIAN
Black
High-Income Individuals
Low-Income Individuals
Average Credit Score
Likelihood of Debt Repayment
By Race
By Income
American Indian
Race
Asian
Black
Hispanic
White
750
700
650
600
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Age
Average Credit Score


Credit Access in the United States  |  PAGE 3
FINDING 2
Credit scores understate true repayment gaps
While differences in credit scores by race, class, and place align with 
patterns of non-repayment, they actually understate true differences 
in repayment risk (Figure 5). Among borrowers with the same credit 
score of 650, we find:
•	 Differences by race: 61% of Black borrowers fall 90+ days 
delinquent within four years, compared to 47% of white and 
40% of Asian borrowers.
•	 Differences by class: 55% of borrowers from low-income 
families fall 90+ days delinquent within four years, versus 42% 
from high-income families.
These results indicate that if credit scores were made more 
predictive—by incorporating more information—they would likely 
widen, not narrow, existing gaps by race and class.
FINDING 3
Even with perfect repayment, credit scores are lower for 
certain groups
Among borrowers with perfect past and future repayment, Black 
individuals still receive credit scores that are, on average, 15 points 
lower than white individuals in adulthood (Figure 6). At age 30, those 
from the bottom parental income quintile receive scores 10 points 
lower than those from the top quintile even with perfect repayment 
histories. These disparities mean that Black and Hispanic borrowers 
as well as those from lower-income families, receive worse credit 
scores and worse credit terms, such as higher interest rates or lower 
credit limits, even when they have shown reliable repayment patterns.
FINDING 4
Repayment gaps persist despite similar financial profiles
Having a higher income or more savings generally helps with 
repayment, but these financial advantages do not fully explain why 
repayment struggles are more common among certain racial and 
class groups. Even among borrowers with similar finances, large 
gaps remain—for example, Black borrowers are still 20 percentage 
points more likely to fall behind than white peers with the same 
income (Figure 7).
•	 Savings do not close the repayment gap. Adding information 
on retirement savings and home equity does not reduce the 
repayment gap. The difference in repayment rates remains 
nearly unchanged.
•	 Stable employment and income does not close the gap. 
Even among people with steady jobs at the same employer and 
stable income over many years, repayment gaps by race and 
class still persist.
•	 Financial history over time does not close the gap. Even 
after factoring in nearly two decades of income data, along 
with savings, home equity, and liquid assets, the repayment 
gap remains large.
These findings show that repayment gaps are not just about income 
or job stability. They point to deeper, structural forces—like unequal 
access to credit-building opportunities, differences in social 
networks and financial support, early financial disadvantages, or 
the lack of financial safety nets—that shape who struggles with debt, 
even when everything else looks the same on paper.
FIGURE 5: Differences in Credit Scores 
Understate Differences in Subsequent Repayment 
Across Race, Class
This figure shows the percentage of borrowers who had at least one 90+ 
day delinquency between 2016 and 2020 by credit score (measured in 2016) 
and race. The gaps in repayment by race indicate that credit score does not 
accurately predict repayment across groups.
Download Figure
This figure shows average credit score by age and race throughout one’s 
life for borrowers who have no delinquencies on record. Credit score and 
age are measured in 2012.
Download Figure
FIGURE 6: Black and Hispanic Borrowers Receive 
Lower Credit Scores Even When They Have the Same 
Repayment Behavior
FIGURE 7: Even Among Adults with Comparable 
Incomes, Racial Differences in Loan Repayments are Stark
This figure shows the gap in repayment by race and parental income. The 
differences in repayment rates between Black and white borrowers persist 
even when controlling for income in adulthood.
Download Figure
800
780
760
740
720
700
25 
45
65
Age
Average Credit Score for
Borrowers with No Delinquencies
12 point
Black-white Gap 
at Age 61
32 point
Black-white Gap at Age 25
White
Race
Black
Asian
Hispanic
Grew up in a low-income family
Repayment Rate
Grew up in a high-income family
13%
10%
40%
35%
36%
63%
41%
66%
Average among 
all adults
Average among 
low-income adults
Average among 
all adults
Average among 
high-income adults
Black
White
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
450
500
550
600
650
700
750
800
Credit Score
Share of Borrowers with At Least 
One 90+ Day Delinquency (%)
Black
Race
Income
White
Low-Income
High-Income
13 Point Gap 
Class gap in repayment 
for borrowers with the 
same credit score
14 Point Gap 
Black-white gap 
in repayment for 
borrowers with 
the same credit 
score


Credit Access in the United States  |  PAGE 4
FINDING 5
Childhood environment and influences shape adult 
credit behavior
Credit behavior is deeply influenced by early life experiences. 
The data show that both family background and neighborhood 
environment play a powerful role in shaping whether people repay 
their loans and how they are scored.
A parent’s credit score is one of the strongest predictors of a child’s 
future repayment behavior. For example, moving from the bottom 
to the top of the parent credit score distribution is associated with 
a 50 percentage point decrease in the likelihood that a child will fall 
90+ days behind on a loan repayment in early adulthood—even after 
accounting for the child’s own income and financial situation.
Where a child grows up also matters. Children who spend more 
time in areas where others tend to repay loans are more likely to do 
the same as adults. Using the place examples from Figure 3, each 
additional year spent in Bergen County, NJ—a high-repayment 
area—rather than Baltimore City, MD—a low-repayment area—
increases a child’s likelihood of repaying loans by 0.4 percentage 
points. Over a full childhood, that adds up to roughly a 10-point 
boost in repayment likelihood2. These effects reflect the impact of 
broader social and institutional environments on credit outcomes.
As illustrated in Figure 8, we find that the same places that foster 
upward mobility—neighborhoods with greater opportunity—are also 
those where higher credit scores and higher repayment behavior are 
observed. For example, places with greater economic connectedness 
(the share of cross-class friendships) are the same places as those 
with higher rates of loan repayment. Such connections could directly 
improve repayment if those friends provide resources in times of 
need. In contrast, when financial shocks hit people in communities 
with lower access to credit, they are more likely to face them 
alone—and to rely on high-cost alternatives like payday loans or 
pawn shops. These products carry steep fees and interest, making it 
harder to build or repair credit over time.
The combined facts that childhood exposure drives our results and 
many of the differences we observe have historical roots in institutional 
inequities suggest that the development of credit behavior is shaped 
by a gradual, long-term process. Individuals may learn how to navigate 
complicated financial decisions from the environment around them, 
shaped in part by a history of fewer lending institutions, which in 
turn generates persistence in differences over time.
Together, these findings suggest that improving credit outcomes 
requires investing in the environments and systems that shape 
financial behavior from the very beginning of one’s life. 
FIGURE 8: National Maps for Credit Score, Repayment, Upward Mobility, Economic Connectedness
These maps show how places with higher credit scores and likelihood of loan repayment are also places that produce greater upward mobility and have 
higher levels of cross-class friendships. Shading indicates credit scores, likelihood of repayment, rates of upward mobility (Chetty, Hendren, Friedman, Jones, 
Porter), and economic connectedness (Chetty, Jackson, Kuchler, Stroebel et al.), with red representing lower and blue representing higher outcomes across 
each measure.
Download Figure
>692
640
<615
Credit Score
Average Credit Score for Children with 
Low-Income Parents (25th Percentile)
>64%
41%
<31%
Repayment
Share of Individuals with Low-Income Parents 
who Repay Bills on Time (No Delinquencies) 
>$50K
$44K
<$40K
Upward Mobility
Household Income at Age 27 for Children with 
Low-Income Parents (25th Percentile)
>52.2%
38-40%
<29%
Economic Connectedness
Share of High-Income Friends Among 
Low-Income People


Credit Access in the United States  |  PAGE 5
Conclusion
This research uncovers wide differences in access to affordable 
credit by race, class, and childhood environment. White individuals, 
those from high-income backgrounds, and those who grew up in the 
upper Midwest, New England, and Western areas of the U.S. have 
significantly greater access to credit. These differences emerge early 
in one’s life, with restrictions in access to credit generally driven by 
early-life delinquencies, most often on credit cards, student loans, 
and other bills. 
Our results suggest that meaningful progress in expanding access 
to affordable credit depends on addressing the environments and 
structures that shape financial behavior from the start. This includes 
investing in communities where opportunity has historically been 
limited, and focusing these investments to help youth and young 
adults from disadvantaged backgrounds avoid a cycle of restricted 
access to credit and engagement with high-cost alternative forms of 
credit, such as payday loans. 
Based at Harvard University, Opportunity Insights identifies barriers to economic opportunity and develops scalable solutions that will empower 
families throughout the United States to rise out of poverty.  opportunityinsights.org
Want to learn more? 
Read the Paper 
See Presentation Slides 
Download Figures from this Summary 
All materials are freely available for use with citation
NEW DATA ON CREDIT OUTCOMES 
NOW AVAILABLE IN THE 
OPPORTUNITY ATLAS
Explore how credit outcomes vary at the county level by 
parent income, race, and gender.
Explore the data 
1  This study uses two main data samples. The first is a 1% random sample of U.S. residents, and the second focuses on people born between 1978 and 1985, linked to their parents. Together, these samples include 
over 25 million individuals.
2  Bergen County, NJ and Baltimore City, MD are used as examples because they have the highest and lowest average credit scores among the 100 largest U.S. counties. To estimate the effect of moving from Baltimore 
to Bergen, we multiply 0.441 by 23 years—the point at which place-based effects fade—yielding an estimated impact of 10.14 percentage points (rounded to 10). While specific values will vary, similar patterns hold for 
moves between other low- and high-repayment areas.