1 
 
 
 
Past Imperfect: How Credit Scores “Bake In”  
and Perpetuate Past Discrimination 
Updated February 2024 
 
 
Credit reports and scores reflect stunning racial disparities. Credit reporting and credit scoring 
are supposed to be entirely objective, with no room for flawed tools such as human judgment 
(and the biases built into human minds). Yet for the past three decades, study after study has 
found that Black and Latino communities have lower credit scores as a group than whites and 
Asians. In 2021, the median credit score from Vantage Score for Black consumers was 639, 
while for white consumers it was nearly 100 points higher at 730 and Asian consumers’ median 
was 752. Latino consumers were in between with a median score of 673. (For a list of other 
reports and studies, see the Appendix at the end.) 
Black and Latino consumers are also more likely to lack a credit history or have too scant a 
history to generate a credit score, referred to as being “credit invisible.” The Consumer Financial 
Protection Bureau (CFPB) found that about 15 percent of Black and Latino consumers are credit 
invisible (compared to 9 percent of whites and Asians) and an additional 13 percent of Black 
and 12 percent of Latino consumers have unscorable records (compared to 7 percent of 
whites). 
The racial disparities in credit scores are due to deep structural factors, created by centuries of 
intentional and legalized discrimination as well as present-day biases. These huge gaps stem 
from the very nature of judging humans based on past behavior. By doing so, credit scores 
necessarily incorporate elements of past and present inequality. 
Income and Wealth Disparities 
Communities of color have less income than white Americans – Black Americans earn only 76 
cents for every dollar earned by whites, and Latinos earn only 73 cents. This difference is due to 
racial inequality in many settings, such as segregation in education, hidden biases in 
Bias Toward Ghetto Residents 
One consequence of the present credit reporting system is to systematically exclude ghetto residents 
from the mainstream of the American credit economy. There is a vicious cycle element to the problem. 
Ghetto residents cannot get credit with the reputable downtown retailers because they have bad credit 
records. Therefore, they deal with the ghetto merchants who charge exorbitant prices for inferior and 
often defective merchandise. An FTC survey of retailing in the District of Columbia showed prices in 
ghetto stores averaged 60 percent more. 
Sen. William Proxmire, 115 Cong. Rec. 2413, Jan.31, 1969, introducing the bill that would become the  
Fair Credit Reporting Act 


2 
employment, and the collateral consequences of mass incarceration. But the disparity in wealth 
is even more stunning: the typical Black family has a median wealth of only about 15 percent 
($44,900) of the typical white family ($285,000). The typical Latino family similarly has only 
about 20 percent of the wealth ($61,600) of the typical white family  
The racial wealth gap has a very real impact on the ability of consumers to pay their bills. With 
fewer assets to draw on, people of color – and the friends and family who they might turn to – 
are far less able to cushion the blow of financial catastrophes, such as job losses, income 
reductions, sickness, or unplanned expenses. Less wealth also means that Black students 
borrow significantly more in student loans for higher education, which places greater financial 
stress on their budgets and also impacts their credit scores. 
How Discrimination Lowered the Credit Scores of Communities of Color 
This racial wealth gap didn’t happen by accident. It was caused by centuries of discrimination, 
redlining, and exclusion. Housing discrimination, in particular, is responsible for much of the 
racial wealth gap. The practice of redlining was invented by the Federal Housing Administration, 
which refused to guarantee home loans made in Black communities, thus depriving them of the 
ability to accumulate wealth through homeownership. During the early years of Social Security, 
unemployment insurance, and the minimum wage, these programs did not cover domestic and 
agricultural workers — two of the most significant occupations for Black workers. 
This discrimination continued into the 21st Century. In the years before the 2007-08 foreclosure 
crisis, homeowners of color were disproportionately targeted for predatory mortgages. These 
communities suffered grossly higher rates of foreclosure, wiping out nearly $400 billion of their 
wealth and having a devastating impact on their financial health and their credit scores. 
Current discriminatory practices that have an outsized economic impact include ongoing 
employment discrimination as well as biases in the criminal legal system. Black and Latino 
individuals are disproportionately targeted by law enforcement, which has a devastating 
economic impact, not only on the individuals but also on their families and communities. A study 
of 51 families Baltimore found that a history of incarceration heavily impacts the credit scores of 
both the incarcerated individuals and their families. 
Black and Latino communities also disproportionately bear the financial burdens from the 
criminal legal system in the form of fines, fees, and debt. These practices drain precious dollars 
from families of color, making it a struggle to keep up with everyday bills, with one resulting risk 
being harm to credit histories. While criminal justice debt and resulting judgments should not 
end up on credit reports due to a settlement between the credit bureaus and state Attorneys 
General, there is a chance it could be reported if referred to debt collectors. 
Using the Past to Judge Carries on its Biases into the Future 
Credit scoring is a reflection of the racial economic divide and wealth gap in this country. As a 
measurement tool, credit scores work well, in that they reveal the trenchant inequality that 
current and historical discrimination has engendered. But the problem is when credit scores are 
used as a decision-making tool without consideration of these disparities, they perpetuate that 
same racial and economic inequality.  
Credit history is a gatekeeper for many important necessities – employment, housing (both 
rental and homeownership), insurance, and of course, affordable credit. Because of poor or 
non-existent credit histories, consumers of color are disproportionately denied jobs, credit, 


3 
insurance, housing and other services, or are forced to pay more. The drain on income affects 
their ability to pay their current bills, let alone build assets to move ahead. They are less likely to 
obtain loans on affordable terms to buy homes or start small businesses, while also being more 
likely to be targeted by predatory lenders who will drain away even more of their income. The 
historic and current discrimination that is reflected in credit histories causes communities of 
color to fall even further behind.  
Challenging Economic Racism 
In light of the troubling racial disparities reflected in credit reports and scores, they should not be 
used outside of the credit context absent the most compelling justification. For example, there is 
no evidence that credit history is a valid predictor of job performance and, with extremely limited 
exceptions, employers simply shouldn’t use credit reports in employment. 
With respect to insurance, insurers claim that there is a correlation between credit scores and 
insurance losses. However, there is no good explanation for why a person with a lower credit 
score is supposedly more likely to cause greater losses to insurers. Insurers inaccurately argue 
that this correlation is because someone “who is reckless with credit may also be reckless with 
driving or irresponsible about maintaining a home.” But credit scores do not measure behavior 
or responsibility; they measure financial resources, as shown by the fact that credit scores rose 
during the COVID-19 pandemic due to significant government economic supports. Consumers 
with lower scores simply have fewer financial resources, and thus may be more likely to file a 
claim rather than absorbing the loss. Consumers shouldn’t be penalized because they don’t 
have resources to forgo filing a claim that they are legitimately entitled to file. 
As many as 90% of landlords use credit history as part of tenant screening, often automatically 
rejecting applicants with low credit scores. According to Experian, a credit score of 620 is the 
starting point required by most landlords to qualify for an apartment. However, there are no 
quantitative or scientific studies showing that credit information accurately predicts a successful 
tenancy; in fact, credit scores are designed to predict the likelihood that a borrower will become 
90 days late on a credit obligation—not rent, which is a different sort of obligation that 
consumers will pay before all other expenses, even groceries. The use of credit scores in tenant 
screening is incredibly harmful, forcing renters with low scores to turn to predatory landlords 
who charge above-market rates for low-quality housing (such as extended stay motels), and can 
even lead to homelessness. 
With respect to lending, the quandary is that credit histories and scores are useful tools for 
lenders, but they perpetuate past inequalities. The issue for our society is whether we continue 
with these same tools knowing that it not only hurts communities of color, but that the disparate 
impact of this tool reflects and perpetuates centuries of discrimination, exclusion, and 
exploitation.  A number of reforms, listed below, would reduce the harm. 
Needed Reforms 
Reducing the harm to Black and Latino communities from the racial disparities and history of 
discrimination baked into credit scores requires a multi-pronged approach, including: 
 
Stop the Mission Creep. Ban the use of credit information in rental housing and insurance. 
Severely restrict the use of credit history in employment. 


4 
 
Restrict Risk-Based Pricing. One simple reform is to 
restrict the practice of risk-based pricing, in which 
lenders charge higher rates to consumers with lower 
credit scores. While lenders argue that higher prices 
are justified as compensation for the risk of lending to 
lower-scoring borrowers, expensive loan terms can 
make the loan much more onerous and difficult to 
repay. Given that consumers of color have historically 
been targeted for predatory lending, credit scores 
should not be used to justify high-rate loans. Interest 
rates should not exceed 36% for small loans and lower 
for larger ones,1 as higher rates exacerbate racial 
injustices by placing borrowers in a debt trap that only 
worsens their economic situation. 
 
Expand Special Purpose Programs. Another 
straightforward reform is to expand the use of  
special purpose programs. These programs are 
specifically aimed at increasing access to credit for 
underserved communities, especially communities of 
color, and are explicitly permitted under the Equal 
Credit Opportunity Act.  
 
Reduce Time Limits on Negative Information. 
Another option is to reduce the time limits on negative 
information in credit reports to three years as a way to 
minimize the vicious cycle aspect of low credit scores. 
There is nothing special about the current time limits of 
seven years for most information and 10 years for 
bankruptcies, and some countries have shorter limits.  
 
Develop Intentionally Improved Algorithms. A 
promising reform is the development of algorithms 
designed to reduce racial disparities, using techniques 
such as adversarial debiasing or adversarial learning. 
This technique uses two adversarial models to 
maximize the ability of the first model to predict a desired factor (e.g., probability of 
defaulting on a loan), while the second model that predicts the sensitive attribute (e.g., 
protected class) minimizes its disparities in the first. In general, scoring models and 
algorithms need to be refined and improved with an intentional focus on reducing racial 
disparities. Intentionality is key - the income disparities and wealth gaps reflected by credit 
scores were the product of centuries of intentional discrimination. They cannot and will not 
be reduced or resolved without the same level of intentionality. 
 
Create a Public Credit Registry. Finally, one of the boldest reform proposals for credit 
reporting is the idea of a public credit registry based in the CFPB. A public credit registry 
could develop credit scoring model that actively takes past and present discrimination into 
account and is intentionally designed to reduce racial disparities. 
 
A cautionary note on 
alternative data: 
Alternative data is often 
promoted as a solution to 
credit invisibility and the 
racial credit score gap. 
However, while alternative 
data can sometimes be 
helpful to some consumers, it 
can also be extremely 
harmful to other consumers. 
The benefit versus harm 
depends on the type of data, 
how it is supplied, and how it 
is used. For example, rent 
payment reporting has been 
aggressively promoted, but 
unless it is positive-only data, 
it can create enormous 
harms for struggling renters. 
Bank account transaction 
data has shown great 
promise in reducing racial 
disparities. More importantly, 
alternative data will not 
eliminate racial disparities in 
credit scores, and is not a 
panacea for credit inequities. 
Any data that relies on 
financial information will still 
reflect racial disparities given 
the unequal economic 
positions of households of 
color and white households. 


5 
As Senator William Proxmire, considered the “father” of the Fair Credit Reporting Act, concluded 
over 50 years ago: 
What we need is a credit reporting system that is more socially oriented – one that 
serves the needs of consumers and particularly low-income consumers as well as 
creditors. We need to develop more precise methods of credit evaluation in order to 
establish the credit worthiness of the many ghetto [sic] residents capable of meeting 
their obligations. 
 
115 Cong. Rec. 2413, Jan.31, 1969 
From healthcare to criminal justice to employment, we have seen numerous examples of how 
purportedly objective algorithms producing biased results because they use an equality 
framework that fails to account for the existing and historical discrimination baked into current 
societal structures. As the following graphic illustrates, treating people equally when barriers 
affect people differently is a formula for perpetuating inequality. 
 
For more information, contact Chi Chi Wu, Senior Attorney, cwu@nclc.org. 
 
 
 
 
 
1 For more, see National Consumer Law Center’s reports and recommendations on small dollar and 
installment lending. 
 
 
Source: Interaction Institute for Social Change | Artist: Angus Maguire
interactioninstitute.org and madewithangus.com 


1 
Appendix 
Studies Showing Racial Disparities in Credit Scores 
▪ 
A 2022 report (with 2021 data) from the Urban Institute noted that the median credit score 
for Black consumers was 639, while for white consumers it was nearly 100 points higher at 
730, and Latino consumers were in between with a median score of 673. Source: Urban 
Inst., Atlanta Market: Keys Unlock Dreams Initiative 12 (June 2022). 
▪ 
A 2019 report (with 2016 data) from the Urban Institute found that over 50 percent of white 
households have credit scores over 700, but only 20 percent of Black households do. 
Source: Urban Inst., Explaining the Black-White Homeownership Gap: A Closer Look at 
Disparities across Local Markets 8 (Nov. 2019). 
▪ 
A 2012 study by the CFPB examining credit scores for about 200,000 consumers found that 
the median FICO score for consumers in majority minority zip codes was in the 34th 
percentile, while it was in the 52nd percentile for zip codes with low minority populations. 
Source: Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, Analysis of Differences Between 
Consumer- and Creditor-Purchased Credit Scores, at 18, Sept. 2012. 
▪ 
A 2010 study by the Woodstock Institute found that in predominately African American zip 
codes in Illinois, over 54.2% of the individuals had a credit score of less than 620. In 
comparison, 20.3% of Illinois residents statewide had a credit score of less than 620, and 
only 16.8% of individuals in predominately white zip codes had a credit score of less than 
620. In white zip codes, 67.3% of residents had a better than a 700 credit score, while 25% 
of individuals in predominantly African-American zip codes had credit scores above 700. In 
zip codes that were majority Latino, 31.4% of individuals had a credit score of less than 620, 
and only 47.3% had credit scores greater than 700. Source: Sarah Duda & Geoff Smith, 
Woodstock Institute, Bridging the Gap: Credit Scores and Economic Opportunity in Illinois 
Communities of Color 8 (Sept. 2010). 
▪ 
A 2007 Federal Reserve Board report to Congress on credit scoring and racial disparities, 
which was mandated by the 2003 Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003 
(FACTA), analyzed 300,000 credit files matched with Social Security records to provide 
racial and demographic information. While the Federal Reserve’s ultimate conclusion was to 
support credit scoring, its study found significant racial disparities. In one of the two models 
used by the Federal Reserve, the mean score of African Americans was approximately half 
that of white non-Hispanics (54.0 out of 100 for white non-Hispanics versus 25.6 for African 
Americans) with Hispanics fairing only slightly better (38.2). Source: Board of Governors of 
the Federal Reserve System, Report to the Congress on Credit Scoring and Its Effects on 
the Availability and Affordability of Credit 80-81 (Aug. 2007). 
▪ 
A 2007 study by the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) on racial disparities in the use of 
credit scores for auto insurance, also mandated by the 2003 FACTA amendments, found 
substantial racial disparities, with African Americans and Hispanics strongly over-
represented in the lowest scoring categories. Source: Federal Trade Commission, Credit-
Based Insurance Scores: Impacts on Consumers of Automobile Insurance 3 (July 2007). 
▪ 
A 2006 study from the Brookings Institution found that counties with high minority 
populations are more likely to have lower average credit scores than predominately white 
counties. In the counties with a very low typical score (scores of 560 to 619), Brookings 


2 
found that about 19% of the population was Hispanic and another 28% is African American. 
On the other hand, the counties that have higher typical credit scores tended to be 
essentially all-white counties. Source: Matt Fellowes, Brookings Inst., Credit Scores, 
Reports, and Getting Ahead in America 9-10 (May 2006). 
▪ 
A 2004 study by Federal Reserve researchers found that fewer than 40% of consumers who 
lived in high-minority neighborhoods had credit scores over 701, while nearly 70% of 
consumers who lived in mostly white neighborhoods had scores over 701. Source: Robert 
B. Avery, Paul S. Calem, & Glenn B. Canner, Credit Report Accuracy and Access to Credit, 
Federal Reserve Bulletin (Summer 2004). 
▪ 
A 2004 study published by Harvard’s Joint Center for Housing Studies found that the 
median credit score for whites in 2001 was 738, but the median credit score for African 
Americans was 676 and for Hispanics was 670. Source: Raphael W. Bostic, Paul S. Calem, 
& Susan M. Wachter, Joint Ctr. for Hous. Studies of Harvard Univ., Hitting the Wall: Credit 
As an Impediment to Homeownership (Feb. 2004). 
▪ 
A 2004 study conducted by the Texas Department of Insurance on insurance scoring found 
that African American and Hispanic consumers constituted over 60% of the consumers 
having the worst credit scores but less than 10% of the consumers having the best scores. 
Source: Tex. Dep’t of Ins., Report to the 79th Legislature--Use of Credit Information by 
Insurers in Texas (Dec. 30, 2004). 
▪ 
A 2004 study conducted by the Missouri Department of Insurance found insurance credit 
scores were significantly worse for residents of high-minority zip codes. The average 
consumer in an “all minority” neighborhood had a credit score that fell into the 18th 
percentile, while the average consumer in a “no minority” neighborhood had a credit score 
that fell into the 57th percentile. Source: Brent Kabler, Missouri Department of Insurance, 
Insurance-Based Credit Scores: Impact on Minority and Low Income Populations in Missouri 
(Jan. 2004). 
▪ 
A 1997 analysis by FICO showed that consumers living in minority neighborhoods had lower 
overall credit scores. Source: Fair, Isaac & Co., The Effectiveness of Scoring on Low-to-
Moderate Income and High-Minority Area Populations 22, Fig. 9 (Aug. 1997). 
▪ 
A 1996 Freddie Mac study found that African-Americans were three times as likely to have 
FICO scores below 620 as whites. The same study showed that Hispanics were twice as 
likely as whites to have FICO scores under 620. Source: See Freddie Mac, Automated 
Underwriting: Making Mortgage Lending Simpler and Fairer for America’s Families (Sept. 
1996). 
Other Resources 
▪ 
National Consumer Law Center, Digital Denials: How Abuse, Bias, and Lack of 
Transparency in Tenant Screening Harm Renters, September 2023. 
▪ 
National Consumer Law Center, Even the Catch-22s Come With Catch-22s: Potential 
Harms & Drawbacks of Rent Reporting, October 2022. 
▪ 
National Consumer Law Center, Mission Creep: a Primer on Use of Credit Reports & 
Scores for Non-Credit Purposes, August 2022. 


3 
▪ 
National Consumer Law Center, No Silver Bullet: Using Alternative Data for Financial 
Inclusion and Racial Justice, June 2022. 
▪ 
Richard Rothstein, The Color of Law: A Forgotten History of How Our Government 
Segregated America (Norton 2017). 
▪ 
Debbie Gruenstein Bocian, Wei Li, and Keith S. Ernst, Center for Responsible Lending, 
Foreclosures by Race and Ethnicity: The Demographics of a Crisis, June 18, 2010. 
▪ 
National Consumer Law Center, Solving the Credit Conundrum: Helping Consumers’ Credit 
Records Impaired by the Foreclosure Crisis and Great Recession (Dec. 2013) (discussing 
bluntness of credit scoring and arguing for shorter time limits for negative information). 
▪ 
Meizhu Lui, et al., The Color of Wealth: The Story Behind the U.S. Racial Wealth Divide 
(The New Press 2006).