INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF RESEARCH AND SCIENTIFIC INNOVATION (IJRSI)
ISSN No. 2321-2705 | DOI: 10.51244/IJRSI |Volume XI Issue VII July 2024
Page 515 
www.rsisinternational.org 
 
   
 
 
Factors to be Considered in Financing Rural Women 
Matilda Pomerai 
Women’s University in Africa 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.51244/IJRSI.2024.1107039 
Received: 24 June 2024; Accepted: 01 July 2024; Published: 07 August 2024 
ABSTRACT  
Gender segregation still persist in the financial sector, rural women face various challenges in accessing 
financial services and products especially in the rural areas. Men own most of the land and agricultural 
machines in the rural areas. The Post structural Feminist theory will be used in this study to show that women 
are different from men and have different categories that need to be considered in rural financial services. 
Women constitute 52% of the Zimbabwean population yet they are not fully benefiting from financing 
programmes. As a result, they resort to informal channels of financing such as Self Help Groups in form of 
Rotating Savings Cooperatives and Associations (ROSCAs) which offer limited funds at exorbitant interest 
rates. Rural women usually find challenges to meet the Know Your Customer (KYC) requirements from many 
financial institutions because gender issues are often ignored in the formulation, implementation and 
evaluation of these programmes. Policy pillars to include gender in rural finance will also be discussed. 
Importance of rural financial services and the challenges that rural women face in the financial sector will be 
discussed. Gender issues in the rural financial sector will be explored so that rural women can meaningfully 
benefit from available programmes hence reduced poverty. 
Key words: gender, rural, financial services 
INTRODUCTION 
The Zimbabwean government has always been willing to include gender issues in all development 
programmes but there is need to focus more on implementation and evaluation on these programmes so that 
progress can be tracked especially in rural financial services. According to the Global Economic Forum (2022) 
Global Gender Gap Index rank Zimbabwe 50th out of 146 countries 8th in Sub Saharan Africa (SSA) in gender 
parity suggesting both progress and remaining challenges on the country’s path towards gender equality. These 
challenges include lack of gender mainstreaming in the rural financial services. Gender is a critical notion for 
rural financial services scrutiny in addition to the plan and execution of financial services to rural people. 
According to Masvotore and Tsara (2023) both rural male and females are susceptible to poverty but gender 
discrimination makes women more vulnerable to poverty and they are fewer resources to cope with poverty. 
This is because rural women spent most of their income on the household and especially on children’s welfare, 
therefore poverty becomes feminised. The term feminisation of poverty denotes that women are the most 
affected by poverty and are amongst the poorest in society (Pearce, 1987). Due to the feminisation of poverty it 
is critical for financial institutions to consider gender issues in offering services and products in rural areas. 
Furthermore, most valuable assets like livestock and land are owned by men in the rural areas. Myamba (2023) 
argues that generally, rural women have more limited access to assets, resources and services such as such as 
credit than man. According to AFI, (2023) there is a growing recognition that any effort to close the gender 
gap in the financial inclusion and to support the creation of gender equitable financial system requires greater 
participation of women at all level. 
POST STRUCTURAL FEMINISM  
The study used Post Structural Feminism (PSF) to analyse the financial exclusion of rural women.  PSF has its 
roots in poststructuralism, an intellectual movement that emerged in the second half of the 1960s and is 


INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF RESEARCH AND SCIENTIFIC INNOVATION (IJRSI)
ISSN No. 2321-2705 | DOI: 10.51244/IJRSI |Volume XI Issue VII July 2024
Page 516 
www.rsisinternational.org 
 
   
 
 
associated with thinkers such as Derrida and Foucault (Maclaran & Steven, 2018). PSF is a promising avenue 
for theoretical inquiry to unravel the masculinist discourse that has been perpetuated in rural financial services 
provision thinking and practice. The rationale of the critical gender lens is timely, given current financial 
exclusion of rural women. However, to address all these challenges, gender issues should be at the centre of 
every   rural financial inclusion initiative. 
PSF positions gender as the focal point of inquiry, viewing it as a dynamic political and social construct that 
defines specific actions considered appropriate for one gender (Kilic, 2022). In this study, gender is placed at 
the centre of rural women’s financial inclusion by analyzing the gender issues that hinder and promote the 
financial inclusion of rural women. Ritzer (2008) argues that women’s experience of inequality and oppression 
varies according to their location within societies’ structural oppression arrangements.  Women in rural areas 
are vulnerable to financial exclusion because of their geographical location, which is often remote and 
inaccessible. There is also poor internet connectivity, which limits their access to DFS. William (1990) asserts 
that women are at a disadvantage when they are treated the same as men, particularly in situations involving 
issues like pregnancy leave and divorce. This is especially prevalent in rural areas where women are treated 
identically to men in the financial sector. When these women become pregnant and temporarily step away 
from their income-generating projects, the financial sector fails to consider this when they have an outstanding 
loan. If they are unable to make loan payments during this period, interest continues to accrue, further 
exacerbating their vulnerability to poverty. 
William (1990) states that women are different from men not only in terms of their biology but also in terms of 
their values and their “voice.” Rural women value their households and spend most of their income on the 
household, yet their voices are not heard in the formal financial sector. Eisenstein, a post-structural feminist, 
argues that PSF seeks to deconstruct the male/female dichotomy and the sameness/difference debate (William, 
1990). According to Masvotore and Tsara (2023) rural women continue to be among the poor because of 
change of roles and circumstances such as becoming single parents, divorced, widowed and breadwinners in 
the family but their state of deprivation remains obscured. Men are still being considered as the breadwinners 
by many financial programmes hence men continue to benefit from such programmes. The Rural Financial 
Market Historical Overview of 1924 to 1991 did not consider gender issues in the financing of rural 
agriculture. The document only mentions that in 1983 the Agricultural Finance Corporation extended credit to 
married women, provided the corporation was satisfied that they were farmers excluding the other categories 
of women. 
Post-structural feminists claim to attend to the differences and multiplicities of women’s specific locations and 
positions (Singh, 1995). Women are not a homogeneous group. They vary in terms of urban and rural living, 
economic status and marital status, including those who are married, single, widowed, below and above the 
poverty line. According to Vishwanath (2021), vulnerable customer groups such as rural women, who often 
have comparatively low literacy rates and lack exposure and access to technology, are being left behind in 
financial inclusion. All these women have different barriers in the formal financial sector. Female-headed 
households may have better financial decision-making power and more responsibilities.   
Financial institutions underserve many rural women compared to urban areas (Boaky-Adjei, 2022). According 
to IDRC (2018), low-income women in rural areas often face barriers to accessing a safe place to save due to 
mobility and time constraints. Rural women experience more barriers in the financial sector than urban 
women. Hence, there are more opportunities for urban women in the financial sector. 
Post-structural feminists see gender as being constructed in discourse and the categories of male or female as 
historically and socially situated rather than being stable or fixed in meaning (Kilic, 2022). Historically, a 
woman’s place has been in the private sphere. This has limited rural women’s opportunities to attend financial 
inclusion programmes and participate in income-generating projects, allowing them to save in the formal 
financial sector. Kilic (2022) argues that PSF problematises what being a woman means by deconstructing the 
privatisation of positions in society according to men and the categories of the opposite gender. 
The financial sector ignores gendered power dynamics, assuming that women are homogeneous. Thus, 
financial institutions do not consider these dynamics when dealing with rural women. Poststructuralism views 


INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF RESEARCH AND SCIENTIFIC INNOVATION (IJRSI)
ISSN No. 2321-2705 | DOI: 10.51244/IJRSI |Volume XI Issue VII July 2024
Page 517 
www.rsisinternational.org 
 
   
 
 
culture as the enduring gender determinant (Kolozova, 2021). The patriarchal nature of African culture has 
subordinated women, creating barriers for them in the financial sector. Some women even need their husband's 
permission to apply for a loan or open an account. PSF utilises the concept of gender to challenge the status 
quo (El Mquirmi, 2020). The ongoing financial exclusion of rural women needs to be confronted using a post-
structural feminist approach. 
According to El Mquirmi (2020), the key element of the PSF Theory is that it highlights the relevance of 
linguistic practices by questioning the binary categories of male and female. The language used in the financial 
sector is biased and masculine; for example, KYC and collateral security requirements suit males more than 
females. Ravelli et al. (2018) state that in rural areas, although land is a primary form of collateral, most 
women are culturally and often legally prevented from owning it. Men typically possess valuable assets at the 
household level, which they can use as collateral to secure loans. They also own land suitable for contract 
farming and are more likely to create the business plans necessary to acquire business loans. As a response to 
this, PSF aims to challenge this discourse and create a new narrative that confronts and overcomes male bias 
(El Mquirmi, 2020). This new narrative aims to promote gender equality and sensitivity in the financial sector. 
THE IMPORTANCE OF FINANCIAL INCLUSION 
This section provides a detailed discussion regarding the importance and relevance of financial inclusion for 
rural women.  
3.1 The Achievement of Sustainable Development Goals 
According to Dr Chipika, the Deputy Governor of RBZ, an inclusive economy is critical to achieving the 
seventeen global sustainable development goals in Zimbabwe, and financial inclusion has been identified as a 
key enabler in attaining the SDGs (RBZ, 2020). Providing poor rural women with access to affordable 
financial products and services can help reduce hunger and poverty, promote good health and well-being, 
improve children's education, foster gender equality and empowerment, and facilitate the use of affordable and 
clean energy. Considering the gender issues in rural finances supports the Living No One Behind mantra by 
the United Nations. 
3.2 Poverty Reduction 
According to Holloway, Niaz and Rouse (2017), women disproportionately experience poverty from unequal 
division of labour and lack of equal access and control of resources.  This makes rural women a vulnerable 
group to poverty. Kapur and Reddy (2020) argue that access to basic financial services enables the less 
fortunate and more vulnerable in society to step out of the vicious cycle of poverty and empower themselves 
and their families. Poverty is rampant in rural areas, and rural women are more affected than men. When rural 
women have access to basic financial services, they can have the base to venture into income-generating 
projects. This can allow them to send their children to school, thereby breaking the generational cycle of 
poverty. Travelli, et al (2018) argue that financial inclusion is not only important for women to access and 
make transactions but also essential for saving money and building assets in a safe place. This, in turn, helps 
them escape poverty.  
According to Mecha (2017), poverty leads to physical weaknesses due to lack of food, underdevelopment, and 
malnutrition, resulting in a low immune response to infections and an inability to access or afford health 
services. Children born to impoverished mothers often have weak immune systems due to malnutrition and 
frequently miss school due to illness. As a result, these children may face a challenging future; thus, poverty is 
passed from generation to generation. Moreover, their mothers may struggle to provide for them, as caring for 
sick children leaves little time for work. However, if rural women can access affordable financial products and 
services, poverty could be significantly reduced, leading to the upbringing of healthier children. 
According to the Finscope Survey 2014, 70% of the Zimbabwean population resides in rural areas (RBZ, 
2016). According to Anna (2015), poverty is higher in rural areas, with around 76% of rural people affected. 
Addressing the financial inclusion issues of rural women can result in improved living standards for 


INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF RESEARCH AND SCIENTIFIC INNOVATION (IJRSI)
ISSN No. 2321-2705 | DOI: 10.51244/IJRSI |Volume XI Issue VII July 2024
Page 518 
www.rsisinternational.org 
 
   
 
 
households. This is achieved through better access to food, healthcare, and education for children, as women 
typically spend much of their income on household and children's needs. Children with better education can 
make more informed life decisions and have opportunities for formal employment, thus ensuring sustainable 
employment. Historically and for traditional reasons, men continue to dominate livestock ownership and 
production in rural Zimbabwe, making decisions regarding their management, use, and disposal (FAO, 2017). 
In rural areas, men tend to own more valuable livestock like cattle, while women primarily own poultry. By 
providing access to financial services programmes, women can venture into more valuable livestock 
production. 
3.3 Family Wellbeing 
According to Williams, et al (2018), when women earn an income, they gain more control over it. They are 
likely to reinvest it in their households by improving their children's education and health, providing better 
food and nutrition for their family, and increasing the family's livelihood assets. Financial inclusion benefits 
the overall well-being of the family, as women tend to spend most of their income on the household and 
children. Hence, promoting financial inclusion among rural women can lead to improved outcomes for 
children, households, nutrition, and the broader community. 
In Nepal, offering easily accessible, free savings accounts to rural female heads of households resulted in 84% 
of women opening an account. This boosted spending on education and nutritious food (Hendrick, 2019). 
Usually, female-headed households are more susceptible to poverty, and financial inclusion is a powerful tool 
in mitigating poverty in such households. This creates an opportunity for their children to access education, 
thereby breaking the cycle of poverty. According to Phina (2015, cited in Hendrick, 2019), compared to those 
without accounts, these women also increased health-related expenditures, enabling households to better 
respond to health emergencies.  
3.4 Dealing with Shocks 
According to the AFI (2021), improving rural financial services is necessary for boosting agricultural 
productivity, increasing agriculture-related income, and assisting the poor in diversifying their livelihoods. It 
also aids in the development of non-agricultural income, improves nutrition, and builds resilience against 
climate and other periodic shocks. This helps prevent the risk of falling into poverty traps. When rural women 
have access to formal financial services, they can diversify their income sources and manage shocks such as 
droughts and cyclones more effectively.  In addition, income from non-agricultural projects can be used to 
purchase food, resulting in food security. The financial inclusion of rural women can also enhance agricultural 
productivity by purchasing fertilisers, hybrid seeds, and chemicals. Alshebani and Khandare (2014) argue that 
rural people, like everyone else, need diverse financial services to run their businesses, build assets and 
manage risk. 
3.5 Economic Empowerment 
Financial services promote economic empowerment and active participation in the financial system, 
particularly for rural women (Hendriks, 2019). In Zimbabwe, rural women make up the largest group among 
the financially excluded. By including them in the financial system, they are empowered to make financial 
decisions at the household level. This allows them to meet specific goals, such as improving the health, 
education, and nutrition of their children. Financial empowerment increases female participation in community 
decision-making, improves well-being, and combats socio-economic marginalisation (World Bank, 2020). 
When rural women have access to formal financial services, they can start and grow small businesses. They 
can use their financial strength to participate in community decisions, leading to community and eventually 
rural development. 
Financial tools can empower rural women within the household to make financial decisions and gain control 
over resource allocation. According to Hendrick (2019), in the Philippines, the initiation of goal-based 
accounts boosted savings by 81%. This led to enhanced bargaining power for women within the household, 
increased expenditure on female-oriented consumer durables, and notably appealed to less empowered women.  


INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF RESEARCH AND SCIENTIFIC INNOVATION (IJRSI)
ISSN No. 2321-2705 | DOI: 10.51244/IJRSI |Volume XI Issue VII July 2024
Page 519 
www.rsisinternational.org 
 
   
 
 
Thus, financial inclusion empowered these less-empowered women.  
Women's empowerment has been on the agenda of every government, as noted by Samant et al. (2019). Since 
women make up a large portion of every country's population, their financial inclusion, especially in rural 
areas, can enhance national development. Samant et al. (2019) further argue that women's empowerment is a 
prerequisite for nation-building and economic development. Despite constituting half of the population, 
women often do not enjoy the same status as their male counterparts.  
3.6 Access to Micro-insurance 
Other prominent financial services under financial inclusion include insurance and payment facilities (Fareed, 
2021). Insurance is critical because it can be used to manage shocks and mitigate risks faced by rural women. 
These shocks include drought, death, illness, crop failure, death of livestock and floods. Rural women can be 
covered against such risks if they have access to insurance. Without insurance rural women and their families 
continue being vulnerable to unforeseen disasters. 
In Zimbabwe, according to the Finmark (2020) survey, the uptake of insurance services by rural women is 4% 
as compared to 17.2% in urban areas. Insurance uptake is still very low for rural women, and access to 
financial services can help improve access to better health services. Rural insurance helps rural women to 
venture into more viable projects. According to a field experiment by Karlan et al. (2014), in Ghana, 
households that obtained free micro insurance adopted high-risk crops, invested more in cultivation, and ended 
up with higher revenue. In this case, insurance gives farmers an opportunity to break out of the cycle of 
poverty. With the aid of micro insurance, rural women can venture into cash crop farming and move out of 
subsistence farming.  
3.7 Creates Employment 
Financial inclusion can indirectly create employment for women in rural areas. According to Soyemi et al. 
(2020), access to credit boosts the establishment of new businesses and enables the expansion of existing ones. 
The start-up expansion creates jobs for the unemployed. Financial inclusion for rural women provides access 
to affordable loans, enabling them to develop livelihood strategies that create employment. These strategies 
may include gardening, poultry farming (including road runners and broilers), sewing, and knitting projects. 
These home-based projects create income for women. Many rural women already possess skills acquired while 
growing up, which can be transformed into businesses.  
As reported by Soyemi et al. (2020), the availability of credit in Mongolia enabled more women to expand 
their businesses, generating 8.5% higher entrepreneur's profit. In essence, rural women ought to be financially 
included to reap the benefits mentioned earlier. When women are financially included, their livelihoods are 
transformed. This will eventually lead to rural transformation by reducing the feminisation of poverty. 
FACTORS CAUSING THE FINANCIAL EXCLUSION OF RURAL WOMEN 
This section will discuss the factors leading to the financial exclusion of rural women. 
4.1 Inadequate Requirements 
Rural women often lack the credit history required to secure loans from formal financial institutions. They are 
frequently excluded from the financial system and may be viewed as riskier applicants, especially first-time 
borrowers without a credit history. This can lead to higher interest rates (Al-shami, Razali and Rashid, 2018), 
further excluding them from formal financial systems. In Zimbabwe, there is no credit register specifically for 
rural women that financial institutions could use to assess credit history and worthiness. Additionally, these 
women are often not formally employed and lack the three months of bank statements often required by banks. 
4.2 Gender Inequality 
In some countries, women are still oppressed and considered inferior, unable to access microfinance services  


INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF RESEARCH AND SCIENTIFIC INNOVATION (IJRSI)
ISSN No. 2321-2705 | DOI: 10.51244/IJRSI |Volume XI Issue VII July 2024
Page 520 
www.rsisinternational.org 
 
   
 
 
independently. The World Bank (2018a) states that in countries like Chad, Guinea-Bissau, and Niger, married 
women are still required to have permission from their husbands or male relatives to open a bank account. This 
further restricts their access to financial services. Such patriarchal practices prevent women from pursuing 
other income-generating activities, perpetuating gender inequality. 
4.3 Financial Illiteracy 
According to FAO (2020), women in rural areas often have lower education levels than men and fewer 
opportunities for specialized training and entrepreneurship programmes. Lower levels of education lead to 
financial illiteracy, which in turn creates difficulties for rural women in using and adopting digital financial 
services. This gender gap contributes to the challenges rural women face when trying to access financial 
products. According to the United Nations (2018), over half of poor rural women lack basic literacy. The same 
is true for numeracy; both prevent women from managing money, engaging in trade and accessing 
information.  
As a result of their financial illiteracy, these women face challenges in understanding basic income and 
expenditure, budgeting, setting financial goals, negotiating financially, and managing debt. This negatively 
impacts their small businesses. Most of the 3.9 billion people who are not connected to the internet are poorer 
and less educated. The majority are rural women and girls (UN Women, 2018). FAO (2019) states that 
illiteracy is a key factor limiting rural women’s ability to benefit from financial services, as all financial 
procedures, such as instructions, rules, contracts, statements, cheques and letters, are communicated in written 
form. In most cases, the English language is used in these documents. However, most poor women are 
unfamiliar with the language. Documents should be simplified for individuals with limited literacy and, when 
necessary, translated into local languages to ensure understanding among the poorest rural women. 
According to GAO (2010, cited in Mwangi, 2018), a lack of financial education can lead rural women to 
purchase unsuitable products or face difficulties with credit when seeking access. In some cases, these women 
may engage with banks that charge high-interest rates, leading to an accumulation of debt and exacerbating 
their poverty. As noted by Mwangi, (2018), there is a need to address language barriers and low literacy levels 
that pose challenges in developing financial education initiatives for the financially excluded. Such barriers 
may deter rural women from accessing financial services. 
Dube (2015) argues that the poor often do not have the capacity to prepare financial accounts for their 
businesses, which is a requirement for credit risk analysis by most financial institutions. Providing basic 
financial literacy training will contribute to human capital development. The acquired skills will be crucial in 
planning and managing finances daily, weekly, monthly, and annually. Access to microfinance without 
financial literacy will not alleviate poverty in rural areas. 
4.4 Debt Accumulation 
In some instances, the financial inclusion of impoverished rural women through microfinance institutions has 
worsened their situation. Crispen and Kantchewa (2023) observed that clients often use microfinance for 
consumption rather than business, which can lead to debt accumulation as it is also used to settle existing 
debts. This can trap rural women in a vicious cycle of poverty, causing them to move from one microfinance 
institution to another to manage their debt. In extreme cases, as argued by Fofana et al. (2015), this debt trap 
can lead to suicide, leaving children orphaned due to microfinance debt—a circumstance arguably worse than 
poverty. If not careful, poor women risk becoming enslaved by microfinance institutions. 
According to Ganle (2015), in rural Ghana, the World Vision findings show that some women have become 
empowered, while others have become disempowered as a result of accessing a loan. This can result from 
mismanagement of the loan due to a lack of financial literacy. The loans are often used for unproductive 
activities. Additionally, these women find it challenging to distinguish between profits and capital. Therefore, 
there is a need to invest in financial literacy training in rural areas.  


INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF RESEARCH AND SCIENTIFIC INNOVATION (IJRSI)
ISSN No. 2321-2705 | DOI: 10.51244/IJRSI |Volume XI Issue VII July 2024
Page 521 
www.rsisinternational.org 
 
   
 
 
4.5 Limited Access 
Rural women have limited access to the formal financial sector compared to those in urban areas. The Reserve 
Bank of Zimbabwe (RBZ, 2016) noted that financial inclusion is skewed towards the urban population at 89%, 
while the rural population is at 62%, even though 70% of Zimbabwe's population resides in rural areas. The 
Zimbabwe Association of Micro Finance Institutions (ZAMFI) (2018), reported that as of 30 September 2018, 
female clients constituted 45% (189 236) of the total clients, while male clients made up 55%. There were 112 
rural branches compared to 205 urban branches of financial institutions. These statistics show that few women 
access formal financial services. The delay in reducing financial inclusion barriers means that a greater portion 
of the country cannot access finances to start income-generating projects that can improve their living 
standards and reduce poverty in rural areas. 
4.6 Unqualified Personnel 
Formal financial institutions in developing contexts often lack specific expertise in rural and agricultural 
financing, specifically targeting rural women as potential clients of financial services (FAO, 2020). There is a 
need for personnel who are gender sensitive, who can work with poor rural women with low levels of 
education and are financially illiterate. In some cases, employees in formal financial institutions are unwilling 
to relocate to rural areas due to their remoteness, inaccessibility and poor network. They prefer urban areas 
with better living standards in terms of better road networks, electricity and water supply. Karn (2018) argues 
that the microfinance industry is facing difficulties finding professional and qualified personnel to work for 
microfinance institutions, primarily in rural areas, leading to management deficiencies.  
4.7 Currency Instability and Inflation 
Currency instability and inflation negatively affect efforts to improve financial services for the rural poor. 
Alshebani and Khandare (2014) state that currency exchange rate instability can limit loans obtained from 
donors and other external sources. This is currently the case in Zimbabwe, where currency instability may 
restrict the amount of loans available to rural women from both internal and external. Ozili (2022) also note 
that inflation can lead to high-interest rates, making borrowers more reluctant to apply for loans. The risk of 
not being able to repay loans due to high-interest rates discourages rural women from taking them, even when 
they are available. Therefore, currency stability is crucial for promoting access to microfinance services for 
people with low incomes. 
4.8 Lack of Collateral Security 
Rural populations, particularly women, often lack collateral due to limited land ownership (AFI, 2022). In 
rural areas, women rarely own land, making it difficult for them to secure loans from formal financial 
institutions. In Zimbabwe, land title deeds are not issued in rural areas. Instead, ninety-year leases are given, 
which some banks do not accept as collateral. Often, these leases are under the names of male family members 
such as husbands, fathers, or brothers. According to Sangwe, Gicharu, and Mahea (2010), rural women usually 
face challenges in providing the required collateral since they may not possess sufficient properties and assets. 
According to UN Women (2018,), less than 13% of landowners are women. Men hold the majority of land 
ownership, which can be used as collateral security. Traditionally, all married male members of a community 
have access to arable plots. The right to allocate these plots rests with local government authorities and 
traditional leaders operating within jurisdictions under the Rural District Council Act (1988) and Communal 
Lands Act (1982) (FAO, 2017). This implies that if land were used as collateral for microloans, few women 
could utilise it. Rural women in Zimbabwe make up the majority of smallholder farmers (FAO, 2017). Women 
often receive minimal or no financial support, such as loans and credit, even in sectors where they are 
predominant. These sectors include the informal economy, micro and small-scale enterprises, and agriculture, 
where women spend most of their time working. For rural areas to be transformed, women need financial 
support in these critical economic sectors. Most of the rural women are not formally employed and lack 
collateral security, making them particularly vulnerable to poverty. 


INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF RESEARCH AND SCIENTIFIC INNOVATION (IJRSI)
ISSN No. 2321-2705 | DOI: 10.51244/IJRSI |Volume XI Issue VII July 2024
Page 522 
www.rsisinternational.org 
 
   
 
 
According to SIDA (2018), rural women's limited right to land ownership constrains their ability to provide 
collateral for loans, limiting their ability to invest in agricultural inputs and equipment. This situation 
exacerbates their poverty, as they are forced to remain as subsistence farmers. In Ethiopia, Ghana, and 
Tanzania, mechanised irrigation technologies were primarily used on plots controlled by men (FAO, 2017).. 
Despite performing most of the agricultural work, women had limited rights and served only as 'helpers' to 
their husbands as is predominant in rural Zimbabwe (Anderson et al., 2021). 
4.9 Cultural Norms and Values 
According to the United Nations (UN) (2020), cultural and social norms can restrict women’s financial and 
economic independence. Due to patriarchy, some women in rural areas are not allowed to visit financial 
institutions by their husbands. Lyons, et al (2020) reveal that 45% of women who do not own a mobile phone 
are not permitted to own one by a family member. This restriction limits rural women's ability to reap the 
benefits of digital financial services. Social norms, such as women's lack of decision-making power, low self-
esteem, and customary laws regarding women's ownership of properties and assets, suggest that women may 
not be able to provide the necessary collateral for credit facilities (Adewoyin, et al 2022). Rural women usually 
own assets like kitchen utensils and hens, which formal financial institutions do not accept as collateral 
security. In terms of farming, women often grow small grains for household use, while men venture into 
government and privately financed cash crops like tobacco, maize, and cotton. 
In a number of traditional cultures, rural women are responsible for a variety of household chores that take up 
most of their day, making it challenging for them to manage their financial needs (FAO, 2020). These 
productive, reproductive, and communal roles make it difficult for women to attend financial literacy lessons 
and meetings. In Pakistan, social norms that limit women's interactions outside their households and expect 
them to operate businesses from home have tempered the success of start-up loans and business training for 
female-owned enterprises (Said et al., 2019, cited in Peteriechner, 2021). 
Government policies and strategies aimed at addressing women's issues often overlook the unique challenges 
faced by women in rural areas. According to FAO (2017), patriarchal systems, cultural norms, and traditions 
significantly influence gender dynamics in Zimbabwe. These dynamics are particularly evident in women's 
access to and control over resources, their roles and participation in (i) decision-making, (ii) rural institutions, 
and (iii) development planning. Certain cultural norms can inhibit women from venturing into economic 
activities such as financial services. Some societies believe that a woman's role is primarily at home, caring for 
children and managing household tasks (Mecha, 2017). 
4.10 Geographical Distance and Profitability. 
Kapur and Reddy (2020) state that most commercial banks operate only in urban commercial areas and set up 
their branches in profitable areas. Hence, people living in rural areas find it difficult to access financial 
services. Banks and other financial institutions view operating in rural areas as unprofitable due to the limited 
customer capacity base. This further financially excludes women in rural areas who do not have the financial 
capacity to travel to urban areas to pursue financial services. Women in rural areas can also face travel 
constraints from their husbands. The low economically active population density in rural areas leads to wasted 
time and reduces economies of scale (Kapur & Reddy, 2020). Banks operating in such regions may become 
increasingly unprofitable, further limiting their operations in rural areas to serve women. 
Boaky-Adjei, et al (2022) discuss geographical barriers that pose challenges for households and businesses in 
remote, rural areas and islands. These challenges pertain to data connectivity (like fixed broadband or mobile 
data access), the availability of physical branches of financial institutions, and even reliable electricity. 
Electricity or solar energy is vital in providing financial services to poor rural women. However, these are not 
readily available in rural Zimbabwe, and the lack of electricity impacts the availability of the network for 
digital financial services. Additionally, the costs of solar installations are too high for rural women. 
Geographical distance from a financial institution is a greater limitation for women than men. Women’s 
limited mobility is often due to heavy workloads, childcare responsibilities, a lack of transportation, and 


INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF RESEARCH AND SCIENTIFIC INNOVATION (IJRSI)
ISSN No. 2321-2705 | DOI: 10.51244/IJRSI |Volume XI Issue VII July 2024
Page 523 
www.rsisinternational.org 
 
   
 
 
cultural barriers around travelling alone (SIDA, 2018). Financial institutions are reluctant to establish branches 
in rural areas due to their remoteness and irregular client base. Therefore, women find it difficult to travel to 
urban areas to access these services. 
4.11 Unsuitable Financial Products 
According to the Alliance for Financial Inclusion (AFI) (2022), the financial needs of rural women are poorly 
served by the current rural financial system. The products and services are often too generic and designed to 
the needs of urban, wealthier customers. Sometimes, financial institutions require business plans and bank 
statements from borrowers to acquire loans; however, rural women do not have these documents. Appropriate 
financial services for rural women should be able to fund farming as a business and support rural 
entrepreneurship. 
The lack of financial expertise among institutions working with rural women often leads to the development of 
inappropriate products. As reported by the FAO (2020), this significantly impairs financial institutions' ability 
to design products and services tailored to the specific strengths, opportunities, needs, and weaknesses of rural 
women, including product features (e.g., interest rates, flexible payment terms, grace periods) and alternative 
delivery channels suited for rural contexts. Many institutions use the group guaranteeing technique for 
repayment when working with rural women, which deters these women from taking small business loans. 
Additionally, the repayment periods are often too short and lack a grace period, which intimidates many rural 
women. 
Financial services providers often overlook gender differences in the demand for and use of financial products 
and services. Generally, they do not invest in understanding their clients and potential clients thoroughly 
(SIDA, 2018). The products offered fail to meet the needs of rural women. Since these women often lack the 
necessary documents and collateral security required by banks, financial products should be tailor-made to 
accommodate and serve such clients. 
Gender-discriminatory bank laws still exist in certain banks and financial institutions, hindering the financial 
inclusion of rural women. According to Miles (2017), restrictions in some countries prevent women from 
applying for credit or making money transfers without a male family member's signature. Such gender-
discriminatory banking laws impede rural women's access to credit. If a male member refuses to sign or is 
unavailable, these women are denied the opportunity to access credit. 
The tendency to assume women are one big market segment leads to the development of generic products that 
ultimately meet no one’s needs (World Bank Group, 2018). There is a significant difference between urban 
and rural women's needs. Rural women may need credit for basic necessities, while urban women might need 
loans for luxuries. Therefore, there is a need for customised financial products based on need assessments. For 
example, the Pronaf-Mulher credit line, which targets women in rural areas in Brazil, contributed to a 15% 
increase in women's credit share in rural development programmes from 2001 to 2006 (Miles, 2017). 
4.12 Lack of Capital 
In Ghana and Nigeria, the number of female entrepreneurs exceeds that of men (IDRC, 2018). Despite women 
making an essential contribution to the agricultural and rural economies in Sub-Saharan Africa, female 
entrepreneurs continue to receive a small fraction of the total capital available for Small to Medium Enterprises 
(SME) investment across Africa (IDRC, 2018). Rural women face barriers when accessing credit, which 
adversely impacts their businesses. Men have better credit opportunities, further widening the gender gap in 
financial inclusion.  
4.13 Lack of Income 
According to the National Financial Inclusion of India (2019-2024) and Matunhu and Mago (2013), the lack of 
surplus income among rural women leads to their financial exclusion. Having access to surplus income gives 
rural women an opportunity to save with formal financial institutions. These savings records can then be used 


INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF RESEARCH AND SCIENTIFIC INNOVATION (IJRSI)
ISSN No. 2321-2705 | DOI: 10.51244/IJRSI |Volume XI Issue VII July 2024
Page 524 
www.rsisinternational.org 
 
   
 
 
to secure loans when these institutions require a three-month bank statement. Without surplus income to save, 
rural women are unable to provide the necessary bank statements. In summary, these factors make rural 
women an unattractive clientele for banks and financial institutions. As such, they must be addressed to 
achieve the financial inclusion of rural women.  
PILLARS OF WOMEN’S FINANCIAL INCLUSION 
For this study, policy pillars from the State Bank of Pakistan (SBP) will be used because they are specific to 
gender issues in rural financial services. Figure 1 below shows the pillars to reduce the gender gap in financial 
inclusion. 
 
Figure 1: Women’s Financial Inclusion Policy Pillars 
Source: Adapted from the State Bank of Pakistan: Banking on equality (2019:11). 
5.1 Gender Diversity in Financial Institutions and Access Points 
According to the SBP (2019), maintaining gender balance in the "access points'' of banks, including branches 
and agents, is essential to encourage women to use formal financial services. Rural women are generally more 
likely to approach female agents because of cultural barriers associated with interacting with males. Gender 
diversity in financial institutions means that men and women have equal opportunities and financial inclusion 
representation in recruitments, retention, promotion, leadership and training (AFI, 2023 & ADB, 2018). This 
will ensure that gender issues in the financial sector are taken into consideration at all levels. The SBP (2019) 
suggests that internal gender imbalances must be addressed by recruiting more women to bank boards. These 
women representatives will advocate for the inclusion of rural women at higher decision making levels. The 
Central bank of Bahamas and Bank of Namibia have 60% women staff (AFI, 2023) and China has 60% (ADG, 
2018). However some countries still have lower percentages of women staff in the financial sector. India has 
16% (ADB, 2018). 
5.2 Women-Centric Products and Outreach Targets 
The SBP (2019) postulates that all banks must develop a suite of financial services and products that cater to 
women's financial needs (household, entrepreneurial, and others) while remaining mindful of existing social 
norms. Social norms are often overlooked in banking. However in Jordan, Dinarak recruited 30 female agents 
to increase outreach in rural areas and the bank is now being considered as being more women friendly 
financial institution (Women’s Enterprise Fund (AWEF), 2019).The SBP (2019) also states that financial 
institutions will be assigned outreach targets for savings and credit products to enhance access, usage, and 
quality of financial products for women. In many developing countries, banks are not given outreach targets 
for rural women, excluding them from the formal financial sector.  
AWEF (2019) states that Dinarak has developed a network of female agents to reach disadvantaged women in 
rural areas. This helps to improve outreach to previously excluded areas. Furthermore, the SBP (2019) 
emphasises the need for dedicated financial literacy and marketing campaigns, partnerships with stakeholders, 
and simplification of loan documentation processes. These measures are intended to improve awareness and 
reach various female market segments. At present, loan forms in banks are often too complicated for rural 


INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF RESEARCH AND SCIENTIFIC INNOVATION (IJRSI)
ISSN No. 2321-2705 | DOI: 10.51244/IJRSI |Volume XI Issue VII July 2024
Page 525 
www.rsisinternational.org 
 
   
 
 
women to understand. Dinarak redesigned brochures showing how women use e-wallets on day to day basis 
(AWEF, 2019). This is a huge improvement considering the fact that most promotional material portray male 
customers. 
5.3 Women Champions at all Touch Points 
There is a need to help rural women feel comfortable in the formal financial sector. According to SBP (2019), 
financial institutions should encourage the presence of women champions at customer touch points, such as 
bank branches and call centres, to make women more comfortable accessing financial products suited to their 
needs. These women champions could be women in business who have undergone gender-sensitive training. 
According to Graham (2019) due to the existence of gender inequalities related to cultural norms limiting 
women’s mobility and association in Afghanistan FINCA established a women only branch called Women’s 
Special Branch (WSB) with staff being exclusively women. The bank is meant to meet women’s financial 
needs at their convenience and addresses cultural barriers associated with dealing with men. They would serve 
as the primary contact for women customers, providing information about financial services and products, non-
financial advisory services, and facilitating complaint resolution (SBP, 2017). 
5.4 Robust Gender-Disaggregated Data Collection and Target Setting 
The absence of data can create a mismatch between perceived barriers to women's financial inclusion and 
policy interventions designed to address these constraints (SBP, 2019). Currently, there is a mismatch in rural 
sex-disaggregated data in many developing countries. However in countries like Tunisia and Morocco gender 
sex aggregated data on women’s financial inclusion is publicized in a bid to improve financial inclusion 
strategies (World Bank 2018). However the data seems to be too general for rural financial inclusion strategies 
to be improved. According to SBP (2019), a gender focus on women's financial inclusion with quantitative 
targets can lead to improved financial inclusion for women. Therefore, banks will be assigned indicative 
targets for maintaining gender balance in products and services and will be asked to submit their respective 
roadmaps for reaching these targets. Without these initiatives, there will be no roadmap towards the financial 
inclusion of rural women.  
5.5 Policy Forum on Gender and Finance 
There is a need for a policy forum on gender and finance.  SBP (2019) states that research has proven that 
high-level platforms on gender, which regularly invite leaders from various spheres of the private and public 
sectors, are instrumental in prioritising women’s financial inclusion. They drive the agenda forward and garner 
support from multiple stakeholders. Collaborations also assist with fundraising towards rural women’s 
financial inclusion. In these forums, opportunities and challenges of rural women’s financial inclusion will be 
discussed and reviewed, providing room for improving existing policy frameworks. According to ADB (2018), 
policies promoting gender parity in China's financial sector are becoming effective, with an increase in the 
number of women working in this sector. This will prompt reforms in legal and regulatory frameworks to 
create space for innovations that support greater women’s financial inclusion. These may include co-titling 
between husbands and wives on landholding and revised account opening forms for widows and single women 
to facilitate easy account opening (SBP, 2019). Most bank forms have sections on spouses, which might be 
unnecessary for widows and single women. 
CONCLUSION 
From the above discussion it is clear that rural women face various challenges in accessing financial services. 
Financial services to rural areas are critical in poverty eradication. This chapter will help in making future 
financial services programmes gender sensitive hence benefiting both males and females. 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
Gender issues should be included in financial services so that rural women can benefit from financial services. 
These include workshop with rural men to train them on gender equality so that rural women can get support at 


INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF RESEARCH AND SCIENTIFIC INNOVATION (IJRSI)
ISSN No. 2321-2705 | DOI: 10.51244/IJRSI |Volume XI Issue VII July 2024
Page 526 
www.rsisinternational.org 
 
   
 
 
household level were these barriers exist. Financial institutions must design gender sensitive financial 
programmes like collateral free loans, grace periods for rural women facing challenges in repaying loans due to 
pregnancy issues. Promotional material, account opening and loan application forms should be in local 
languages. Financial literacy programmes should also be designed and disseminated in local languages. Male 
champions in gender sensitivity should be used in such programmes. Female agent should be available at 
grassroots level to address proximity barriers. There is also need for financial rural sex disaggregated data so 
that progress on financial services can be assessed and improved.  
REFERENCE LIST 
1. AFI, (2022). Policy catalogue: Women–led MSME access to finance. SME Finance Working Group. 
AFI. 
2. AFI, (2022). Enhancing financial inclusion in rural areas. Guideline note NO.50.May 2022. Financial 
Inclusion Strategy (FIS) Learning Group. Kuala Lumpur. 
3. AFI, (2023). A Toolkit for Increasing Gender Diversity and Women’s Leadership in Financial 
Regulatory Institutions. AFI. 
4. Al-shami, S. S. A., Razali, R. M., & Rashid, N. (2018). The effect of microcredit on women 
empowerment in welfare and decisions making in Malaysia. Social Indicators Research, Volume 137 
Issue 3. pp 1073–1090. 
5. Arab Women’s Enterprise Fund (AWEF) (2019. Women’s Economic Empowerment in Market 
Systems Learning Series. AWEF. 
6. Boaky-Adjei, N.Y., Auer R, Frost, J., Prenio, J., Banka, H., Faragallar, A., and Natarajan, H. (2022). 
Bank for International Settlements. FSI Insights on Policy Implementation. Number 41. Central Bank 
Digital Currencies: A New Tool in Financial Inclusion   Toolkit. April 2022. 
7. Dube, H. (2015). The Downfall of the Micro Lending Businesses in Zimbabwe Causes and  
8. Remedies. International Review of Research Markets and Global Economy (IRREM).1 (4) an online 
research journal (ISSN: 2311-3200)  
9. El Mquirmi, N.A (2020). How Post structural feminism and its focus on the concept of gender provide 
innovative challenges in the status quo within security studies. Policy brief, March 2020, PB-20/12. 
Policy Center for New South. 
10. Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO), (2017). National Gender Profile of Agriculture and Rural 
livelihoods. FAO. Harare. 
11. FAO, (2019). Women’s Access to Rural Finance: Challenges and Opportunities. Rome. 
12. FAO, (2020). Deconstructing the Gender Gap in Rural Financial Inclusion. The Case of Mozambique 
and Tanzania. FAO and UN. Rome. 
13. Fareed, F., (2021). Financial Inclusion, Entrepreneurship and Gender: An Empirical Assessment Using 
Micro-economic Data. University of Paris, Est. Erudite. 
14. Financial Technology (FINTECH), (2020). Zimbabwe FINTECH ecosystem study. DFID. London. 
15. Fofana, N.B., Antonides, G., Niehef, A. & Van Ophem, J.A.C., (2015). How Microfinance Empowers 
Women in Cote d’Ivoire. Rev Econ Household, 13 (4), pp. 1023-1014. 
16. Graham, S. (2019).\Keeping the Promise of Financial Inclusion for Women. FINCA. 
17. Hendricks, S., (2019). The Role of Financial Inclusion in Driving Women’s Economic Empowerment. 
Development in Practice. 29(8).1029-1038.Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation: Routledge. 
18. Holloway, K., Niazi, Z. & Rouse, R., 2017. Women’s economic empowerment through financial 
inclusion: A review of existing evidence and remaining knowledge gaps. New Haven, CT: Innovations 
for Poverty Action: Financial Inclusion Program. 
19. International Development Research Centre (IDRC). (2018). Exploring FINTECH Solutions for 
Women. IDRC. Ottawa. 
20. Kapur, R. & Reddy, R. (2020). Financial in Rural India. Banking and AIM sector in India January 
2020. An Instinct of Growth. Grant Thornton. 
21. Kilic, D.I (2022). A Post Structural Feminist Approach to The Acquisition of Gender Roles in Early 
Childhood. Istanbul University.  Journal of Women Studies, 125, pp. 141-154. 
22. Accessed: http://doi.org/10/26650/iukad.2022.1135316. 
23. Kolozova, K., (2021). Post-structuralism. The Oxford Handbook of Feminist Philosophy: Oxford. 


INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF RESEARCH AND SCIENTIFIC INNOVATION (IJRSI)
ISSN No. 2321-2705 | DOI: 10.51244/IJRSI |Volume XI Issue VII July 2024
Page 527 
www.rsisinternational.org 
 
   
 
 
24. Lyons, A., Kass-Hanna, J. and Greenlee, A., 2020. Impacts of Financial and Digital Inclusion on 
Poverty in South Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3684265 
or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3684265 
25. Maclaran, P. & Stevens, L., (2018). Thinking through feminist theorising: Post structural Feminism, 
Ecofeminism and Intersectionality. University of Forward Thinking. Westminster. 
26. Matunhu, J. and Mago, S., (2013). Rural Banking for Rural Development in Zimbabwe. Studs Tribes 
Tribals, Vol 11 Issues 1. pp 43-47. 
27. Masvotore, P. and Tsara, L. (2023). Poverty with Faminine Face: Theorising the Feminisation of 
Poverty in Mutasa District, Zimbabwe. Herv teol Stud. Vol 79. 
28. Miles, K.S., (2017). Case Study. Advancing Women’s Financial Inclusion through Gender Sensitive 
Business Environment Reform. Donor Committee for Enterprise Development. 
29. Mwangi, C., (2018). Factors Hindering Sustainable Financial Inclusion of Rural Women in Kenya. A 
Case of Garissa County Kenya. KCA University. 
30. National Strategy for Financial Inclusion of India (2019-2014). The Government of India. 
31. Ozili, P.K., (2023). Financial inclusion-exclusion paradox: How banked adults become unbanked 
again. Financial Internet Quarterly, 17(2), pp.44-50. 
32. Peteriechner, L., (2021). Women’s Financial Inclusion Toolkit. Paving the Way for Women’s 
Economic Empowerment. Deutsche Gesellschaft Für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ): GmbH. 
33. Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe. (2010-2020). The National Financial Inclusion. Government of 
Zimbabwe. 
34. Samant P., Singh A.B., Misra, R. and Dwivedi, R., (2019). Impact of Microcredit on Women 
Empowerment Indicators. An Empirical Research in the State of Uttarakhand. International Journal of 
Recent Technology and Engineering. Volume 8 Issue 3. pp3702-3709. 
35. SIDA. (2018). Toronto Centre Notes. Practical Leadership and Technical Guidance from Toronto 
Centre. Advancing Women’s Digital Inclusion. 
36. Singh, P. (1995). Feminism(s), Education and Social Justice in 1990S. Poststructural Theory and the 
Politics of Inclusion. Lin, M Kalanztis (Ed). A fair go in Education, pp.18-24. Belconnen. Australia 
Association of Curriculum Studies. (ISBN 1-875864-09-1). 
37. Soyemi, K.A, Olowofela, O.E, and Yunusa, L.A. (2020) Financial Inclusion and Sustainable 
Development in Nigeria. Journal of Economic Development. Vol 39(1). pp 105-131. 
38. Travelli, C., Villanueva, C., Marincian, M., Pels, J., Sachetti, F.C., Robino, C., Wabley, H. Martnez L. 
& Magnelli M., (2018). Gender Economic Equity. Financial Inclusion for Women. A Way Forward. 
W20.T20. 
39. UNCTAD, (2020). Policy options to support women farmers to benefit from strengthening linkages 
between agriculture and tourism. United Nations. 
40. UN Women, (2018). Challenges and Opportunities in achieving gender equality and the empowerment 
of rural women and girls.2018 Commission on the Status of Women agreed conclusions. UNWOMEN. 
41. Vishwanath, N.S., (2021). Inclusive Finance India Report. New Delhi. 
42. William, J., (1990). Feminism and Post Structuralism. Michigan Law Review. 88(6) Accessed: 
http://resipitory.law.umich.edu/mir/vol 88/iss6/31.  
43. World Bank Group, (2021). The Drive for Financial Inclusion: Lessons of World Bank Group 
Experience WBG, IFC and MIGA. World Bank. 
44. World Economic Forum. (2022). Global gender gap report 2022: Insight report.