Ensuring College Access and Success for 
Black Students in Higher Education
Authored by Frank Harris III, Ed.D. and Tina M. King, Ed.D. 
April 2025


or Black Students in Higher Education • The Campaign for College Opportunity • April 2025
2
Preface
Over 50% of American students in our public schools are Latinx, Black, Asian American, Native Hawaiian 
and Pacific Islander (NHPI), or American Indian/Alaska Native (AIAN).  Tapping into their talent and ensuring 
their access to a college education is essential to our future economic power and the success of our multi-
racial democracy. Yet, despite the historical exclusion and current underrepresentation of many Americans 
in our colleges and universities—including those who are first-generation, undocumented, or low-income—
anti-equity forces continually threaten to regress the nation back into a pre-civil rights era of darkness and 
exclusion.
These pressures are not new. Setbacks to our progress, such as the current national attacks on diversity, 
equity, and inclusion and the 2023 Supreme Court of the United States (SCOTUS) decision curtailing race-
conscious college admissions, follow a lineage of discrimination. That is why the Campaign for College 
Opportunity launched the Equity, Inclusion, Action (EIA) initiative, which ensures historically underserved 
students are supported to reclaim their right to a college education free of barriers and empower them to 
thrive in our nation’s economy and democracy. The EIA initiative accomplishes this by equipping higher 
education stakeholders with a blueprint for resistance, combatting discriminatory attacks with solutions 
in college preparation, admission, affordability, and completion that protect every student’s right to a 
transformative college degree.  True leadership is demonstrated on the frontlines of resistance in activating 
this blueprint. By standing with students in equity, inclusion, and action, higher education and policy leaders 
advance the core value that all people in America—regardless of race, ethnicity, zip code, income level, or 
documentation status—should be afforded a college degree and the opportunity to succeed. Our country’s 
future counts on our fight to make good on the progress our ancestors dreamed of.
Ensuring College Access and Success f


Ensuring College Access and Success for Black Students in Higher Education • The Campaign for College Opportunity • April 2025
3
Foreword
May 25, 2020 marked an inflection point in the long-standing strained and toxic relationship between 
the U.S. and the Black people who reside within it. That was the day when George Floyd was tragically 
murdered by Minneapolis police officer Derek Chauvin, who kneeled on his neck and restricted his 
breathing for approximately 9 minutes. Although it was not the first time a Black person was killed by a 
law enforcement officer in the U.S., this grotesque act of violence was broadcast on social media for the 
entire world to see. Shortly after Floyd was killed, we learned of the deaths of Breonna Taylor and Ahmad 
Aubrey, which had occurred a few months earlier in February 2020. Taylor was a Black woman who was 
tragically killed when Louisville police officers broke into her apartment and recklessly discharged their 
firearms, presumably to apprehend her boyfriend. Aubrey, a Black man, was murdered while jogging 
through a neighborhood in Glynn County, Georgia by 3 white, racist men, one of them a retired  
police officer. 
Floyd, Taylor, and Aubrey’s murders sparked protests around the world. Millions marched and organized 
demands for justice and accountability, and collective voices were raised in affirmation of Black lives 
mattering. The calls for justice and affirmations were quickly followed by statements of solidarity that 
were developed by organizations across the U.S., including colleges and universities, that promised to 
take proactive approaches to stand in solidarity and strengthen their efforts to serve Black communities, 
students, and educators. Some institutions infused more resources into their diversity, equity, and inclusion 
(DEI) efforts. Others promised scholarships to Black students. Even more eliminated barriers to access in 
admissions. 
Unfortunately, despite enormous outrage expressed and promises made, actions often fell short. Even 
worse, in recent years, institutions in states like Florida, Texas, and Utah enacted anti-DEI policies and 
got rid of much-needed resources, programs, and support for Black students. These actions were further 
emboldened by the 2023 SCOTUS ruling in the Students for Fair Admissions (SFFA) case. That decision 
reversed decades of precedent and ended the ability of colleges and universities to consider race as one 
of many factors in deciding which qualified applicants to admit. Chief Justice John Roberts, a longtime 
critic of affirmative action programs, wrote the decision for the court majority, saying that “the nation’s 
colleges and universities must use colorblind criteria in admissions”1  (para. 3). In dissent, Justice Ketanji 
Brown Jackson wrote, “With let-them-eat-cake obliviousness, today, the majority pulls the ripcord and 
announces ‘colorblindness for all’ by legal fiat. But deeming race irrelevant in law does not make it so  
in life.” Justice Sonia Sotomayor wrote, “Today, this court stands in the way and rolls back decades of


4
precedent and momentous progress,” adding that the decision “cements a superficial rule of 
colorblindness as a constitutional principle in an endemically segregated society where race has always 
mattered and continues to matter.” She added that the majority’s vision of race neutrality “will entrench 
racial segregation in higher education because racial inequality will persist so long as it is ignored” (p. 
68).2  We strongly agree with this dissent. Historical inequality in access to American education, broadly, 
and to higher education, specifically, has been based on race/ethnicity and gender. Closing the intentional 
gaps that have resulted from this history and providing a quality education for all Americans, especially 
Black Americans, requires a commitment to addressing this inequality and a focus on practices that work 
to support outreach, engagement, enrollment, and the success of Black students in higher education. 
Despite the SCOTUS ruling, and the pervasive federal efforts to weaponize DEI amid a new presidential 
administration, it is possible to legally pursue bold, courageous innovation and intentional strategies to 
ensure access to and success in higher education for Black students. This brief contributes to meeting this 
imperative. 
Frank Harris III, Ed. D. 
Professor, postsecondary education 
Director, Community College Equity Assessment Lab 
San Diego State University 
Tina M. King, Ed. D. 
President 
San Diego College of Continuing Education
Ensuring College Access and Success for Black Students in Higher Education • The Campaign for College Opportunity • April 2025


Ensuring College Access and Success for Black Students in Higher Education • The Campaign for College Opportunity • April 2025
5
Purpose of This Brief
The Campaign for College Opportunity has always been a champion of ensuring equal and equitable 
treatment of all students in higher education. We recognize the value and necessity of understanding 
the experience of all learners from diverse backgrounds by disaggregating data to explore trends, 
opportunities, and challenges. More importantly, we seek to bring attention to the expertise, assets, and 
strengths of Americans from all backgrounds, while ensuring that solutions are targeted to support these 
same students. This is the third brief within our EIA initiative that highlights practices to support historically 
underserved students. This brief is tailored and informed by experts, best practices, and an authentic 
commitment to ensure that all Black students can go to college and succeed without sacrificing or leaving 
their cultural assets behind. 


Ensuring College Access and Success for Black Students in Higher Education • The Campaign for College Opportunity • April 2025
6
Overview
This brief seeks to serve as a clarion call for all educators and policymakers who believe higher education 
is a viable pathway to socioeconomic prosperity and eradicating centuries of generational poverty for 
Black people residing in the U.S.  Despite the enactment of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which marked the 
end of de jure segregation in the U.S., Black people continue to suffer the consequences of slavery, Jim 
Crow segregation, and anti-Black racism, as expressed in unequal access to a quality education and job 
opportunities across the U.S.
In this brief, we discuss the current status of Black students in higher education, with a particular focus 
on recent trends in college enrollment, persistence, and attainment. We highlight salient challenges and 
issues that impact the ways in which Black students experience college and university campuses. We 
discuss the challenges that Black students must often navigate to focus on opportunities that can be 
leveraged to improve both their experiences and outcomes in higher education. In doing so, we propose 
a set of innovations and promising practices that can be enacted by college and university leaders. 
Finally, we offer policy solutions for higher education leaders and state and federal policymakers that can 
eliminate systemic barriers and transform higher education to ensure Black student success.
This brief is primarily focused on public community colleges and 4-year institutions because they have 
an obligation to educate the public, regardless of race, socioeconomic status, ability, religion, citizenship, 
or other indicators of privilege or status. Moreover, because these institutions are supported by public 
resources, they are often the most affordable and accessible options for higher education, regardless of a 
student’s life circumstances. However, the expertise offered in this brief is also applicable to and relevant 
for independent colleges and universities.


For over 180 years, HBCUs have played a pivotal role in the education and empowerment of 
Black students in the U.S. These institutions have been at the forefront of providing higher education 
opportunities to Black Americans during times when access to PWIs was legally restricted or severely 
limited. They provided a unique space for students who have been historically excluded from higher 
education and have been effective in cultivating a sense of belonging. HBCUs are also known for their 
smaller class sizes, allowing for personalized instruction and mentorship, which contribute to higher levels 
of student engagement and retention.5
Ensuring College Access and Success for Black Students in Higher Education • The Campaign for College Opportunity • April 2025
7
The Role of Historically Black Colleges and Universities 
It is critical to acknowledge the rich legacy and important role that Historically 
Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) have played in providing access to higher 
education for Black people in the U.S. and preparing them for the workforce. 
Of the nearly 4,000 Title IV degree-granting institutions in the U.S., HBCUs 
comprise only about 100.3  Yet, HBCUs have consistently outperformed their 
non-HBCU peers in educating and graduating Black students. Often, they do so 
with a fraction of the resources—such as state and federal funding, endowments, 
grants, alumni donations, land, human capital, and other needed resources—that 
are afforded to predominantly white institutions (PWI) and other minority-serving 
institutions (MSIs). A disproportionate number of Black professionals, including 
physicians, lawyers, judges, and scientists, are graduates of HBCUs. Some HBCUs 
have been applauded for their excellence in attracting students of all racial/
ethnic backgrounds, not just Black students, to prepare for careers in pharmacy 
(e.g., Xavier University in New Orleans) and veterinary medicine (e.g., Tuskegee 
University in Alabama). Thus, some of the challenges we discuss in the brief may 
not be as salient at HBCUs as they are at other institutions. Likewise, some of the 
recommendations for institutional practices and policies might not be applied as 
seamlessly at HBCUs as at other institutions. Clearly, HBCUs have a lot to teach us 
about how to effectively educate Black students.4 


Despite representing less than 3% of U.S. postsecondary institutions, HBCUs enroll 8% of Black 
undergraduates and award 13% of all bachelor’s degrees earned by Black students.6 Consistently, 
HBCUs have demonstrated their success in fostering academic excellence and leadership among Black 
students. They offer supportive and inclusive environments where students can thrive academically and 
personally. Research indicates that HBCUs have the distinctive ability to facilitate upward mobility because 
they have higher rates of mentorship, support, and experiential learning opportunities than non-HBCU 
institutions.
There has been an increase in applications to HBCU institutions since 2020, in contrast with the 
overall decline at other postsecondary institutions nationwide, with some HBCUs reporting a 30% 
increase in applications between the 2019 to 2021 academic cycles. Recent research has indicated that 
HBCUs provide increased access for lower-income students, which generates greater upward mobility for 
these students when they graduate, compared to non-HBCU institutions. About 30% of HBCU students 
move up at least 2 income quintiles from their parents by age 30, compared to 18% of alumni from  
non-HBCU institutions.
In recent years, HBCUs have partnered with the California Community Colleges to expand 
opportunities for community college students through the 2-year Associate Degree for Transfer (ADT) 
program.7  This initiative guarantees community college students with an ADT admission to more than 30 
HBCUs to streamline the transfer process, reduce time-to-degree completion, and make higher education 
more accessible and affordable. Students can receive a fee application waiver and be considered for 
transfer scholarships if they have a 3.2 or higher grade point average. The ADT has been impactful in 
expanding access to HBCUs for California’s community college students and highlights the commitment of 
more than 30 participating HBCUs to inclusivity and educational equity.
Ensuring College Access and Success for Black Students in Higher Education • The Campaign for College Opportunity • April 2025
8


Ensuring College Access and Success for Black Students in Higher Education • The Campaign for College Opportunity • April 2025
9
The State of Higher Education for Black 
Students
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, in 2022, approximately 334 million people resided in the U.S., of 
which about 48 million (14%) identified as Black. This reflected a nearly 33% increase from the year 2000, 
when approximately 36 million people identified as Black.8   Like most racially minoritized populations, 
Black people in the U.S. are often viewed as monolithic, but although the vast majority of them identify 
solely as Black (single race, non-Hispanic), 5.4 million identify as multiracial Black (non-Hispanic) and 3 
million identify as Black Hispanic.9
In 2022, Black households had a median household income of $53,500, which is more than $20,000 
less than the median household income for all races, $74,580.10   During the same year, the percentage of 
Black people experiencing poverty dropped to a record low of 17%.11  Yet, disparities still persist between 
Black people who experience poverty and members of other racial/ethnic groups. The poverty rate for all 
racial groups that year was 12%, 11% for whites, 9% for Asians, and 17% for Hispanics.12 
Homeownership is a key indicator of prosperity in the U.S. Owning a home provides families with an asset 
that can be leveraged for generational wealth-building. Because of racist social and lending policies, like 
redlining, which make it difficult for Black families to purchase real estate in the U.S., Black people have 
the lowest homeownership rates. In 2023, that rate was 46% among all major racial/ethnic groups.13  


Black high school students are not supported to graduate at the national 
average rate.
Figure 1. Adjusted Cohort High School Graduation Rates by Race/Ethnicity, 2019-2020.
Data Source: National Center for Education Statistics. High School Graduation Rates. Condition of Education. U.S. Department of Education, Institute 
of Education Sciences.
Latinx
All
Black
Asian American and NHPI 
AIAN
white
86%
83%
81%
75%
90%
92%
Ensuring College Access and Success for Black Students in Higher Education • The Campaign for College Opportunity • April 2025
10
In comparison, the overall homeownership rate that year was 66%. Whites had the highest rate of all racial 
groups, at 74%.14 
Educational attainment has long been one of the few viable pathways out of low-income status for Black 
people and other racially minoritized populations in the U.S. An examination of national high school 
graduation rates for the class of 2019-2020 reveals some disparity for Black students when compared to 
their peers from other racial/ethnic groups. While the overall graduation rate for the class was 86%, the 
rate for Black students lagged 5 percentage points behind, at 81% (see Figure 1). When compared to the 
highest performing racial/ethnic group in the class, Asian American and Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 
(NHPI) students, the disparity for Black students was 11 percentage points. However, caution is always 
necessary when comparing aggregated data for the Asian American and NHPI population to other racial/
ethnic groups, as these data often mask disparities that exist for Southeast Asian, Pacific Islander, and 
Native Hawaiian students, who routinely are disproportionately impacted and underserved in education.


Black students enroll in college immediately after completing high school at 
rates similar to their peers.
Figure 2. Percentage Rate of Students who Enrolled in College Within 9 Months of High School 
Graduation, by Race/Ethnicity, 2021. 
Data Source: National Center for Education Statistics. (2024). Immediate College Enrollment Rate. Condition of Education. U.S. Department of 
Education, Institute of Education Sciences.
Community College
4-Year College
All
Latinx
Black
Asian American 
white
62%
19%
43%
59%
19%
40%
59%
17%
42%
85%
9%
76%
62%
19%
43%
Ensuring College Access and Success for Black Students in Higher Education • The Campaign for College Opportunity • April 2025
11
Since fall 2019, Black students’ enrollment in postsecondary education has steadily declined by 8.4%, a 
rate slightly higher than the 6.3% decline for all racial/ethnic groups during this same time frame.15  College 
enrollment declines can be attributed, in part, to several factors—notably the increasing cost of living in 
the U.S., the rising cost of attending college, and the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. In fall 2023, Black 
undergraduates represented approximately 1.64 million of the 15.25 million undergraduates enrolled 
in postsecondary education in the U.S.16, 17  In comparison, approximately 255,000 Black students were 
enrolled in a private nonprofit 4-year institution, while approximately 127,000 were enrolled in a private, 
for-profit, 4-year institution.18
The patterns of Black students who enroll in college immediately upon completing high school have 
reflected similar patterns for other racial/ethnic groups. According to data reported by the National 
Center for Educational Statistics (NCES), in 2021, 59% of Black high school graduates enrolled in college 
within 9 months of completion, compared to 62% for all racial/ethnic groups (see Figure 2). Also, like 
most students, Black students who matriculated to college immediately after high school in 2021 were 
nearly 2.5 times more likely to enroll at a 4-year institution than a community college, at 42% and 17%, 
respectively. Similarly, 43% of all graduates in the class enrolled at a 4-year school immediately upon 
completion, while 19% enrolled at a community college.


At public and private community colleges, Black students are supported to 
complete a degree within 3 years at rates far lower than white and Asian 
students. 
Figure 3. Three-Year Cohort Graduation Rates at U.S. Community Colleges by Race/Ethnicity, Students 
Enrolling in 2019.
Data Source: National Center for Education Statistics. (2024). Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System.
Public Community Colleges
2-Year Independent Nonprofit
2-Year Private For-Profit
Latinx
Black
Asian American 
AIAN
NHPI
white
2 or More
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
 
62%
 
45%
 
86%
 
52%
 
44%
 
48%
 
66%
 
27%
 
21%
 
42%
 
23%
 
27%
 
27%
 
36%
 
61%
 
46%
 
68%
 
50%
 
51%
 
51%
 
62%
Ensuring College Access and Success for Black Students in Higher Education • The Campaign for College Opportunity • April 2025
12
An examination of college graduation data disaggregated by race/ethnicity and institution type reveals 
disparities for Black students. Three-year graduation rates for Black students who enrolled in a public, 
private nonprofit, or private for-profit community college in 2019-2020 were 21%, 45%, and 46%, 
respectively (see Figure 3). In comparison, Asian students in the cohort had the highest 3-year college 
graduation rate at 42% for those enrolled at a public community college, 86% at a private nonprofit 
community college, and 68% at a private for-profit community college.


Public 4-year colleges and universities in the U.S. support less than half (42%) 
of Black students to complete a degree within 6 years. 
Figure 4. Six-Year Cohort Graduation Rates at U.S. 4-Year Colleges and Universities by Race/Ethnicity, 
Students Enrolling in 2016.
Data Source: National Center for Education Statistics. (2024). Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System.
Ensuring College Access and Success for Black Students in Higher Education • The Campaign for College Opportunity • April 2025
13
In 2016-2017, a similar pattern existed for Black students who enrolled in 4-year institutions. As shown 
in Figure 4 below, less than half of Black students in the 2016-2017 cohort graduated within 6 years, 
regardless of institution type.19  Moreover, along with American Indian/Alaska Native (AIAN) students, 
Black students had the lowest college graduation rates among the 7 racial/ethnic groups for whom data 
are reported. The 6-year graduation rate for Black students in the cohort was 42% for those enrolled at a 
public 4-year school and 46% at a private nonprofit 4-year school. Less than a third of Black students in 
the cohort who were enrolled at a private, for-profit, 4-year institution graduated within 6 years.
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
 
63%
 
46%
 
83%
 
56%
 
46%
 
66%
 
72%
Public 4-Year
4-Year Independent Nonprofit
4-Year Private For-Profit
 
52%
 
42%
 
74%
 
44%
 
37%
 
55%
 
63%
 
52%
 
31%
 
70%
 
45%
 
36%
 
39%
 
45%
Latinx
Black
Asian American 
AIAN
NHPI
white
2 or More


Just 1 in 4 Black Americans have a bachelor’s degree, a rate ten percentage 
points lower than the national average. 
Table 1. Educational Attainment in the United States by Racial/Ethnic Background, Ages 25 and Over.
Data Source: National Center for Education Statistics. High School Graduation Rates. Condition of Education. U.S. Department of Education, Institute 
of Education Sciences.
Less Than  
High School
HS Graduates
Some College/
Associate's 
Degree
Bachelor's 
Degree
Graduate or 
Professional 
Degree
BA or Higher
All
10%
26%
28%
22%
14%
36%
Latinx
27%
28%
25%
14%
7%
20%
Black
12%
31%
32%
15%
10%
25%
Asian American
12%
14%
17%
31%
27%
58%
NHPI
11%
37%
32%
14%
6%
20%
AIAN
15%
34%
34%
11%
6%
17%
white
6%
26%
29%
24%
16%
40%
2 or More
8%
24%
32%
23%
14%
36%
Other
11%
22%
27%
23%
17%
41%
Ensuring College Access and Success for Black Students in Higher Education • The Campaign for College Opportunity • April 2025
14
Approximately 29.8 million Black people in the U.S. (62%) are 25 years or older.20  Among them, 
approximately 7.8 million (25%) have obtained a bachelor’s degree or higher, 9.6 million (32%) have 
completed some college but have yet to earn a bachelor’s degree, and approximately 8.9 million (31%) 
have completed high school but have not attended college (see Table 1 below).
As shown in Table 1, the degree attainment rate for all races, comparatively, was 36%. The college degree 
attainment rate for whites was 40%—15 percentage points higher than the rate for Black people. The gap 
in degree attainment between Black people and the highest performing group, Asian Americans (58%), 
was 33 percentage points. 
Although the degree attainment rate for Black people has increased from 19% in 2012 to the current rate of 
25%, pursuing postsecondary education for Black students comes with salient challenges. In 2019-2020, 
60% of Black college students received a Pell Grant, compared to 40% of all students.21  Black students are 
also more likely to rely on student loans to pay for college. Whereas slightly more than a third of all students 
received a federal student loan, nearly half of Black students did so in the 2019-20 academic year.22  Black 
students also reported higher levels of debt-related education stress than other students.23


Ensuring College Access and Success for Black Students in Higher Education • The Campaign for College Opportunity • April 2025
15
How Black Students Experience College 
and University Campuses
Next, we turn our focus to how Black students experience college and university campuses and highlight 
salient challenges and the navigational capital required to overcome them.  
The founding of Harvard College (now Harvard University) in 1636 marked the beginning of higher 
education in the U.S. Yet, Black students were not allowed to study at a U.S. college until the 1790s, when 
John Chavis studied ministry at the College of New Jersey (now Princeton University). Even though more 
than 230 years and many legislative acts have passed since Chavis first studied there, Black students 
continue to experience challenges to access and success in higher education that can be attributed 
to their racial/ethnic identities. Chronic racism, disproportionate representation among students and 
educators, curricula that do not acknowledge the contributions and lived experiences of Black people, 
and persistent equity gaps in student success are some of the major factors that contribute to Black 
students feeling unsafe, unwelcome, and excluded at U.S. colleges and universities. Collectively, these 
challenges impact Black students’ success and result in the disparate academic outcomes highlighted 
earlier.


Ensuring College Access and Success for Black Students in Higher Education • The Campaign for College Opportunity • April 2025
16
Scholars have consistently concluded that Black students’ experiences are remarkably different from 
those of their white peers,24  who often perceive their campuses in positive ways.25  That Black students 
experience college and university campuses as chronically racist has been well-documented in decades 
of published research.26  As Harper and Hurtado (2007) noted, “Researchers have consistently found 
that racial/ethnic minority students and their white peers who attend the same institution often view 
the campus racial climate in different ways” (p. 12).27  Approximately 1 in 5 Black students reports being 
“discriminated against” and feeling “physically unsafe” and “psychologically unsafe” at their institutions.28
According to data reported by the U.S. Department of Education, race was a motivating bias in more than 
half of the hate crimes that occurred on college and university campuses in 2020.29  However, racism 
need not rise to the level of a reported hate crime to have a negative impact on Black students. Black 
students frequently report experiencing racial microaggressions, which are covertly communicated 
verbal or nonverbal messages that convey to people of color that they are not welcome in particular 
contexts or spaces.30  Wood and Harris (2024) have written extensively about “racelighting” at colleges 
and universities to describe the questioning, second-guessing, and undermining that often occurs when 
people of color illuminate their experiences with racism.31  Wood and Harris identified 4 types of messages 
that are often used to racelight people of color, including: (1) stereotype advancement, which involves the 
use of race-based stereotypes to justify negative perceptions of people of color; (2) inauthentic allyship, 
which gives the false pretense that a person, institution, or other entity will support and protect people 
of color from racism; (3) resistive actions, which are efforts enacted to protect those who engage in racist 
behavior from accountability; and (4) misrepresentation of the past, which entails reframing history, past 


Ensuring College Access and Success for Black Students in Higher Education • The Campaign for College Opportunity • April 2025
17
events, and injustices against people of color in ways that advance white supremacy. Smith, Allen, and 
Danley’s (2007) concept of racial battle fatigue is rooted in the notion that Black people experience 
racism—be it subtle or overt—nearly every day, which results in both physiological and psychological 
consequences.32  Racial microaggressions, racial battle fatigue, and racelighting have been linked by 
scholars to Black students’ experiences with stereotype threat33 and imposter phenomenon,34 which can 
negatively impact academic performance and success. Stereotype threat is “a situational threat—a threat 
in the air—that, in general form, can affect the members of any group about whom a negative stereotype 
exists (e.g., skateboarders, older adults, white men, gang members). Where bad stereotypes about these 
groups apply, members of these groups can fear being reduced to that stereotype” (p. 614).35  Clance and 
Imes define imposter phenomenon as “an internal experience of intellectual phoniness” that individuals 
with marginalized, salient identities can experience in response to oppressive educational environments, 
despite high levels of academic and professional achievement (p. 241).36
In addition to their experiences with campus racism, a factor contributing to Black students feeling unsafe, 
unwelcome, and excluded on college and university campuses is the lack of Black educators at most 
institutions. While Black educators are underrepresented nationally in nearly all educator roles at most 
colleges and universities, they are woefully underrepresented among full-time faculty members. In fall 
2022, Black faculty members represented about 7% (112,000) of the approximately 1.6 million full-time 
faculty members at degree-granting institutions in the U.S.37  Black faculty members play an important role 
in shaping educational experiences and outcomes for students. In addition to serving as role models for 
Black students interested in pursuing academic careers, Black faculty members are more likely than their 
white colleagues to take on the responsibility of building relationships with Black students, infusing Black 
scholarship into curricula, and intentionally creating learning environments that are safe, welcoming, and 
inclusive for Black students.38  They also take on a disproportionate amount of what is often described 
as “invisible labor” on college campuses, such as mentoring students who desire faculty careers and 
engaging in efforts that advance DEI at the institution. This work is described as invisible because it can 
be incredibly labor-intensive in regard to the time and resources (e.g., financial, emotional, cognitive) 
invested. Undoubtedly, institutions benefit from this work and have come to rely on it to support the 
retention, belonging, and success of Black students; to recruit, hire, and retain Black educators; and to 
promote DEI at the institution. Nevertheless, invisible labor is typically unrecognized or not valued in 
faculty tenure and promotion processes.
The cost of pursuing a college or university education is yet another persistent challenge that negatively 
impacts the experiences of Black students. In the 2023-2024 academic year, the total cost of attendance 
(inclusive of tuition and fees, housing and food, books and supplies, transportation, and other related 


Ensuring College Access and Success for Black Students in Higher Education • The Campaign for College Opportunity • April 2025
18
expenses) at a public 2-year institution in the U.S. was $19,860. The total cost of attending a public 4-year 
institution was $28,840 for an in-state student and $46,730 for an out-of-state student when both types of 
students live on campus. The total cost of attending a private 4-year institution with on-campus housing 
was $60,420.39  As noted previously in the brief, Black students are more likely than their white peers to 
receive student loans to pay for their education, and they report higher levels of debt-related education 
stress. Moreover, Black students are nearly twice as likely as other students to report that they have taken 
on full-time work, a responsibility that competes with their studies.40
Finally, Black students’ experiences with racism; financial pressures; the demands of work, family 
commitments, and education stress; as well as other life stressors contribute to mental health and 
wellness concerns, notably chronic anxiety and depression. In 2022, 37% of Black students indicated that 
“support from a school counselor or mental health professional” would enable them to remain enrolled in 
college, compared to 28% of all other students.41  Yet, given the high demand for mental health support at 
colleges and universities since the COVID-19 pandemic and the racial reckoning that occurred in 2020, 
these services can be extremely difficult to access. Moreover, the time, cost, and social stigma associated 
with the need for mental health support in communities of color are additional barriers that complicate 
proactive and responsible help-seeking for Black students.
Given the challenges of experiencing racism, the high cost of paying for college, the underrepresentation 
of Black college educators, and mental health and wellness concerns, ensuring that Black students have 
equitable access and opportunities to succeed in higher education requires strategic institutional action 
and targeted policy interventions.


Ensuring College Access and Success for Black Students in Higher Education • The Campaign for College Opportunity • April 2025
19
Opportunities to Advance Black Student 
Success at our Colleges and Universities
We propose policy and practice interventions that have the potential to improve Black students’ access to, 
and feeling of belonging and success in, postsecondary education. The proposed policies and practices 
are aligned with the trends and challenges discussed in this brief and focus primarily on demonstrating 
an institutional commitment to Black students that holds institutions and educators accountable for these 
students’ success, increases and improves their access to higher education, closes gaps in success, 
makes higher education more affordable, and engenders a sense of belonging.
While developing these ideas, we are mindful of the current political climate, the election and presidency 
of Donald Trump, and recognize that there is resistance to enacting some of these ideas in some states, 
particularly those that have proposed or enacted anti-DEI legislation. That said, we did not allow the 
current political climate to dilute or limit the policies and practices we propose to better serve Black 
students in the U.S.
It is important to note that institutional efforts to meet the needs of Black students must occur while 
acknowledging the heterogeneity and intersectionality that exist within Black communities. While it is true 
that Black students on college and university campuses often have shared experiences, how they make 
sense of their experiences and respond to education environments is largely determined by their salient 
identities that intersect race/ethnicity and where they are developmentally within them. Therefore, the 
application of the practices and innovations proposed herein must take into account the broad range of 
Black identities, including as women, student-athletes, student parents, adult learners, U.S.-born, foreign-
born, neurodivergent, disabled, LGBTQIA-identified, and English-language learners.


Recommended Innovations and 
Promising Practices
Black students’ enrollment in postsecondary education has declined by 8.4% since fall 2019, which 
is among the highest rate of decline for all racial/ethnic groups. There are also significant disparities 
between Black high school graduates who enroll in college immediately upon completion compared to 
their white peers. Given these trends, increasing Black students’ access to higher education must be at 
the forefront of any effort to improve education and life outcomes for Black people in the U.S. 
	
Institutions committed to providing access to Black students would benefit from 
developing a strategic outreach and engagement plan that supports an increased 
number of applications from and an increased enrollment of Black students.
Resources:
Ensuring Fairness in College Admissions
Advancing Equity by Rethinking the Use of Tests in College Admissions
The Urgency of Fair and Equitable Holistic Review of College Applicants
Expert Spotlight: Olufemi “Femi” Ogundele
Ensuring College Access and Success for Black Students in Higher Education • The Campaign for College Opportunity • April 2025
20


	
Early exposure to college by way of enrichment programs and initiatives that target 
students before and during high school can serve Black students well. These 
efforts should not just expose Black students to college but allow them to immerse 
themselves on campuses for sustained periods of time.
Resource:
Expert Spotlight: Youlonda Copeland-Morgan
	
Summer programs that allow students to take courses, obtain information about 
applying to college, and spend nights in campus residence halls can go a long way 
in demystifying the college experience for Black students.
	
Dual enrollment programs that allow students to take college classes while in high 
school are also valuable for Black students' college trajectories.
Resource:
	
Greater Equity in College Access Through High School/College Dual Enrollment 
Programs
	
Access efforts must also account for the important role that community colleges 
play in providing access to higher education for Black students and pathways to 
transfer for those who want to earn bachelor’s degrees at 4-year institutions.
Resource: 
Advancing Equity With Effective Community College Transfer Pathways
	
Colleges and university admissions centers should make sure they are adequately 
staffed with educators who are responsible for establishing transfer partnerships 
with local community colleges, engaging in direct outreach to Black transfer 
students, among other students, and developing programs and services to create 
a transfer-receptive culture for Black and other transfer students.42, 43
Ensuring College Access and Success for Black Students in Higher Education • The Campaign for College Opportunity • April 2025
21


	
Finally, college affordability is directly related to college access.  Institutions must 
continue to develop strategies to ensure that Black students, among others, are 
able to pay for tuition, fees, technology, supplies, living expenses, and other costs 
associated with attending college. Having a robust portfolio of grants, scholarships, 
and other financial support for Black and low-income students is essential. 
Moreover, supporting students who struggle to meet basic needs, like food, 
housing, and transportation, is also an important strategy for ensuring affordability 
and access to college for Black students. For example, all students at Compton 
College are entitled to 1 free meal per day and a weekly food voucher, which can 
be used at a farmers’ market hosted on campus. Students have reported that 
these resources significantly improve their access to nutritious food and reduce 
the stress of daily meal planning, allowing them to concentrate more effectively on 
their studies. While some institutions may not have the resources to support every 
student in this way, they should consider doing so for Pell Grant-eligible students. 
Resources:
Equitable College Affordability Policies and Practices
Advancing Equity Through a Universal Financial Aid Application Policy
Ensuring College Access and Success for Black Students in Higher Education • The Campaign for College Opportunity • April 2025
22


Compton College by JingKe888 on Flickr.
or Black Students in Higher Education • The Campaign for College Opportunity • April 2025
23
Compton College’s Food Security & BASIC NEEDS ProgramS
Compton College in southern Los Angeles has implemented a comprehensive food security program 
to support students. Dedicated to ensuring student success by providing essential resources, Compton 
College offers several food resources for students, including the Tartar Food Pantry, and provides students 
with 1 free meal a day at the Everytable Cafeteria on campus. The college partners with the Los Angeles 
Regional Food Bank for a monthly mobile food pantry on campus and hosts a weekly farmers’ market 
where students are eligible for $20 in vouchers weekly to spend at the market. It also provides students 
with one-on-one CalFresh application support. In 2023, 30% of students used the campus food pantry, 
42% utilized farmers’ market vouchers, and 32% participated in food distribution days, highlighting the 
significant impact of these food insecurity programs.44
In addition to offering food-related support to their students, Compton College has expanded to offer 
other basic needs services, such as technology, including laptops and Wi-Fi hotspots. During the 2021-
2022 academic year, the college distributed basic needs-related support to 3,060 students (students 
may have received more than one form of support). In a longitudinal analysis, the institution reported that 
students who received food and technology support showed higher course success rates than those who 
did not.45
Ensuring College Access and Success f


Ensuring College Access and Success for Black Students in Higher Education • The Campaign for College Opportunity • April 2025
24
Current Housing Support:
Compton College offers housing referral services to connect students with community resources for 
housing and other essential needs. The college provides programs like CalWORKs, which supports 
students transitioning from welfare to self-sufficiency, and emergency grants to assist those facing housing 
crises. These services aim to help students maintain stability while pursuing their education.46
Housing Support COVID-19 Pandemic:
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, Compton College partnered with the Coalition for Responsible 
Community Development (CRCD) to implement the Shallow Subsidy Housing Assistance Program 
(SSHAP). CRCD, a community development organization based in South LA, focuses on enhancing the 
quality of life in South Central LA. Through the partnership, which lasted from September 2020 to January 
2022, students who needed housing assistance received rental subsidies, housing stability planning, and 
connections to additional support services.47 
Between 2020 and 2022, Compton College’s SSHAP program significantly reduced homelessness 
among its participants. At the start of the program, 43% of SSHAP-enrolled students had experienced 
homelessness in the past year, compared to 21% of non-participants. By the end of the program in 2022, 
the percentage had dropped to 29%. Similarly, in 2020, 18% of participants reported having no stable 
housing prior to joining SSHAP; however by 2022, the rate had fallen to 6%. Over the program’s 2-year 
span, students also demonstrated improved financial stability in managing housing costs, along with a 
reduction in housing instability. By 2022, fewer students reported needing to move within the previous 
12 months compared to baseline levels observed at the program’s outset.48
Future Housing Support:
In June 2022, California lawmakers allocated $80.4 million in the 2022-2023 state budget to the Compton 
Community College District (CCCD) for a 250-bed student housing facility at Compton College. This 
housing aims to enhance students’ focus on education and career goals, provide a safe environment, and 
foster independence. It also enables Compton College to better support historically marginalized groups, 
including foster youth and veterans. The facility will play a key role in improving students’ financial and 
educational outcomes.49


Sacramento State University by Ronbo76 on Wikimedia Commons. 
Ensuring College Access and Success for Black Students in Higher Education • The Campaign for College Opportunity • April 2025
25
The Black Honors College at Sacramento State University
In 2024, Sacramento State University established the nation’s first Black Honors College, aimed at 
fostering academic excellence and community. This pioneering program offers specialized coursework 
in Black history, life, and culture, and includes biweekly seminars on economic empowerment, self-
determination, and leadership. It also features designated weekly study hours, paid internships, and 
research opportunities. To remain in the honors college, students are expected to actively participate in 
study hours and seminars and to engage with at least 80% of the events and programming.50  The honors 
college and its expectations provide a support system and community for Black students, faculty, and staff 
members. Students benefit from specialized residential living and a learning community that provides 
shared housing and access to academic advisers, counselors, and therapists, ensuring comprehensive 
academic and personal support. Mentorship from Black faculty and staff members further enhances 
this support network, encouraging academic success and personal growth. The Black Honors College 
is designed to empower students with a strong sense of self-efficacy. Additionally, the program includes 
cultural events, networking opportunities, and partnerships with local organizations to enrich students’ 
academic and professional trajectories. Sacramento State’s holistic approach not only elevates the 
educational experience for Black students, but also contributes to a more inclusive campus environment.


Ensuring College Access and Success for Black Students in Higher Education • The Campaign for College Opportunity • April 2025
26
African American Male Education Network Development
The African American Male Education Network Development (A2MEND) is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit 
organization established in 2006 by 6 emerging African American male administrators who leveraged 
their scholarly and professional expertise to create institutional change within California’s community 
college system.51  Its mission is to improve academic success, close achievement gaps, and increase 
transfer rates for underrepresented students, while also developing culturally competent servant leaders 
through initiatives like the Student Leadership Mentor Academy, which offers mentorship and resources 
to foster institutional change.52  The organization specifically supports the retention and success of men 
of color through targeted mentorship and academic advising. Dedicated to advancing the interests and 
success of underrepresented students, faculty and staff members, and administrators, A2MEND aims 
to create a sense of belonging, engage students in discussions about identity and systemic barriers, 
and empower them to navigate higher education successfully by addressing the systemic issues and 
improving retention rates.53  Since it was established, A2MEND has mentored over 500 African 
American male community college students, awarded $500,000 in scholarships, provided 25 learning 
abroad scholarships, and established 44 campus-based student charters across California.54  The 
A2MEND charter strives to advance the community college sector’s Vision 2030 goals by conducting 
targeted recruitment events, organizing campus programs, and providing academic and financial support 
while engaging in community outreach initiatives.


Bronx Community College by Onasill - Bill Badzo on Flickr.
Ensuring College Access and Success for Black Students in Higher Education • The Campaign for College Opportunity • April 2025
27
The City University of New York’s Black Male Initiative
The City University of New York’s (CUNY) Black Male Initiative (BMI) was established in 2005 with funding 
from the New York City Council after hearings led by Councilman Charles Barron. Through the grant, 15 
demonstration projects were funded to improve the enrollment and graduation rates of students from 
underrepresented groups.55  The CUNY-wide initiative aims to increase, encourage, and support the 
inclusion and educational success of students, particularly African, African American, Caribbean, and 
Latino/Hispanic males. The BMI envisions creating model programs throughout the university to provide 
additional layers of academic and social support that will be integrated into academic departments and 
student affairs offices, with the primary goal of increasing enrollment, retention, GPA, and graduation rates 
of underrepresented students.  
Since its inception, CUNY’s BMI has graduated over 100,000 students, trained more than 30,000 
mentors, and expanded to 30 programs across 25 campuses.56  Recently, the program has evolved 
to include wellness and career development, leveraging partnerships with the New York State My 
Brother’s Keeper program, the Eagle Academy Foundation, and elected officials to tackle workforce 
development and immigrant challenges. The BMI has also recently collaborated with CUNY Graduate 
Center to demystify the graduate school admissions process. Through panels and discussions with faculty 
members, students, and alumni, students learned about different types of graduate programs through the 
Graduate Center, CUNY School of Law, and CUNY School of Medicine, and gained insights into admissions 
and financial aid.


Ensuring College Access and Success for Black Students in Higher Education • The Campaign for College Opportunity • April 2025
28
The CUNY BMI program targets increasing enrollment and supporting success for underrepresented 
students through 6 strategic pillars. These include diversity recruitment, the utilization of various outreach 
methods to attract students, particularly males, to CUNY; culturally competent peer-to-peer mentoring, 
where trained upperclassmen provide support to lower division students, while acknowledging their 
diverse backgrounds and cultural differences; academic enhancements, such as tutoring and academic 
support to foster a sense of belonging and improve retention; institutional commitment by senior leaders 
to secure resources and support; advisory committee meetings, where internal and external partners 
collaborate to ensure project success; and socioemotional programming, which provides workshops and 
activities to help students manage emotions, set goals, and build positive relationships.
The University of Tennessee Knoxville’s Center for Career Development 
& Academic Exploration
The University of Tennessee Center for Career Development and Academic Exploration (CCDAE) in 
Knoxville has implemented initiatives committed to fostering an inclusive environment that supports the 
career development of Black, Hispanic, and Indigenous students. The center emphasizes the importance 
of supporting students to explore their strengths, to make informed decisions about internships 
and employment, and to acquire tools to overcome stereotypes and barriers that may hinder their 
progress. The center’s key initiatives include connecting students with organizations related to culture 
and diversity through tools like the Campus Labs Student Organization Finder, and providing guidance 
through mentorship programs, specifically the university’s Multicultural Mentoring Program. Students 
are also guided to assess potential employers through resources like Glassdoor and DiversityInc to 
verify compliance with federal laws using the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC). 
       Hodges Library at University of Tennessee, Knoxville by Wyoming_Jackrabbit on Flickr.


Ensuring College Access and Success for Black Students in Higher Education • The Campaign for College Opportunity • April 2025
29
The CCDAE implements practices that are designed to empower students from underrepresented 
backgrounds to find affirming and supportive workplaces while navigating their career paths. Overall, 
these practices ensure that students from underrepresented backgrounds can find affirming and 
supportive workplaces.
Spelman College Wellness Center
Spelman College, an HBCU in Georgia, launched a Wellness Revolution in 2012.57  The comprehensive 
initiative was designed to enhance the physical, mental, and emotional wellbeing of its students. It was 
created in response to the alarming health statistics among Black women, who are significantly more 
likely to develop high blood pressure, Type 2 diabetes, heart disease, breast cancer, and strokes. Beverly 
Tatum, Spelman’s president, noted that many of these illnesses can be prevented and shared her 
personal experience of attending too many funerals for young alumni. Recognizing the specific challenges 
Black women face in higher education, Spelman established a holistic approach to student wellness and 
success. Since its inception, the wellness initiative has introduced a range of offerings, including yoga 
classes, fitness challenges, cooking demonstrations, and mental health workshops. Spelman College 
has integrated wellness into its campus life, promoting healthy habits, such as increased hydration 
and stress management techniques, and offering healthier dining choices on campus.58  As part of its 
commitment to a healthier lifestyle for students and faculty and staff members, the college removed soda 
machines and Krispy Kreme doughnuts from campus and invested in a $17 million fitness center, which 
features an Olympic-sized pool and weight training equipment.
Spelman College by Broadmoor on Wikimedia Commons.


Ensuring College Access and Success for Black Students in Higher Education • The Campaign for College Opportunity • April 2025
30
To support its efforts, Spelman College partnered with the National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development (NICHD) to cosponsor a summit on nutrition, physical activity, and wellness; connect 
students with health researchers through internships to cultivate interest in scientific careers; and educate 
potential national partners about the Wellness Revolution59 as a model program for college women. 
Students have embraced the wellness initiative at Spelman College, with more of them engaging in 
healthier habits, such as drinking more water and participating in fitness activities together. By prioritizing 
the health and well-being of its students, the college’s Wellness Revolution serves as a model for how 
HBCUs and other institutions can create supportive environments that promote the overall success of their 
student bodies.
UC San Diego’s Black Academic Excellence Initiative
University of California (UC), San Diego’s Black Academic Excellence Initiative (BAEI), led by Vice 
Chancellor Becky Petitt, is dedicated to improving the experience of Black students, faculty, and staff 
members on campus.60  The initiative fosters community conversations and collaborations to create 
inclusive spaces. The BAEI Advisory Committee was established to recommend ways to enhance 
the presence and experience of Black students at UC San Diego. The initiatives brought forth by the 
committee aligned with the campus’s Strategic Plan for Inclusive Excellence, which focuses on access and 
success, climate, and accountability, aiming to create a welcoming environment and ensure institutional 
accountability.61  The committee’s primary goal is to develop recommendations that strengthen support 


Ensuring College Access and Success for Black Students in Higher Education • The Campaign for College Opportunity • April 2025
31
for UC San Diego’s Black campus community. The initiative aims to enhance undergraduate student 
enrollment by increasing scholarship funds, ensuring that prospective and admitted students can pursue 
higher education at UC San Diego.
Founded on May 10, 1930, at Howard University, the National Pan-Hellenic Council (NPHC) is the umbrella 
organization for the Divine Nine, 9 historically Black fraternities and sororities.62  Its mission is to provide 
a unified voice for these organizations, foster collaboration, and advocate for the needs and interests of 
Black students. At UC San Diego, the NPHC is an integral component of the Black Academic Excellence 
Initiative. The NPHC Plaza63 at UC San Diego, the first of its kind in the University of California system, 
is a student-centered space dedicated to promoting the values and contributions of the Divine Nine. 
This plaza serves as a hub for cultural appreciation, collaboration, and advocacy.
The NPHC at UC San Diego is the coordinating body for the campus chapters of the Divine Nine 
organizations. It plays a critical role in guiding these chapters, ensuring they adhere to NPHC policies. The 
council organizes and supports a variety of events and programs, including social, service, cultural, and 
professional development activities, with the initiatives aiming to enhance cultural awareness, engage 
the campus community, and provide resources and support for Black students. Through these efforts, it 
connects the campus with the broader network of historically Black fraternities and sororities, working to 
enrich the student experience and advocate for the needs of Black students.


Ensuring College Access and Success for Black Students in Higher Education • The Campaign for College Opportunity • April 2025
32
Each of these innovative programs feature key elements of strategies and practices noted below 
that support Black student success.
Create Welcoming Campuses 
One of the most important things a campus can do is to intentionally establish “Black-affirming” spaces, 
such as Black resource centers, Black honors colleges, Black studies programs, and Black collections 
in the campus library. Black students regularly report that spaces like these not only engender a sense 
of belonging at their campuses but also help to counter negative stereotypes about Black students 
being intellectually inferior to their non-Black peers.
Resources: 
How Universities Can Build and Sustain Welcoming and Equitable Campus Environments
Representation Matters 
It is important that colleges make sure Black students are equitably represented in institutional 
governance bodies, like associated students and boards of trustees, as these entities often play a key 
role in advocating for students and preparing them for leadership roles when they graduate. Far too 
often, Black students are either underrepresented or not represented at all in important leadership 
roles across campus.
Resources: 
Still Left Out: How Exclusion In California’s Colleges & Universities Continues To Hurt Our 
Values, Students, and Democracy
Equity-Minded Faculty Hiring Practices: Promoting Fairness, Inclusion, and Faculty Diversity to 
Support Student Success in Higher Education
Commit to Being a Black-Serving Institution
Campuses that are committed to Black students must also unapologetically affirm their status 
as Black-Serving Institutions. Black-Serving Institutions are colleges and universities that enroll a 
significant number of Black students and demonstrate a transparent commitment to their success. This 
commitment can be reflected in each institution’s academic and student support programs, campus 
engagement opportunities, hiring practices, professional learning, and accountability processes. 
Additionally, it should be reflected in the institution’s mission and strategic plan, with measurable goals 


Ensuring College Access and Success for Black Students in Higher Education • The Campaign for College Opportunity • April 2025
33
committed to outreach to and the engagement of prospective Black students, and in the tracking of 
Black student enrollment, persistence, course success, and college completions. Of course, ensuring 
Black excellence in traditional student success metrics, like graduation and transfer rates, is also 
paramount. Senate Bill 1348 (SB 1348) has been passed by the California Legislature, establishing the 
California Black-Serving Institution designation. This designation formally recognizes colleges and 
universities in the state that excel at supporting Black students in achieving postsecondary excellence 
and success.64  Policy efforts like SB 1348 can be very effective in encouraging institutions to affirm 
their Black-serving status and to be intentional about their strategies for supporting Black students.
Support Excellence Among Teaching Faculty
Institutions that are unapologetically committed to Black students’ success should also require their 
Centers for Teaching and Learning and other professional development units to offer all campus 
educators ongoing learning opportunities for teaching and serving Black students, among other 
students.
Invest in Research Opportunities
Supporting the faculty by providing institutional grants or other resources to engage Black students, 
among other students, in undergraduate research, which has been identified by researchers as a high 
impact practice that contributes to student success, can also be beneficial to students and faculty 
members.
Provide Access and Preparation for Jobs
In addition, it is essential that community colleges that host pre-apprenticeship and workforce 
development programs, which lead to employment that pays livable wages in their regions, make 
sure that Black students are equitably represented among those who enroll in and complete these 
programs.


Ensuring College Access and Success for Black Students in Higher Education • The Campaign for College Opportunity • April 2025
34
Recommended Policy Solutions for College and 
University Leaders
	✓
Ensure announcements for open tenure/tenure-track faculty and 
management-level positions state that a desired qualification for applicants 
is a demonstrated commitment to the institution’s efforts to serve or close 
equity gaps for Black students, among other students.
	✓
Incorporate metrics into periodic performance reviews for all employees, 
including management level positions, to evaluate their contributions 
to advancing the institution’s efforts to serve minoritized students with 
emphasis on efforts directed to serve Black students.
	✓
Tenured and tenure-track faculty members seeking promotions should 
provide evidence of their contributions to the institution’s efforts to support 
Black and other historically marginalized students through their teaching, 
research, and/or service activities.
Policy Recommendations
The following policy recommendations can have a sustained and measurable impact on Black students’ 
access to and success in higher education.


Ensuring College Access and Success for Black Students in Higher Education • The Campaign for College Opportunity • April 2025
35
Recommended Policy Solutions for State Policymakers
	✓
Establish a “Black-Serving Institution” designation to be awarded to 
qualifying institutional applicants whose enrolled student population 
is at least 10% percent Black.  It is imperative that awarded institutions 
demonstrate a commitment to reducing gaps in retention, time-to-degree, 
or time-to-certificate completion, and increasing graduation rates for this 
student population.  
	✓
Assign a governing board that is responsible for the management of the 
Black-Serving Institution designation.  
	✓
Require every public institution to develop an equity plan that identifies 
any disproportionate impact on the enrollment, persistence, and success 
of Black students, among others. Identify goals/targets to eliminate such 
disproportionate impacts within a specified time frame and the actions that 
will be undertaken by the institution to achieve these goals/targets.
	✓
Resource every public high school to establish a dual enrollment program 
with a local community college (and vice versa) and ensure that the 
representation of Black students in the program is proportional to or 
exceeds the students’ representation at the high school. Require some dual 
enrollment courses to be offered in-person at the high school to ensure 
access for students who do not have transportation.    
	✓
The curriculum committee should require all new course proposals to 
ensure the inclusion, contribution, and perspectives of Black scholarship, 
along with other contributions from racially diverse scholars.
	✓
Faculty members whose courses consistently yield high rates of D’s, F’s, and 
withdrawal (DFW) grades for Black and other disproportionately impacted 
students should be supported to develop a professional learning plan to 
improve their effectiveness in teaching and supporting Black students and 
others who are disproportionately impacted.


Ensuring College Access and Success for Black Students in Higher Education • The Campaign for College Opportunity • April 2025
36
Recommended Policy Solutions for Federal Policymakers
	✓
Implement a scorecard that reports on institutional effectiveness in 
serving Black students, among others, in the areas of access, persistence/
completion, excellence, and institutional receptivity.
	✓
Encourage institutional accrediting agencies to include student success 
metrics for Black and other students in the criteria used to assess 
institutional quality and effectiveness. 
	✓
Increase the Pell Grant amount to cover the full cost of attendance at public 
colleges or universities.
	✓
Invest in student support services to provide access to academic 
counseling/advising and mental health counseling in the evening hours and 
on weekends. 
	✓
Establish a system- or statewide center for Black student excellence that 
provides leadership, strategy, resources, and professional learning that can 
directly impact the success of Black students at every public institution in the 
state or system.65
	✓
Implement tuition and fee waivers for undergraduate students who come 
from households that earn less than the state’s median household income. 
	✓
Invest in cradle-to-career data systems that allow researchers to monitor 
student outcomes from K-12 through postsecondary education and into the 
workforce.  Ensure that these data can be disaggregated by race/ethnicity.


Ensuring College Access and Success for Black Students in Higher Education • The Campaign for College Opportunity • April 2025
37
Conclusion
Gianna Floyd, George Floyd’s daughter will turn 12 years old this year. About 6 years from now, she will 
be completing high school and likely considering what opportunities await her as she prepares to enter 
adulthood. Hopefully, college will be a viable option for Gianna. Whether she chooses to attend a local 
community college, a 4-year public institution, or an independent college or university, she deserves to 
have access to the people and resources she needs to achieve excellence as a Black college student. 
Far too often, Black students like Gianna are not afforded the opportunity to maximize their potential, 
whether it’s due to the overwhelming cost of attending college, the lack of access to mentors, or the lack 
of exposure to an academic curriculum that engages their identities and lived experiences.  
By the time Gianna enrolls in college, we hope that institutions will have found more innovative ways to 
create and sustain Black-affirming spaces on campus, that more colleges will be designated as Black-
Serving Institutions, and that there will be a critical mass of Black faculty members on Gianna’s campus to 
whom she can go for mentoring and undergraduate research opportunities. As a matter of fact, we desire 
for Gianna to have more than just hope to depend on to reach her dreams. We desire a safe, welcoming, 
and rewarding journey to and through post-secondary education for her.  Ensuring Gianna’s success, 
and that of the many young talented boys and girls like her, is both a moral and economic imperative. 
The future of this country depends on our ability to support young and gifted Black scholars. This brief is 
a value-added resource for those who are fully committed to creating the conditions for Gianna and her 
peers to get in and through college and thrive while doing so.


Ensuring College Access and Success for Black Students in Higher Education • The Campaign for College Opportunity • April 2025
38
Endnotes
1.	
Totenberg, N. (2023). Supreme Court Guts Affirmative Action, effectively ending race-conscious admissions. NPR. https://www.
npr.org/2023/06/29/1181138066/affirmative-action-supreme-court-decision
2.	
Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fellows of Harvard College and University of North Carolina, et al., 600 U.S. 
1-69 (2023). Politico. https://www.politico.com/f/?id=00000189-07c0-dcb1-a7af-d7ce1a0f0000
3.	
National Center for Education Statistics. (2023a). Historically Black Colleges and Universities. U.S. Department of Education, 
Institute of Education Sciences. https://nces.ed.gov/fastfacts/display.asp?id=667
4.	
Thurgood Marshall College Fund. (n.d.) History of HBCUs. https://www.tmcf.org/history-of-hbcus/
5.	
The White House. (2024). The Economics of HBCUs. https://www.whitehouse.gov/cea/written-materials/2024/05/16/the-
economics-of-hbcus/#:~:text=Beyond%20their%20excellence%20in%20educating,when%20other%20institutions%20wouldn’t.
6.	
The White House. (2024). The Economics of HBCUs. https://www.whitehouse.gov/cea/written-materials/2024/05/16/the-
economics-of-hbcus/#:~:text=Beyond%20their%20excellence%20in%20educating,when%20other%20institutions%20wouldn’t.
7.	
California Community Colleges. (n.d.) California Community Colleges Transfer Guarantee Pathway to  Historically Black 
Colleges & Universities. https://www.californiacommunitycollegehbcutransfer.com
8.	
Pew Research Center. (2023) Facts about the U.S. Black population. Pew Research Center: Social & Demographic Trends. 
https://www.pewresearch.org/social-trends/fact-sheet/facts-about-the-us-black-population/?tabItem=2c9497c0-82c3-4f44-97ff-
f17aa3fc40c2 
9.	
Pew Research Center. (2023) Facts about the U.S. Black population. Pew Research Center: Social & Demographic Trends. 
https://www.pewresearch.org/social-trends/fact-sheet/facts-about-the-us-black-population/?tabItem=2c9497c0-82c3-4f44-97ff-
f17aa3fc40c2 
10.	 Guzman, G., & Kollar, M. (2023). Income in the United States: 2022. United States Census Bureau. https://www.census.gov/
content/dam/Census/library/publications/2023/demo/p60-279.pdf
11.	
United States Census Bureau. (2023). Poverty rate for Black individuals: 1959-2021 [Figure 1]. U.S. Census Bureau, Current 
Population Survey, 1960 to 2023 Annual Social and Economic Supplements.
12.	 Shrider, E. A., & Creamer, J. (2023). Poverty in the United States: 2022. US Census Bureau. https://www.census.gov/content/
dam/Census/library/publications/2023/demo/p60-280.pdf
13.	 Zhao, N., & Zhao, N. (2024, February 6). Homeownership rates by race and ethnicity. Eye on Housing | National Association of 
Home Builders Discusses Economics and Housing Policy. https://eyeonhousing.org/2024/02/homeownership-rates-by-race-
and-ethnicity-3/
14.	 Zhao, N., & Zhao, N. (2024, February 6). Homeownership rates by race and ethnicity. Eye on Housing | National Association of 
Home Builders Discusses Economics and Housing Policy. https://eyeonhousing.org/2024/02/homeownership-rates-by-race-
and-ethnicity-3/
15.	 National Student Clearinghouse Research Center. (2024). Current term enrollment estimates. https://nscresearchcenter.org/
current-term-enrollment-estimates/
16.	 National Student Clearinghouse Research Center. (2024). Current term enrollment estimates. https://nscresearchcenter.org/
current-term-enrollment-estimates/
17.	
National Student Clearinghouse Research Center. (2024). Current term enrollment estimates. https://nscresearchcenter.org/
current-term-enrollment-estimates/
18.	 National Student Clearinghouse Research Center. (2024). Current term enrollment estimates. https://nscresearchcenter.org/
current-term-enrollment-estimates/
19.	 National Student Clearinghouse Research Center. (2024). Current term enrollment estimates. https://nscresearchcenter.org/
current-term-enrollment-estimates/
20.	 Pew Research Center. (2023) Facts about the U.S. Black population. Pew Research Center: Social & Demographic Trends.  
https://www.pewresearch.org/social-trends/fact-sheet/facts-about-the-us-black-population/?tabItem=2c9497c0-82c3-4f44-97ff-
f17aa3fc40c2
21.	 Postsecondary National Policy Institute. (2022). Black students fact sheet. Postsecondary National Policy Institute. https://pnpi.
org/wp-content/uploads/2023/11/BlackStudentsFactSheet-Nov-2023.pdf


22.	 Postsecondary National Policy Institute. (2022). Black students fact sheet. Postsecondary National Policy Institute. https://pnpi.
org/wp-content/uploads/2023/11/BlackStudentsFactSheet-Nov-2023.pdf
23.	 Postsecondary National Policy Institute. (2022). Black students fact sheet. Postsecondary National Policy Institute. https://pnpi.
org/wp-content/uploads/2023/11/BlackStudentsFactSheet-Nov-2023.pdf
24.	 Davis, M., Dias-Bowie, Y., Greenberg, K., Klukken, G., Pollio, H. R., Thomas, S. P., & Thompson, C. L. (2004). “A fly in the 
buttermilk”: Descriptions of university life by successful black undergraduate students at a predominately white southeastern 
university. The Journal of Higher Education, 75(4), 420-445. https://doi.org/10.1080/00221546.2004.11772266
25.	 Feagin, J. R., Vera, H., & Imani, N. (2014). The agony of education: Black students at a White university. Routledge.
26.	 Fleming, J. (1985). Blacks in College. A Comparative Study of Students’ Success in Black and in White Institutions. Jossey-
Bass Inc., Publishers, 433 California Street, San Francisco, CA 94194; Garcia, G. A., Johnston, M. P., Garibay, J. C., Herrera, F. 
A., & Giraldo, L. G. (2011). When parties become racialized: Deconstructing racially themed parties. Journal of Student Affairs 
Research and Practice, 48(1), 4-20. https://doi.org/10.2202/1949-6605.6194;  Smith, W. A., Allen, W. R., & Danley, L. L. (2007). 
“Assume the position... you fit the description” psychosocial experiences and racial battle fatigue among African American 
male college students. American Behavioral Scientist, 51(4), 551-578. https://doi.org/10.1177/0002764207307742; Smith, W. 
A., Allen, W. R., & Danley, L. L. (2007). “Assume the position... you fit the description” psychosocial experiences and racial 
battle fatigue among African American male college students. American Behavioral Scientist, 51(4), 551-578. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0002764207307742; Solorzano, D., Ceja, M., & Yosso, T. (2000). Critical race theory, racial microaggressions, and 
campus racial climate: The experiences of African American college students. Journal of Negro education, 60-73. https://www.
jstor.org/stable/2696265
27.	 Harper, S. R., & Hurtado, S. (2007). Nine themes in campus racial climates and implications for institutional transformation. New 
Directions for Student Services, (120), 7-24. https://doi.org/10.1002/ss.254
28.	 Lumina Foundation. (2023). Balancing Act: The tradeoffs and challenges facing Black students in Higher education.  
https://www.luminafoundation.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/02/Black-Learners-Report-2023.pdf
29.	 National Center for Education Statistics. (2023b). Hate Crime Incidents at Postsecondary Institutions. Condition of Education. 
U.S. Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences. https://nces.ed.gov/programs/coe/indicator/a22
30.	 Sue, D. W., Capodilupo, C. M., Torino, G. C., Bucceri, J. M., Holder, A., Nadal, K. L., & Esquilin, M. (2007). Racial microaggressions 
in everyday life: implications for clinical practice. American Psychologist, 62(4), 271. https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.62.4.271
31.	 Wood, J. L., & Harris III, F. (2024). Racelighting Black, Indigenous and People of Color in education: a conceptual framework. 
Equality, Diversity and Inclusion: An International Journal, 43(3), 400-409. https://doi.org/10.1108/EDI-01-2023-0038
32.	 Smith, W. A., Allen, W. R., & Danley, L. L. (2007). “Assume the position... you fit the description” psychosocial experiences and 
racial battle fatigue among African American male college students. American Behavioral Scientist, 51(4), 551-578.  
https://doi.org/10.1177/0002764207307742
33.	 Steele, C. M. (1997). A threat in the air: How stereotypes shape intellectual identity and performance. American Psychologist, 
52(6), 613. https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.52.6.613
34.	 Clance, P. R., & Imes, S. A. (1978). The imposter phenomenon in high achieving women: Dynamics and therapeutic intervention. 
Psychotherapy: Theory, research & practice, 15(3), 241. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0086006
35.	 Clance, P. R., & Imes, S. A. (1978). The imposter phenomenon in high achieving women: Dynamics and therapeutic intervention. 
Psychotherapy: Theory, research & practice, 15(3), 241. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0086006
36.	 Clance, P. R., & Imes, S. A. (1978). The imposter phenomenon in high achieving women: Dynamics and therapeutic intervention. 
Psychotherapy: Theory, research & practice, 15(3), 241. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0086006
37.	 National Center for Education Statistics. (2024). Characteristics of Postsecondary Faculty. Condition of Education. U.S. 
Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences. https://nces.ed.gov/programs/coe/indicator/csc.
38.	 Wood, J. L., & Harris III, F. (2023). Equity-Minded Faculty Hiring Practices: Promoting Fairness, Inclusion, and Faculty Diversity 
to Support Student Success in Higher Education. Affirming Equity, Ensuring Inclusion and Empowering Action. Campaign for 
College Opportunity. https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED639588.pdf
39.	 Ma, J. & Pender, M. (2023). Trends in college pricing and student aid 2023. https://research.collegeboard.org/media/pdf/
Trends%20Report%202023%20Updated.pdf 
40.	 Lumina Foundation. (2023). Balancing Act: The tradeoffs and challenges facing Black students in Higher education.  
https://www.luminafoundation.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/02/Black-Learners-Report-2023.pdf
41.	 Lumina Foundation. (2023). Balancing Act: The tradeoffs and challenges facing Black students in Higher education.  
https://www.luminafoundation.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/02/Black-Learners-Report-2023.pdf
Ensuring College Access and Success for Black Students in Higher Education • The Campaign for College Opportunity • April 2025
39


42.	 Hunter, T. E. (2024). Empowering Transitions: A Phenomenological Study of Black Transfer Students From Community Colleges 
to California State Universities (Doctoral dissertation, San Diego State University). 
43.	 Jain, D., Melendez, S. N. B., & Herrera, A. R. (2020). Power to the transfer: Critical race theory and a transfer receptive culture. 
MSU Press. 
44.	 #RealCollegeCalifornia2023 (2023). https://reporting.alchemer.com/r/694627_6414d70e3d78a7.02579504
45.	 Compton College. (2022). Basic Need Supports at Compton College. https://www.compton.edu/about/institutional-
effectiveness/docs/Basic-Needs-Analysis_Nov-2022.pdf
46.	 Compton College (2022b).Compton College Student Housing Proposal. https://www.compton.edu/about/presidentceo/docs/
Compton-College-Student-Housing-Proposal_040122.pdf
47.	 Lumina Foundation. (2022). Every student is a success story : Basic needs innovation. https://www.luminafoundation.org/
resource/every-student-is-a-success-story/
48.	 NextGen Policy. (2022). Every Student is a Success Story: Basic Needs Innovation at Compton College.  
https://assets.nextgenpolicy.org/ComptonCollege_NextGenPolicy_PolicyBrief.pdf
49.	 Compton College (n.d.). Student Parent resources. https://www.compton.edu/student-support/student-parent-services-
resources.aspx
50.	 Sacramento State Black Honors College. (n.d.) About Sacramento State Black Honors College. https://www.csus.edu/student-
affairs/black-honors-college/
51.	 California Community Colleges. (n.d.). African American Male Education Network Development.  https://www.cccco.edu/About-
Us/Chancellors-Office/Divisions/Educational-Services-and-Support/aa-male-education-network-development
52.	 A2MEND. (2022). A2MEND Overview. https://a2mend.net/a²mend-2022-web-update/overview/#:~:text=A²MEND%20was%20
formed%20in%202006,conference%20for%20new%20college%20administrators.
53.	 A2MEND. (2022). A2MEND Our Impact  https://a2mend.net/a²mend-2022-web-update/our-impact/
54.	 A2MEND. (2022). A2MEND Student Leadership Academy https://a2mend.net/a²mend-2022-web-update/student-leadership-
academy/
55.	 The City University of New York. (n.d.) Black Male Initiative. https://www.cuny.edu/academics/current-initiatives/bmi/#mission
56.	 The City University of New York Graduate Center. (2023). CUNY Black Male Initiative Students Encouraged to Apply 
to Graduate Student. https://www.gc.cuny.edu/news/cuny-black-male-initiative-students-encouraged-apply-graduate-
school#:~:text=CUNY%20BMI%2C%20started%20in%202005,are%20underrepresented%20in%20higher%20education.
57.	 Spelman College. (2023). Spelman History and Tradition 2023 Reference Guide. https://www.spelman.edu/_1_Docs-and-Files/
alumnae/spelman-history-traditions-brochure.pdf
58.	 New, J. (2014). Fitness Without Athletics. Inside Higher Ed. https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2014/10/15/spelman-
college-builds-student-health-initiative-years-after-leaving-ncaa#:~:text=Administrators%20pass%20out%20water%20
bottles,humus%2C%20and%20other%20vegetarian%20choices.
59.	 National Institutes of Health (NIH). (2013). NICHD and Spelman College Partner on Wellness Initiative. https://www.nichd.nih.gov/
newsroom/releases/110813-NICHD-Spelman
60.	 University of California, San Diego (n.d.). Black Academic Excellence Initiative. https://diversity.ucsd.edu/initiatives/black-
academic-excellence/index.html#Recommendations-and-Presentatio
61.	 University of California, San Diego. (2021). Black Academic Excellence Initiative: Advisory Committee Report and 
Recommendations. https://diversity.ucsd.edu/initiatives/black-academic-excellence/BAEI-Report-Presentation-VCSA-AVC-
Enrollment-Management---FINAL.pdf
62.	 University of California, San Diego. (n.d.). National Pan-Hellenic Council (NPHC).https://getinvolved.ucsd.edu/sfl/join-sfl/NPHC.
html
63.	 University of California, San Diego. (n.d.) National Pan-Hellenic Council (NPHC) Plaza. https://diversity.ucsd.edu/initiatives/black-
academic-excellence/nphc-plaza.html#Fall-2023:-Completion
64.	 Senate Bill 1348 Postsecondary education: Designation of California Black-Serving Institutions. (2024). https://leginfo.legislature.
ca.gov/faces/billNavClient.xhtml?bill_id=202320240SB1348
65.	 Smith, D. (2024). How Sacramento State is becoming a statewide hub for Black student success. https://www.sacbee.com/
news/equity-lab/representation/article288435027.html#storylink=cPY
Ensuring College Access and Success for Black Students in Higher Education • The Campaign for College Opportunity • April 2025
40


1
Please visit our website for more resources to affirm equity, ensure inclusion, and empower action. 
www.collegecampaign.org
LOS ANGELES OFFICE
1149 S. Hill Street, Ste. 925
Los Angeles, CA  90015
Tel: (213) 744-9434
Fax: (877) 207-3560
SACRAMENTO OFFICE
1512 14th Street
Sacramento, CA  95814
Tel: (916) 443-1681
Fax: (916) 443-1682
Edward C. Bush, Chair
Brooke Armour, Vice Chair
Lena Carew, Treasurer
Andy Wong, Secretary
Diana Aguilar-Cruz 
Mellissa E. Gallegos
Juan Sanchez Muñoz
Maria Ott 
Julie Peller
Thomas A. Saenz
Reshma Shamasunder 
Joseph Villela
Dina Walker
facebook.com/collegecampaign
@CollegeOpp
Acknowledgements
This brief was authored by Frank Harris III, Ed.D., professor of postsecondary education and director of 
the Community College Equity Assessment Lab at San Diego State University, and Tina M. King, Ed.D., 
president of San Diego College of Continuing Education and a lecturer in the Community College 
Leadership Doctoral Program at San Diego State University. The authors thank Dr. J. Luke Wood,  
president of Sacramento State University, for his valuable contributions as a thought partner on this brief. 
The Campaign thanks Michele Siqueiros and Vikash Reddy, Ph.D. for co-editing this publication.  
We are grateful for the additional review by Art Coleman and Ed Smith at EducationCounsel that provided 
great wisdom in developing this brief and fine tuning the recommendations. The Campaign for College 
Opportunity thanks our funders who are supporting this series of briefs, including the Lumina Foundation, 
Stuart Foundation, the College Futures Foundation, the Kresge Foundation, the W.K. Kellogg Foundation, 
Eileen and Harold Brown, the Evelyn and Walter Haas, Jr. Fund, the Latino Community Foundation, and the 
Joyce Foundation.
BOARD OF DIRECTORS