How the Small and Mid-Sized Business Community Can Support Hispanic and Latino Job Growth
America is known around the world as the great melting pot, and this is a prominent part of our culture. Just as we celebrate mixing cultures and traditions, we must also ensure that everyone receives the same opportunities. The Hispanic and Latino community makes up more than 18% of the overall US population, and this population is expected to account for 78% of net new workers between 2020 and 2030. But Hispanic and Latino workers are often subjected to hardships such as labor law violations, pay inequality, and fewer advancement opportunities. As we recognize Hispanic Heritage Month, we must acknowledge the work needed to create a fair job market and inclusive work environment for all.
Labor Law Violations Affecting the Hispanic and Latino Community
The Hispanic and Latino community is often disproportionately prevented from advancing into higher-paying jobs. Consequently, Hispanic and Latino workers make up a majority of people in low-quality yet crucial job sectors. Restaurant workers like line cooks, dishwashers, and bussers as well as cleaners like janitors, maids, and housekeeping workers, are often represented by the Hispanic and Latino community. These roles are essential to our community and our workforce but are undervalued as “unskilled labor.” Unfortunately, these industries are also prone to safety violations, wage theft, and other violations. Hispanic and Latino workers often experience a language barrier, lack of opportunity to pursue higher education, and discrimination, all of which cause these workers to be exploited and mistreated.
The Los Angeles Times reported that “the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights found that when everything is equalized — education and age, for example — and no matter what the economic climate, minorities, and women still come out on the short end of the employment stick.” This research strongly indicates that discrimination is a significant factor in why these underrepresented groups still experience inequality in the job market. The Hispanic and Latino community are overrepresented in industries where labor law violations are prevalent because discrimination, biases, and barriers prevent them from moving upward.
Wage Gap Hinders Economic Growth in Hispanic and Latino Community
The longer the Hispanic and Latino community is kept in low-paying jobs, the more difficult it is for this community to achieve safe, high-quality jobs with sustainable benefits. It also prevents this community from accessing higher education, medical treatment, the ability to afford unpaid internships, and other opportunities. According to a recent study, the wage gap for the Hispanic and Latino communities is as high as $288 billion per year. “Latinos are greatly underrepresented in higher-paying jobs and are paid less in the same fields as non-Latino whites,” reported NBC News. Further, this community is less likely to get approved for funding to start their businesses and more than 70% of prospective Hispanic business owners are forced to use their savings. Many communities have pay gaps, including women, people of color, LGBTQIA+, and more. (We examined this disparity in a recent blog post – read it here.)
When thinking about the inequity in the Hispanic and Latino community, it’s important to remember that there are ingrained, systemic issues preventing this community from receiving equal treatment and opportunities. It is not as simple as just raising a few salaries – we must look at this issue from all angles.
How to Attract and Retain a Diverse Pool of Talent
Now that we’ve explored the inequality for the Hispanic and Latino community, what can business owners do to combat this issue? An essential first step is to examine your hiring practices for potential instances of unconscious bias. There are many ways we can be biased in our hiring practices without even realizing it. You may prefer one name over another without recognizing that the difference is one name is male and the other is female, or you may choose a name that sounds “familiar” over a name that could be from another culture. Without intentionally discriminating against these candidates, this type of bias can and does still happen. It’s important to acknowledge that everyone has biases. We highly recommend providing robust and ongoing DEI training so your staff can learn, challenge their assumptions, and grow as professionals while creating an environment that values DEI.
Further, take a look at the way your company is portrayed online. How much diversity are you showing? Consider posting job ads and landing pages in Spanish and English on your website. “Young LatinX job seekers are often digitally savvy and comfortable communicating in both English and Spanish. However, they are also committed to preserving Spanish at home. A company that goes the extra mile targeting Hispanic talent by creating Spanish landing pages will go a long way,” reports Censia. It may seem like a catch-22 to try and portray a diverse team when you are struggling to recruit diverse team members, but it is certainly possible. Be sincere in your efforts, demonstrate how important diversity is to your organization, and you will begin to attract the talent your business needs.
The Hispanic and Latino community experience many barriers that prevent them from receiving the same opportunities and career paths as their White counterparts. As business community members, we must recognize these barriers and do our part to promote equal opportunities for everyone.
If you’re interested in providing DEI training at your company, refreshing your hiring practices, and other important HR strategies, PrestigePEO can help. Our team of HR specialists can help you with HR management, employee benefit plans, retirement services, compliance, payroll, and more. Get in touch with us today to learn more about how we can support your business as you move forward.