10.1177/1538192703262514ARTICLE
Journal of Hispanic Higher Education
/ April 2004
Auerbach
Engaging Latino Parents in
Supporting College Pathways:
Lessons From a College Access Program
SUSAN AUERBACH
Abstract: How can K-16 partnerships enlist Latino parents as informed allies
in support of their children’s college planning? This article draws on data
from 3 years of participant observation to show how a bilingual outreach pro-
gram for parents at a diverse high school narrowed the information gap about
college, enhanced family social networks, and challenged inequities. Latino
families gained knowledge and confidence for interacting with institutions,
communicating with their children, and easing pathways to college.
Resumen: ¿Cómo pueden las sociedades desde el Jardín de Niños hasta la
Preparatoria reclutar padres Latinos como aliados conscientes que apoyen el
proyecto universitario de sus hijos? Este manuscrito extrae información de
tres años de observaciones para demostrar cómo un programa bilingüe de
vanguardia para padres efectuado en una preparatoria diversa redujo la brecha
de información sobre universidades, mejoró redes sociales familiares, y retó
desigualdades. Las familias Latinas obtuvieron conocimiento y confianza
para interactuar con instituciones, comunicarse con sus hijos, y facilitar los
caminos que llevan a la universidad.
Keywords:
college access; Latinos; parent involvement; outreach programs
[Parents who want their kids to go to college should] get involved at the school, find
out what you need to go to college, like about scholarships and financial aid. Open
up some doors. . . . My mom’s trying to help, but I realized she really doesn’t have a
clue.
—College-bound Latino senior, Pacific High School
It’s nice to get with a group and see other Latino parents there . . . that have the same
idea as you [of college] . . . so that parents struggling with their kids do not feel by
themselves. . . . When I got into this program and I saw those parents sitting there, it
just felt good. It just felt like, ah! almost like a support group, you know?
—Parent, Futures & Families
125
Journal of Hispanic Higher Education, Vol. 3, No. 2,  April 2004, 125-145
DOI: 10.1177/1538192703262514
Sage Publications 2004


The struggle for college access is a central concern for Latino families.
Although Latino students and their parents hold high educational aspira-
tions, Latinos remain underrepresented in 4-year colleges and universities
(Gándara, 1998; Solórzano, 1992). Nationally, they have been dispropor-
tionately affected by rising costs and competition in admissions, coupled
with diminishing grant-based aid. In states such as California, they have also
suffered from the loss of institutional supports, such as affirmative action
and adequate numbers of guidance counselors. Thus, the burden of college
planning has fallen increasingly on Latino students and their families on an
uneven playing field.
Research suggests the pivotal role of parents in promoting students’
college going (Gándara, 1995, 2002; Gándara & Bial, 1999; Hossler, Schmit,
& Vesper, 1999; Jun & Colyar, 2001; McDonough, 1997; McDonough
et al., 2000; Pérez, 1999; Plank & Jordan, 2001). College-educated parents
of higher socioeconomic status (SES) often play a proactive role in “manag-
ing” their children’s pathways through secondary school and the college
choice process (Baker & Stevenson, 1986; McDonough, 1997; Useem,
1991; Yonezawa, 1997). Parents of lower SES may “sponsor” their chil-
dren’s role as students and offer indirect support for college (Clark, 1983;
Gándara, 1995; Mehan, Villanueva, Hubbard, & Lintz, 1996). Yet few fami-
lies without a tradition of college going have sufficient knowledge to help
their children navigate pathways to college.
According to the Latino Eligibility Study, the single most important
barrier to college access for Latino students in California is lack of instru-
mental knowledge of the steps needed to go to college (Gándara, 1998,
2002). Across social groups, parents are cited as one of the top three sources
of college information and help for students, yet most parents hold inaccu-
rate beliefs about crucial information, such as the cost of college (Antonio,
2002; Post, 1990). In a nationally representative survey of Latino parents of
high school students, more than two thirds lacked basic information about
college eligibility and planning (Tornatzky, Cutler, & Lee, 2002). The infor-
mation gap is especially wide for lower SES immigrant parents who are not
fluent in English and who have specialized needs on issues of financial aid,
undocumented status, and college life (McClafferty, McDonough, & Fann,
2001). A survey of 50 college access and parent involvement programs in
California found that these programs were the main source of college infor-
mation for those attending (McDonough et al., 2000)—yet most Latino
families lack access to such programs.
In the absence of appropriate information and support, many parents
unfamiliar with college life and concerned about the opportunity costs of
college for their families may construe college as a threat and resist the best
laid plans of qualified students (Auerbach, 1999, 2003). Schools, colleges,
and programs rarely reach out to Latino parents in meaningful, culturally ap-
propriate ways to help narrow the information gap and level the playing field
126
Journal of Hispanic Higher Education / April 2004


for college access (Tierney & Auerbach, in press). As a result, efforts to ad-
dress Latino access may be missing some potentially valuable players and
strategies.
What can kindergarten through college (K-16) partnerships do to enlist
Latino parents as more informed, active supporters of their children’s col-
lege planning? How do parents of prospective first-generation students re-
spond to the invitation? This article examines a bilingual outreach program
for parents at a large, diverse high school that used information, support, and
social critique to make privileged information about college accessible to
Latino parents with little college experience. It shows how the Futures &
Families (F&F) program worked to narrow the information gap, enhance
family social networks, and challenge inequities in schooling. As a result,
families were equipped with new knowledge and confidence for interacting
with educational institutions, communicating with their children, and easing
students’ pathways to college.
Family Cultural, Social, and Critical Capital
Many factors contribute to the troubling gap between higher educa-
tional aspirations and attainment for Latino students. Among these are the
unequal distribution of college-relevant forms of cultural and social capital.
Parents, like their students, are differently positioned in the struggle for
college access in terms of knowledge, power, and home-school relations.
Middle-class and affluent White and Asian parents come to the task with a
“home advantage” in economic and educational resources as well as with
an earlier start on college planning (Hossler et al., 1999; Lareau, 1989;
McDonough, 1997). They draw on personal experience of higher education
and professional careers as well as on broader, information-rich social net-
works to work the system and advance their children’s prospects; their ef-
forts tend to be recognized and accommodated by schools (Useem, 1991;
Yonezawa, 1997). By contrast, poor and working-class Latino families
come to college preparation relatively late in students’ careers, with fewer
resources and more obstacles. These parents have numerous funds of
knowledge and other forms of capital with which to enrich their children’s
learning (Moll, Amanti, Neff, & Gonzalez, 1992; Villalpando & Solórzano,
in press). They support the value of education and encourage their children’s
success behind the scenes through consejos (narrative advice) and “invisible
strategies” that often go unrecognized by schools (Azmitia, Cooper, Garcia,
& Dunbar, 1996; Delgado-Gaitan, 1994b; López, 2001; Villanueva & Hub-
bard, 1994). But typically, these parents do not have sufficient detailed col-
lege knowledge from personal experience, social networks, or resources in
Spanish to guide their children. As Delgado-Gaitan (1994a) noted, knowl-
edge is power and “parents who are knowledgeable about the school’s ex-
Auerbach
127


pectations and the way in which the school operates are better advocates for
their children than parents who lack such skills” (p. 96).
As part of its mission to build a college-going culture for students and
families of color, F&F aimed to make privileged college knowledge accessi-
ble. It did this by promoting certain forms of college-relevant cultural, so-
cial, and “critical capital.” Cultural and social capital are complex, cumula-
tive processes not easily transmitted by programs (Gándara & Bial, 1999).
Futures & Families focused on teaching more limited instrumental or navi-
gational aspects of cultural capital for negotiating the K-16 system and on
expanding family social networks. In addition, the program introduced par-
ents to the “critical capital” that was the focus of the broader Futures Project.
Critical capital refers to the development of a critical understanding of edu-
cational inequality and social reproduction that leads to social action to rec-
tify these conditions (Morrell & Rogers, 2002). Each of these forms of
capital are explored in the findings sections below.
Method, Sample, and Setting
F&F was the parent component of a small, experimental college ac-
cess program and ethnographic study known as the Futures Project, which
was, in turn, part of an ongoing University of California, Los Angeles
(UCLA)–school partnership. The data for this qualitative case study were
drawn mainly from field notes and transcripts from 3 years of participant-
observation in F&F and other parent meetings at the school as well as from a
survey and a series of interviews with parents of Futures students. These
data were supplemented by quotes from interviews with school staff and Fu-
tures students. The study was conducted from students’ 10th- through 12th-
grade years, with most interviews during the critical college “search” and
“choice” phases (Hossler et al., 1999). In-depth, semistructured interviews
with a subsample of parents in their preferred language (English or Spanish)
explored their beliefs, knowledge, and practices regarding college pathways
as well as their response to F&F. All interviews were taped and transcribed
verbatim, with Spanish interviews transcribed and translated into English by
bilingual, native Spanish speakers.1 Topical, theoretical, and in vivo codes
were used to explore emerging themes in iterative data analysis, with a focus
on the forms of capital evident at meetings. Validity was enhanced by multi-
ple methods and data sources as well as colleague checks, member checks,
and analytical memos to monitor subjectivity (Merriam, 1988). Like other
qualitative case studies with small, nonrepresentative samples, findings are
intended to be generalized to theory rather than to populations (Yin, 1993).
The study was conducted at a large, racially and socioeconomically di-
verse high school in the Los Angeles metropolitan area that was 46% Anglo,
34% Latino, 12% African American, and 8% Asian American. Equity issues
were the focus of reform at “Pacific High” since 1994, with efforts to ad-
dress the stark race- and class-based divide in student achievement and
128
Journal of Hispanic Higher Education / April 2004


postsecondary outcomes. There, as in the United States generally, higher
SES White and Asian students traditionally performed well academically
and went on to prestigious universities, whereas lower SES Black and
Latino students performed less well and went on to less prestigious post-
secondary outcomes, such as community college or employment. The Fu-
tures Project (1997-2001) combined a college access program for 30 stu-
dents of color who aspired to 4-year college with a longitudinal study of
their trajectories through high school and beyond.
This article discusses the views and responses of Latino parents of Fu-
tures students who attended F&F meetings, especially regular attendees and
15 Latino parents who were intensively interviewed, as well as the views
and stories they heard from program staff, guest speakers, and other par-
ents at open meetings. Most of the 45 Futures parents were low-income or
working-class Spanish-speaking Mexican immigrants, with smaller num-
bers of Central American immigrants, U.S.-born Chicanos/Chicanas, and
African Americans.2 Most immigrant parents had at least several years of
schooling in their native country, and some had been to secondary school
there or in the United States; several U.S.-born parents had been to commu-
nity college, and a few immigrant parents had no formal schooling. In addi-
tion to their high school–age children, many Futures families had children in
middle and elementary school, and a few had children older than 18. All Fu-
tures parents attended at least 2 of the 25 F&F meetings. A core group of 10
to 15 families (including a few fathers) were regular attendees, with most
meetings attracting about 25 people. Several open meetings cosponsored
with Latino and African American parent organizations drew 25 to 100 par-
ents but few Futures parents.
F&F was grounded in the belief that marginalized parents need oppor-
tunities for dialogue with educators and safe spaces in which to learn and en-
gage around educational issues (Delgado-Gaitan, 1994a; Mehan et al.,
1996). The program’s 25 monthly, bilingual meetings from students’ sopho-
more through senior years were organized around college-related topics,
from understanding college requirements to demystifying academic tran-
scripts to searching for scholarships on the Internet (see the appendix). Ad-
ditional themes were geared to the concerns of families of color around ac-
cess issues, such as tracking, surviving in advanced placement (AP) classes,
or dealing with counselors. The Futures team—including teachers, counsel-
ors, community liaisons, UCLA faculty and graduate students, with me as a
research assistant and F&F coordinator—jointly planned the meetings in re-
sponse to parent concerns, college planning deadlines, and the broader Fu-
tures agenda. Meetings held in the school’s Parent Center combined infor-
mal presentations or panel discussions in English and Spanish by guest
speakers of color with small group discussion (in separate English or Span-
ish groups) or hands-on workshop activities. Most meetings were facilitated
by the school’s bilingual Latina community liaison, who was a highly
Auerbach
129


valued cultural and linguistic “bridge” among Pacific’s students, staff, and
parents.
Narrowing the Information Gap:
Activating Instrumental Capital
Parents came to F&F meetings keenly aware of their lack of informa-
tion and eager to do more to help their children get to college and have the
opportunities that they had missed. “All the information we are seeing is
new because neither of us went to the university,” said an immigrant father.
“We don’t know what the process is like” [translated quote]. “I would like to
have more knowledge and information to be able to help my daughter, like
which university is more suitable and why” [translated quote], an immigrant
mother explained. Several mothers spoke of not wanting their children to get
“stuck” or “trapped” in community college as they had. Many parents ech-
oed the sentiments of a father who came to meetings because “my son wants
to go to college and it’s my job to guide and support him, 100%.” Yet even
U.S.-born parents who had been to community college said they felt “con-
fused” or “blocked” in dealing with college information and that school staff
“make it hard” to know how to help students reach college goals.
A popular Latino guidance counselor who worked with the program ob-
served,
You have a set of parents who . . . do not know the system and don’t know how
to be supportive but want to be supportive [of college preparation]. . . . Then
there are some parents . . . that have some knowledge of the system but still get
lost within the system, still don’t understand it, or they know the basics of it but
they don’t know what else goes on after that.
For the counselor, the point of F&F was to “educate the parents about how to
play the game” of college preparation. Likewise, the African American prin-
cipal told the parents, “We need to make sure that you parents have the same
information that other parents do,” referring to the school’s more privileged
parents.
According to parent surveys and interviews, F&F meetings were the
main source of college information for nearly all Futures parents. The sec-
ond most important yet not always reliable source was their high school–age
children. Not surprisingly, parents with relatively more education had more
extensive information networks, through college-educated friends, cowork-
ers, and the Internet (Auerbach, 2001). Significantly, F&F meetings were
also the main contact that Futures parents had with the high school. Thus,
families urgently needed information about both college and navigating the
complex world of a large, urban high school.
130
Journal of Hispanic Higher Education / April 2004


The core of F&F programming was building parents’ basic knowledge
about college in general, college planning, and specific colleges. Meetings
were centered on the concept of planned pathways to 4-year college and
learning to be strategic about these. Speakers stressed that there were certain
steps that needed to be taken or monitored at certain times to ensure access
and that certain options were available as a result of these steps. This notion
of a pathway was perhaps the single most important lesson of the program
for parents. For example, a Chicana mother who had dropped out of high
school said the most helpful aspect of the meetings was “knowing that the
kids were on track [for college] and knowing what that was. I mean, I always
knew you needed certain classes to get in [to college], but I didn’t know
which ones they were.”
Because college information was new, complicated, and lacking in
meaningful context for most families, meetings had to convey the basics re-
peatedly in multiple formats. These included not only conventional informa-
tional presentations and handouts but lively panel discussions with people
who looked like them, study groups, small group debriefings, and time for
informal networking and socializing. Simply presenting the facts was not
enough; families needed opportunities to make sense of college information
in relation to their own lives (McDonough, 1998). Pacific High students,
alumni, teachers, and parents, as well as college and graduate students and
college representatives, spoke honestly with the group about their struggles
to “take control” of their education, convince their parents of the value of
college, choose between community college and university, and pay for
higher education. For example, a Latino school outreach worker recalled in
a panel discussion, in both Spanish and English,
I was advised [by a school counselor] to be a mechanic like my father. My par-
ents had a 6th-grade education. They couldn’t guide me. A lot of parents that
didn’t go to college—it’s hard to teach someone something that you know very
little about. But it is your responsibility to learn what is needed. Everyone can
go to college if we give them the support that they need.
Parents reported that the personal testimony and stories of guest speakers
like him were the most valuable aspect of the program.
Parents were especially attentive when hearing the experience of par-
ents of Latino college students, such as a Mexican couple whose son had just
graduated from University of California, Santa Cruz (UCSC). These parents
were frank with the group about their initial misgivings:
Mother: It was difficult to hear he was going away to college. I didn’t want him
to go far, but I knew we had to accept it.
Father: Since he was little, we tried to stress the importance of studying. Educa-
tion was always the priority. I was worried when he chose to go to UCSC—
Auerbach
131


we couldn’t afford it, we had to get a loan. But it’s paid off because my son
has started out working at a higher income than I ever had in 20 years. . . . We
didn’t know much about what was involved [in college planning]; we relied
on the counselors. We wish we’d seen something like this [“College: Mak-
ing It Happen” video at F&F meeting] when our son was in high school.
[translated quote]
F&F parents plied this couple with questions during and after the meeting,
conceivably because they could relate to this family’s experience. By con-
trast, they listened quietly to more formal, generic presentations by college
representatives that lacked this personal dimension.
“It’s the funds that scare a lot of us parents; that’s where us parents need
help, to meet the deadline dates for our kids,” said an outspoken Chicana
who attended meetings regularly. “Why do they make it so hard to get finan-
cial aid?” wondered a Mexican mother with two older children in commu-
nity college. Stories helped to calm parents’ intense worries about financing
college, or at least put these concerns in more accurate perspective. A Pa-
cific High alumnus and California State University business student told the
group,
Thank God for financial aid. I never had to pay a cent. . . . My mother wasn’t re-
ally aware. She would always ask, “How much do I have to pay? Why are you
getting this free money?” My parents didn’t know [about financial aid] because
they didn’t come to classes like this.
Parents asked speakers why they had taken out loans, what type of loans
were best, and how they had paid back the money. They were surprised to
learn that many young professionals such as teachers were still repaying
their college loans without facing financial ruin due to their middle-class
salaries. In a typical reaction, one parent noted on the survey that after the 1st
year of F&F meetings, “I am not so ignorant; I thought money [for college]
was an obstacle, but now I see there is enough help” [translated quote]. An-
other wrote, “I didn’t realize there was this much money offered by the gov-
ernment.” Undocumented families were able to speak privately with guest
speakers about their more limited options, especially prior to California leg-
islation granting resident tuition status to undocumented students at public
universities. Overall, even for these families, personal testimony about
paying for college contributed to an atmosphere of hope and possibility.
Parents also needed detailed, concrete information about daily college
life to assuage their fears of children (especially daughters) leaving home
and living in the unfamiliar world of dorms or student apartments. The view
of a Guatemalan father was often expressed at meetings and interviews:
“Latinos don’t like for their children to go far away where we lose sight of
them or can’t help them if they need it. So to us, it will be better if our daugh-
ter goes to one of the closer universities.” One mother hoped her child would
132
Journal of Hispanic Higher Education / April 2004


choose the state university a few miles away because “she could come home
for lunch.” Even if colleges were nearby, parents were uneasy about stu-
dents’ wish to live on campus. They were rapt at meetings when Futures stu-
dents described campuses they had visited, from the dining hall to the laun-
dry facilities, and when a guest speaker recounted putting window locks on
their daughter’s apartment, telephoning her daily, and sending care pack-
ages of tortillas and tamales.
One of the most moving moments in the program was a talk in May of
senior year by a Mexican mother of five, whose three oldest children had at-
tended Yale, UCLA, and the University of Southern California. She ad-
dressed many concerns shared by Latino parents, in both Spanish and Eng-
lish, to frequent appreciative applause:
There’s always a way to find the money. There were a lot of hard times, but to-
gether you will get through it. My daughter and I laugh now about how she ate
only beans for a week when she ran out of money. . . . Our family faced criticism
from relatives for letting our daughter go so far away, and other people asked us
why we were spending so much money on a girl’s education. My husband al-
ways told our children that since he would not be able to leave them money after
his death, the least he could do was to give them an education because no one
can take that away. . . . When you see your children graduate from college, I can
compare it to giving birth. I can’t describe the happiness. All the parents are cry-
ing. You are so proud of them and all the sacrifices they made.
Including such discussion in parent meetings enabled the families of first-
generation students to imagine themselves feeling that same pride at their
own children’s graduation.
Through stories and personal testimony of fellow people of color, fami-
lies learned about options and strategies for attaining higher education that
they might not have known about or deemed within reach. This framing of
complex information as narrative at meetings helped put families at ease
with the prospect of college and with deciphering complex college informa-
tion (Auerbach, 2002a).
F&F parents’ college knowledge clearly increased over the 3 years of
the program yet remained modest compared to parents of higher SES. Per-
haps the greatest impact of the program’s attempt to make privileged infor-
mation accessible was in eroding barriers to understanding and aspiration—
as in Bourdieu’s concept of habitus, a sense of what is desirable, appropri-
ate, and possible for “people like us” (Auerbach, 2001; McDonough, 1997).
As one Guatemalan mother commented,
This program has really helped me because I didn’t know anything about col-
lege. We sometimes think that it is impossible for them to go to college—where
am I going to get the money to pay for it?—but it is the lack of information and
ignorance on our part. [translated quote]
Auerbach
133


A Mexican father noted, “Every time I come to a meeting, it helps me since I
haven’t been through the [American] system. I go away with a lot more in-
formation” [translated quote].
Armed with more information and inspiration, some parents were em-
powered to take small, proactive steps to support college pathways that went
beyond their usual focus on behind-the-scenes moral and emotional support.
For example, one mother called a college office to contest her daughter’s re-
jection from an Early Academic Outreach Program; another mother who
spoke little English went repeatedly to the school attendance office to cor-
rect her child’s records; and a traditional immigrant father finally decided
his daughter could live in a dorm. Many parents echoed a father’s report that
“we are trying to be more on top of what our son is doing in school” and a
mother’s comment that the meetings “reinforced what I am trying to do at
home to push my child.” One mother told the group after a panel discussion,
“Tonight, I learned the most important thing is to support the student at
home and that her responsibility is to her studies, not to have to worry about
the responsibilities of the household” (translated quote); as a result, this par-
ent and others reduced their students’ chores. For these parents, new infor-
mation about college and stories of strategies for getting there led to new
ways of supporting college pathways.
Expanding Family Networks and
Relationships: Building Social Capital
In addition to building college knowledge, F&F aimed to build social
networks and community among participants that would help motivate stu-
dents to stay on track for college. Like working-class parents of color in
other programs and studies, F&F parents had little contact with the school,
with college-educated professionals, or with fellow parents who had chil-
dren at the school (Gándara, 1995; Lareau, 1989; Yonezawa, 1997). The
program facilitated three types of social relationships that supported college
pathways: between parents and educators, between parents and fellow par-
ents at the school, and between parents and their children.
Stanton-Salazar (1997, 2001) has documented the critical role of rela-
tionships with “institutional agents”—knowledgeable, middle-class staff
members who can help negotiate school or college—in the upward mobility
of “low-status students.” F&F meetings represented a unique opportunity
for parents to build a modest, college-relevant social network with school
staff as well as with professors and graduate students from UCLA. The on-
going, empathetic presence of educators who knew their students and/or
shared their families’ background engendered parents’ trust. “We try to ask
what kind of career they recommend, what is the best university, what they
did [in their education], so that’s how I get experience [about college] and
then I talk to my daughter,” one immigrant mother explained of her talks
134
Journal of Hispanic Higher Education / April 2004


with school staff and other college-educated people. Parents routinely con-
ferred with these institutional agents about their individual concerns, espe-
cially before and after meetings or during time set aside for short individual
conferences on students’ transcripts or financial aid. Although parents
seemed to prefer one-on-one contact with staff, they also sought advice dur-
ing the meetings, such as, “How did you avoid the peer pressure? My daugh-
ter is getting teased for being a school girl.” Having met staff members
on neutral ground at meetings, some parents contacted them outside meet-
ings for more guidance—an unusual step for parents of color at the school.
F&F’s opportunities for home-school communication and intervention were
critical for students whose college eligibility was at risk and reassuring for
families worried about the viability of college for their children.
Some of the most powerful encounters with institutional agents were
the individual “strategic meetings” that the lead Futures teacher had with
students and their parents in junior and senior year to gauge progress and
plan next steps toward college. These often emotional sessions became fo-
rums for both parents and students to express disappointment and frustration
while listening to the teacher’s advice. As they pored over graphs of fluctu-
ating grade point averages, with some students near tears, one mother re-
marked of her child, “I think she settles for being average,” whereas a father
lamented, “I try to do my best for him. . . . I’m not giving up, but sometimes I
want to give up.” The teacher also contacted some parents by phone or in
home visits to intercede in parent-child conflicts and reassure parents
through traumatic points along the pathway. This long-term communication
with a teacher who deeply cared about and guided their children—“like a
second dad,” as one father put it—helped convince anxious parents to let
their children go on out-of-town college trips, live in dorms, bypass the local
community college, apply to expensive private colleges, take out loans, and
otherwise prepare for college and prevent “cooling out.”
F&F also eased parents’ isolation by serving as a support group of like-
minded people. “You gotta have the right group . . . to socialize, have things
in common,” according to one mother who felt alienated by other parent
groups but was an avid participant in F&F. Similarly, the Chicana mother
quoted at the start of this article, who lived far from the school and rarely
spoke to other parents about school matters, was surprised to find other La-
tino parents from similar backgrounds who were interested in college for
their children: “I find another parent who has the same problem [with her
student], so now we’re growing together. . . . She’s me!” she declared and
promptly took the woman’s phone number. Parents compared notes on the
trials of raising teenagers and keeping them on track for college, trying to
figure out “when to push and when to back off” when children did poorly at
school. They commiserated and encouraged each other with applause, nods,
and suggestions as they exchanged tales of dealing with the school bureau-
cracy. After recounting the many times she had gone to the school to change
Auerbach
135


her child’s schedule, one mother concluded, “I have more coraje [courage,
nerve, guts] now” [translated quote] about dealing with school authorities.
Over time, regular F&F participants offered each other mutual support.
They shared family struggles, warned each other to beware of financial aid
scams in the mail, helped each other do computer searches, and labored
through financial aid forms together. They chatted at college fair recep-
tions, a family barbeque, and a graduation celebration that allowed for more
informal socializing. These social connections with other families of first-
generation students showed families that they were not alone, allowing them
to share experiences and plans as they moved through an unfamiliar process
together.
Several parents reported that the program had helped them to better un-
derstand and communicate with their students—”to know what she is going
through right now,” as one father told the principal. His daughter com-
mented that coming to F&F meetings “allows my parents to talk to me more
about school now because they know more, versus me having to go through
everything [such as reviewing college preparation information] with them.”
Another student noted that the program had given her father insight into
problems at the school so that “he understands where I come from some-
times when I get mad.” F&F facilitated parent-child communication at a
tense phase in family life by giving them more common points of reference
and offering parents glimpses into academia and the sociology of education
that students were studying. Parents began to visualize their children as col-
lege students as a result of hearing them give polished oral presentations on
their research projects at F&F meetings, UCLA symposia, and education
conferences. “I had never heard my child talk like that before!” marveled
one mother.
The program’s promotion of stronger ties among parents and educators,
fellow parents, and their children was a modest way to enhance parents’ so-
cial capital for the task of college pursuit. On a smaller scale, it mirrored the
broader Future Project’s promotion of students’ social capital through clus-
tering in advanced placement (AP)/honors classes and the encouragement of
study groups (Serna & Collatos, 2001). Just as students learned that they
were not alone in their struggles and leaned on each other for support, so,
too, F&F helped parents find the necessary emotional and social support to
keep students on track for college despite doubts, inexperience, and other
obstacles.
Challenging the System:
Promoting Critical Capital and Advocacy
Increasingly, as F&F engaged parents in learning about college access,
it opened the door to the questioning, social critique, and activism that are
essential to what Morrell and Rogers (2002) called “critical capital.” F&F
136
Journal of Hispanic Higher Education / April 2004


encouraged parents to challenge the system with frank talk about race, class,
power, and inequality by facilitators, guest speakers, and students, notably
at study groups on racism, panel discussions on AP/honors classes, and pre-
sentations on test bias (Auerbach, 2002b). Unlike most college access or
parent involvement programs, F&F provided a forum where issues that dis-
proportionately affect families of color could be openly discussed. This em-
phasis on critical capital enhanced families’ awareness of barriers to access
as well as strategies for overcoming and protesting them. As with margin-
alized students, outrage over barriers and unequal outcomes was a goad to
action for some parents.
One of the most pressing issues for parents that they brought up repeat-
edly was inadequate or inappropriate academic and college counseling at
Pacific High. A Guatemalan father broached the topic at the second F&F
meeting: “I read in the news there are some counselors who give the wrong
advice to minority students. I’m wondering if this still happens?” A mother
who was a Pacific High alumnus described her distrust of a counselor said to
be “biased toward Latinos” as follows:
I’ve been wanting to change my child’s counselor. This goes back to when I was
in school here and had the same counselor. . . . When I was in school, you were
not informed about what was out there. . . . You were told what your high school
requirements were but not what requirements were to transfer to a univer-
sity. . . . I wouldn’t want to see her waste her years at [the local community col-
lege] and be discouraged.
Parents spoke well of Pacific’s sole Latino counselor, who knew students
well, made home visits, and explained college requirements to families. But
they faulted the counseling system for being understaffed and insensitive, as
in these comments from an open meeting on the topic:
• We should keep that in mind when we have our discussions: how many stu-
dents there are [more than 3,000] and how few counselors [six]. [translated
quote]
• It’s a catastrophe and that’s the source of the problem. [translated quote]
• Why don’t we have more Spanish-speaking counselors?
• My son was doing badly all year, but the counselor did nothing to help him or
find out why this was happening. [translated quote]
Parents were insulted that counselors had no time to return their calls or meet
with them, giving them the “runaround” when they sought help. “A parent
like me, who doesn’t understand how to get into the university system too
well, but is trying—I need the school to help me counsel my son,” said a
Chicana mother. Parents’ experience of rebuff was an instance of what
Lareau and Horvat (1999) called “moments of social exclusion” that affect
families who lack the type of cultural capital recognized by the school (Au-
Auerbach
137


erbach, 2001). By sharing stories of rebuff at the meetings, parents learned
that their experience was common for Latino families and were able to give
school administrators important suggestions.
Secondary schools are notably reticent about the existence and work-
ings of tracking systems, and families from marginalized groups have the
most to lose from ignorance about the system (Sanders, Epstein, & Connors-
Tadros, 1999; Useem, 1991; Yonezawa, 1997). Parents were both bewil-
dered and angered as they learned about tracking, the predominance of
White and Asian students in AP and honors classes, and unequal outcomes
at Pacific High and elsewhere. “When I see these statistics, one way to help
change that is by taking part in a group like this, so we can become more
aware [of these conditions] and what they mean to us,” said a father at an
open meeting [translated quote]. Poor outcomes for students of color went
against many parents’ assumption that a well-reputed school like Pacific
was the route to equal educational opportunity. A mother of 11, accustomed
to a more uniform system in Mexico, asked, “Why does the high school of-
fer classes that are not required for university?” [translated quote]. A father
wanted to know why there were so few Latinos in advanced classes. Repeat-
edly, parents insisted that all students should have the “same rights,” the
“same opportunities,” and the “same classes” because “they should all be
prepared to go to university.” One father, Manuel Carillo (a pseudonym),
observed that reform at Pacific had had little impact on its traditional struc-
tures for sorting students: “Why do they give the good classes that are
needed for university to some and not to others? I suppose that if there’s
equality, everyone should have the opportunity” [translated quote] (Auer-
bach, 2002a).
Of all the Futures parents, Manuel was most receptive to the develop-
ment of critical capital and activism. A restaurant manager with three chil-
dren, he grew up in extreme poverty in an indigenous village in Mexico and
underwent great sacrifice to complete preparatoria (upper secondary school
in preparation for college). With his family history of local political leader-
ship in México and his experience of discrimination as a minority in his
homeland, Manuel was acutely sensitive to equity issues and the struggles of
students of color. “Maybe their mother is the dishwasher,” he said of chil-
dren he met at work, “but as soon as they have the chance, maybe they can
do better.” He told his daughter to “fight, go to another counselor” to “get
the classes that you want and [do] not settle for whatever they give you.”
F&F became Manuel’s education in American schooling and the
springboard both for his activism in school governance and his decision to
go to community college. He took full advantage of the program’s informa-
tion, social networks, and encouragement of social critique to develop him-
self as a school leader. He was a regular participant at meetings, despite his
16-hour workdays, and sought varied contacts at the school to help him
monitor and guide his daughter. He shared what he learned with a network
138
Journal of Hispanic Higher Education / April 2004


of relatives, compatriots, and coworkers, urging other immigrant parents to
get involved at school to help their children. Increasingly, he gained the con-
fidence to speak out in English at large school meetings. He used lessons
from F&F to press for change, as in calling for more Latino representation in
school organizations and greater accountability for school counselors—
even after his daughter had graduated. Leaders such as Manuel with the
knowledge, skills, and coraje to speak for marginalized others are key to
helping schools break down barriers to access.
When college access programs open the door to social critique, only
small numbers of parents such as Manuel may be moved to advocacy. How-
ever, as this study indicates, all parents will gain the chance for insight into
the roots of discrimination and exclusion that affect their children and ideas
for strategies in confronting them. Significantly, Futures parents often
voiced the belief that programs such as Futures and F&F should be available
to all students and their families.
Conclusion and Recommendations
What effect did F&F have on Latino parents and their children in the
pursuit of college pathways? First and foremost, parents grasped the notion
of steps along the pathway, the need for their involvement in that pathway,
and the desirability and viability of 4-year college for their families. Parents
expanded their college-relevant social networks, and some gained confi-
dence for intervention, advocacy, and leadership roles. They began to offer
more informed, proactive support for their children’s college pursuit, thus
easing some of the “conflict and challenge” that McDonough (1997) noted
surrounds the college planning process for low-SES, first-generation stu-
dents (Auerbach, 2001). This may have greater ripple effects in the future
with younger family members as parents share the experience they have
gained with college pathways.
F&F became the vehicle through which most parents of Futures stu-
dents experienced the school and acquired college knowledge as well as
gained insight into their children’s experience. They were receptive to the
parent program because they saw the Futures Project as sharing their aspira-
tions and caring for their children, with teachers serving as “second dads”
and project staff “sponsoring” students’ roles (cf. Clark, 1983; McDonough,
1997; Stanton-Salazar, 1997). Participation in F&F made the difference for
many parents in being able to provide stronger moral, emotional, and instru-
mental support for college to their children.
Ultimately, most Futures students were accepted at and enrolled in 4-
year colleges. This is largely due to the far more intensive efforts of the Fu-
tures Project with the students themselves on a daily basis. The effects of a
monthly parent program with voluntary attendance are, predictably, more
modest. They cannot be disentangled from the effects of other Futures activ-
Auerbach
139


ities in a qualitative study, except to note that the parents of students who did
not go to 4-year colleges were notably absent at meetings. The findings of
this study suggest that F&F provided students with an additional source of
support for college that in the absence of the program would likely have
been less consistent and less informed. In at least several cases, information
and support from F&F prevented some parents from obstructing their stu-
dents’ pathway to college. The greatest benefit of outreach to Latino parents
in college access programs may be in their potential to develop parents as
more knowledgeable, committed allies of students in their quest for higher
education (Tierney & Auerbach, in press).
The lessons of F&F and other programs underline the intense interest in
and need for college information and support among Latino families who as-
pire to college for their children. If K-16 partnerships are to take a compre-
hensive approach to increasing the rate of Latino college access, it behooves
them to invest in meeting these parents’ needs rather than neglecting this po-
tential resource for students. Outreach to parents need not be labor intensive
or expensive but could be based around monthly or even quarterly work-
shops and build on existing school and college resources, such as the experi-
ence of bilingual, bicultural staff, students, and alumni as well as parent
educators and organizers.
Specifically, policy makers and educators might consider the following
recommendations for engaging Latino parents:
• Start early—no later than the upper elementary grades—to reinforce family
college aspirations and introduce the idea of planning for pathways to college.
Many parents in this study regretted that they did not have key information be-
fore 10th grade about college options and requirements.
• Speak parents’ language. Schools and colleges must reach out to Latino parents
in both English and Spanish, especially on the Internet and in college directo-
ries and catalogues. F&F parents were more likely to participate in small dis-
cussions in their dominant language than in large, combined bilingual
presentations.
• Think small and personal. Parents who do not typically come to the school are
more likely to come to meetings of small groups with which they have some
connection—such as a class, club, sports team, or church group—rather than
large, schoolwide events. Make meetings as convenient and comfortable as
possible. If large events are necessary, arrange for smaller break-out groups
and ways for parents to get to know each other over time. Personal face-to-face
or telephone invitations to meetings are often more effective than letters or
flyers.
• Invite personal stories from guest speakers of similar backgrounds to help fam-
ilies make sense of complex information and feel comfortable asking ques-
tions. Guests can include not only K-16 educators, students, and alumni but fel-
low parents with children in college.
• Reinforce basic college information often, in a variety of ways. It takes time to
absorb new, complex information. Written information campaigns or annual
140
Journal of Hispanic Higher Education / April 2004


college nights will have only limited impact without sustained contact. Have
K-12 students research and present college information to their parents at
meetings to attract interest.
• Attend to the specialized information needs of Latino parents, such as worries
about children’s safety on campus, undocumented status, and loans. These
practical issues can become barriers to access unless addressed in a sensitive,
culturally appropriate way.
• Give parents opportunities to meet individually with school and college repre-
sentatives, who can become additional sources of help. Individual contact al-
lows parents to ask questions that are highly specific or private and helps build
trust with institutional agents.
• Help parents move through the college planning process together as a group.
The social and emotional mutual support that parents gain from undertaking
the experience collectively can reduce “cooling out” and increase their com-
mitment to the process.
• Acknowledge the barriers to college access for Latinos and encourage parent
learning about educational inequality. Frank discussion of barriers recognizes
the realities that students face, introduces strategies for overcoming them, and
contributes to a greater sense of community.
Together, such approaches will increase the likelihood of Latino par-
ents being helpful allies rather than bystanders or potential obstacles in stu-
dents’ struggle for access.
Appendix
Futures & Families Meeting Topics, 1998-2001
Year 1: 10th Grade
Are Your Children on the Path to College? (focus group on parent questions,
concerns)
College: Making It Happen (California Higher Education Commission video
and panel)
All About Tracking
Understanding Grades and Transcripts (hands-on workshop with counselors)
Where Are We Now on Our Paths to the Future? (discussion with principal)
Can We Afford College? Financial Aid Options (overview)
Lessons From the Class of ’99 (panel of graduating seniors of color)
Families and Adolescence: Strategies for Success for the Next Generation
Year 2: 11th Grade
What I Learned Last Summer (student presentations from University of Califor-
nia, Los Angeles, summer seminar)
College Fair Orientation (prior to high school college fair)
Auerbach
141


Families’ Experience With the Counseling System (with counselors and
administrators)
How to Survive and Thrive in Honors/Advanced Placement Classes
(panel of students, teachers)
Secrets of the SAT and ACT (panel of students, teachers, test tutors,
college reps)
Computer Workshop: Introduction to the Internet
Students’ Multiple Worlds: Home, School, Peers (study group)
Why Are All the Black Kids Sitting Together in the Cafeteria? (study group)
The College Search (in the school’s College & Career Center)
Using Community College as a Stepping Stone to University: Pros and Cons
(panel)
Computer Workshop: Searching for Colleges and Scholarships on the Internet
Futures & Families Summer BBQ and Student Awards
Year 3: 12th Grade
Family Reception and Rap Session (prior to school college fair)
Countdown to College Applications (in College & Career Center)
Preparing to Apply for Financial Aid: What You Need to Know
FAFSA Workshop (federal financial aid application)
Leaving Home for College (panel)
College Paperwork and Preparations (acceptances, housing, aid, loans, etc.)
Family Graduation Celebration and Student Awards
Notes
1. All quotes in this article were originally spoken or written in English, unless indicated in
the text as a translated quote from Spanish.
2. I recognize that the terminology used for naming persons of Latin American origin is a
highly sensitive, personal matter and the basis of ongoing debate. For the sake of clarity and
convenience, this article uses the term Chicano/Chicana for U.S.-born parents of Mexican an-
cestry to distinguish them from immigrant parents born in Mexico or Central America. It uses
the term Latino more broadly to encompass both U.S.-born and immigrant parent subgroups.
References
Antonio, A. (2002). College knowledge for successful K-16 transitions. Paper pre-
sented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Associa-
tion, New Orleans, LA.
142
Journal of Hispanic Higher Education / April 2004


Auerbach, S. (1999). Conceptualizing college: Listening to multiple voices in action
research with students of color. Paper presented at Reclaiming Voice II Confer-
ence, University of California, Irvine.
Auerbach, S. (2001). Under co-construction: Parent roles in promoting college ac-
cess for students of color. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Cali-
fornia, Los Angeles, Graduate School of Education & Information Studies.
Auerbach, S. (2002a). “Why do they give the good classes to some and not to oth-
ers?” Latino parent narratives of struggle in a college access program. Teachers
College Record, 104(7), 1369-1392.
Auerbach, S. (2002b). Exposing the rules of the game of college access: Making
privileged information accessible in a family outreach program. Paper pre-
sented at the annual meeting of the Sociology of Education Association,
Asilomar, CA.
Auerbach, S. (2003). Unpacking college preparation programs: The role of family
engagement. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educa-
tional Research Association, Chicago.
Azmitia, M., Cooper, C. R., Garcia, E. E., & Dunbar, N. D. (1996). The ecology of
family guidance in low-income Mexican-American and European-American
families. Social Development, 5(1), 1-23.
Baker, D. P., & Stevenson, D. L. (1986). Mothers’ strategies for children’s school
achievement: Managing the transition to high school. Sociology of Education,
59, 156-166.
Clark, R. M. (1983). Family life and school achievement: Why poor Black children
succeed or fail. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Delgado-Gaitan, C. (1994a). Spanish-speaking families’ involvement in schools. In
C. L. Fagnano & B. Z. Werber (Eds.), School, family, and community interac-
tion: A view from the firing lines (pp. 85-96). Boulder, CO: Westview.
Delgado-Gaitan, C. (1994b). Consejos: The power of cultural narratives. Anthropol-
ogy & Education Quarterly 25(3), 298-316.
Gándara, P. (1995). Over the ivy wall: The educational mobility of low-income Chi-
canos. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Gándara, P. (1998). Capturing Latino students in the academic pipeline. California
Policy Seminar Brief Series, 10(3). Berkeley: University of California Latino/
Latina Policy Research Program.
Gándara, P. (2002). A study of high school Puente: What we have learned about pre-
paring Latino youth for postsecondary education. Educational Policy, 16(4),
474-495.
Gándara, P., & Bial, D. (1999). Paving the way to higher education: K-12 interven-
tion programs for underrepresented youth (draft). Washington, DC: National
Postsecondary
Education
Cooperative,
National
Center
for
Education
Statistics.
Hossler, D., Schmit, J., & Vesper, N. (1999). Going to college: How social, eco-
nomic, and educational factors influence the decisions students make. Balti-
more: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Jun, A., & Colyar, J. (2001). Parental guidance suggested: Family involvement in
college preparation programs. In W. G. Tierney & L. S. Hagedorn (Eds.), In-
creasing access to college: Extending possibilities for all students (pp. 195-
216). Albany: State University of New York Press.
Auerbach
143


Lareau, A. (1989). Home advantage: Social class and parental intervention in ele-
mentary education. New York: Falmer.
Lareau, A., & Horvat, E. (1999). Moments of social inclusion: Race, class and cul-
tural capital in family school relationships. Sociology of Education, 71, 39-56.
López, G. (2001). The value of hard work: Lessons on parent involvement from an
(im)migrant household. Harvard Educational Review, 71(3), 416-437.
McClafferty, K. A., McDonough, P. M., & Fann, A. (2001). Parent involvement in
the college planning process. Paper presented at the annual conference of the
Association for the Study of Higher Education, Richmond, VA.
McDonough, P. (1997). Choosing colleges: How social class and schools structure
opportunity. Albany: State University of New York Press.
McDonough, P. (1998). African American and Latino perceptions of college access
in California after affirmative action: UCOP preliminary report, emergent
findings. Los Angeles: University of California Outreach Program.
McDonough, P., Perez, L., Fann, A., Tobolowsky, B., Smith, M., Teranishi, R., et al.
(2000). Parent involvement programs in education: Best research and prac-
tices. Los Angeles: University of California, Los Angeles, GEAR-UP State
Support Systems for Families Implementation Committee.
Mehan, H., Villanueva, I., Hubbard, L., & Lintz, A. (1996). Constructing school suc-
cess: The consequences of untracking low-achieving students. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Merriam, S. B. (1988). Case study research in education: A qualitative approach.
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Moll, L., Amanti, C., Neff, D., & Gonzalez, N. (1992). Funds of knowledge for
teaching: Using a qualitative approach to connect homes and classrooms. The-
ory Into Practice, 31(2), 132-141.
Morrell, E., & Rogers, J. (2002). Toward a grounded theory of critical capital. Paper
presented at the annual meeting of the Sociology of Education Association,
Asilomar, CA.
Pérez, L. X. (1999). The interface of individual, structural, and cultural constructs in
Latino parents’ effort to support their children in planning for college. Unpub-
lished doctoral dissertation, UCLA Graduate School of Education &
Information Sciences.
Plank, S. B., & Jordan, W. J. (2001). Effects of information, guidance, and actions on
postsecondary destinations: A study of talent loss. American Educational Re-
search Journal, 38(4), 947-980.
Post, D. (1990). College-going decision by Chicanos: The politics of misinforma-
tion. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 12(2), 174-187.
Sanders, M. G., Epstein, J. L., & Connors-Tadros, L. (1999). Family partnerships
with high schools: The parents’ perspective (Report No. 32). Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University, Center for Research on the Education of Students Placed at
Risk.
Serna, I., & Collatos, T. (2001). Achieving from the margins: Students of color in AP
classes. Paper presented at the American Educational Research Association,
Seattle, WA.
Solórzano, D. G. (1992). Chicano mobility aspirations: A theoretical and empirical
note. Latino Studies Journal, 3(1), 48-66.
144
Journal of Hispanic Higher Education / April 2004


Stanton-Salazar, R. D. (1997). A social capital framework for understanding the so-
cialization of racial minority children and youths. Harvard Educational Re-
view, 67(1), 1-40.
Stanton-Salazar, R. D. (2001). Manufacturing hope and despair: The school and kin
support networks of U.S.-Mexican youth. New York: Teachers College Press.
Tierney, W., & Auerbach, S. (in press). Toward developing an untapped resource:
The role of families in college preparation. In W. Tierney, Z. Corwin, &
J. Colyar (Eds.), From high school to college: Evaluating access. Albany: State
University of New York Press.
Tornatzky, L. G., Cutler, R., & Lee, J. (2002). College knowledge: What Latino par-
ents need to know and why they don’t know it. Claremont, CA: Tomas Rivera
Policy Institute.
Useem, E. L. (1991). Student selection into course sequences in mathematics: The
impact of parental involvement and school policies. Journal of Research on Ad-
olescence, 1(3), 231-250.
Villalpando, O., & Solórzano, D. G. (in press). The role of culture in college pro-
grams: A review of the research literature. In W. Tierney, Z. Corwin, &
J. Colyar (Eds.), From high school to college: Evaluating access. Albany: State
University of New York Press.
Villanueva, I., & Hubbard, L. (1994). Toward redefining parent involvement: Mak-
ing parents’ invisible strategies and cultural practices visible. Paper presented
at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, New
Orleans, LA.
Yin, R. K. (1993). Applications of case study research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Yonezawa, S. (1997). Making decisions about students’ lives: An interactive study of
secondary school students’ academic program selection. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, UCLA Graduate School of Education and Information Studies.
Susan Auerbach, Ph.D., is an assistant professor in the Department of Ed-
ucational Leadership & Policy Studies at California State University,
Northridge. She received her doctorate from the University of California,
Los Angeles’s Urban Schooling Division, where her dissertation was a
case study of how Latino and African American parents without college
experience support their children’s pathways to college. Previously a se-
nior research associate with the University of Southern California’s Cen-
ter for Higher Education Policy Analysis, she has published in Teachers
College Record and the forthcoming book, From High School to College
(SUNY Press). Her research interests in the social context of education fo-
cus on college access, home-school relations, community engagement in
school reform, and community-centered school leadership.
Auerbach
145