233 Broadway, 12th Floor, New York, NY 10279	
212 334 1300	
vera.org
Public policy—including decisions related to criminal justice and immigration—has far-reaching consequences, but too often is swayed by political rhetoric 
and unfounded assumptions. The Vera Institute of Justice has created a series of briefing papers to provide an accessible summary of the latest evidence 
concerning justice-related topics. By summarizing and synthesizing existing research, identifying landmark studies and key resources and, in some cases, 
providing original analysis of data, these briefs offer a balanced and nuanced examination of some of the significant justice issues of our time.
About these briefs
For the Record
An Unjust Burden: The Disparate 
Treatment of Black Americans in the 
Criminal Justice System 
By Elizabeth Hinton, Assistant Professor, Department of History and Department of African and African American Studies, 
Harvard University, LeShae Henderson, Special Assistant, Research, Vera Institute of Justice,  
and Cindy Reed, Senior Editor, Vera Institute of Justice	
May 2018
Vera Evidence Brief
Summary
The over-representation of black Americans in the nation’s 
justice system is well documented. Black men comprise 
about 13 percent of the male population, but about 35 
percent of those incarcerated. One in three black men born 
today can expect to be incarcerated in his lifetime, 
compared to one in six Latino men and one in 17 white men. 
Black women are similarly impacted: one in 18 black women 
born in 2001 is likely to be incarcerated sometime in her life, 
compared to one in 111 white women. The underlying reasons 
for this dis-proportionate representation are rooted in the 
history of the United States and perpetuated by current 
practices within the nation’s justice system. 
This brief presents an overview of the ways in which America’s 
history of racism and oppression continues to manifest in the 
criminal justice system, and a summary of research demon-
strating how the system perpetuates the disparate treatment 
of black people. The evidence presented here helps account 
for the hugely disproportionate impact of mass incarceration 
on millions of black people, their families, and their communi-
ties. This brief explains that:
› Discriminatory criminal justice policies and practices 
have historically and unjustifiably targeted black people 
since the Reconstruction Era, including Black Codes, va-
grancy laws, and convict leasing, all of which were used 
to continue post-slavery control over newly-freed people.
››
This discrimination continues today in often less overt ways, 
including through disparity in the enforcement of seemingly 
race-neutral laws. For example, while rates of drug use are 
similar across racial and ethnic groups, black people are ar-
rested and sentenced on drug charges at much higher rates 
than white people. 
››
Bias by decision makers at all stages of the justice process 
disadvantages black people. Studies have found that they 
are more likely to be stopped by the police, detained pretri-
al, charged with more serious crimes, and sentenced more 
harshly than white people. 
››
Living in poor communities exposes people to risk factors 
for both offending and arrest, and a history of structural 
racism and inequality of opportunity means that black 
people are more likely to be living in such conditions of 
concentrated poverty.
In addition to the clear injustice of a criminal justice system 
that disproportionately impacts black people, maintaining 
these racial disparities has a high cost for individuals, families, 
and communities. At the individual level, a criminal conviction 
has a negative impact on both employability and access to 
housing and public services. At the community level, dispropor-
tionately incarcerating people from poor communities removes 
economic resources and drives cycles of poverty and justice 
system involvement, making criminal justice contact the norm in 
the lives of a growing number of black Americans.


2
A snapshot of current 
disparities in incarceration
Present day disparities show that the burden of the tough 
on crime and mass incarceration eras has not fallen equally 
on all Americans, but has excessively and unfairly burdened 
black people. Though these disparities have narrowed in 
recent years, there still remains a wide gulf between black 
and white incarceration rates.1 Black people are represented 
in the American criminal justice system in unwarranted 
numbers given their share of the population.2
›› Black men comprise about 13 percent of the U.S. male 
population, but nearly 35 percent of all men who are 
under state or federal jurisdiction with a sentence of 
more than one year.3
›› One in three black men born in 2001 can expect to be 
incarcerated in his lifetime, compared to one in six Latino 
men and one in 17 white men.4
›› Black people are incarcerated in state prisons at a rate 5.1 
times greater than that of white people.5
›› One in 18 black women born in 2001 will be incarcerated 
sometime in her life, compared to one in 45 Latina 
women and one in 111 white women.6
›› Forty-four percent of incarcerated women are black, 
although black women make up about 13 percent of the 
female U.S. population.7 
As this brief demonstrates, these racial disparities are no 
accident, but rather are rooted in a history of oppression 
and discriminatory decision making that have deliberately 
targeted black people and helped create an inaccurate picture 
of crime that deceptively links them with criminality. (See 
“Black people have historically been targeted by intentionally 
discriminatory criminal laws,” below.) They are compounded 
by the racial biases that research has shown to exist in 
individual actors across the criminal justice system—from 
police and prosecutors to judges and juries—that lead to 
disproportionate levels of stops, searches, arrests, and pretrial 
detention for black people, as well as harsher plea bargaining 
and sentencing outcomes compared to similarly situated 
white people. (See “Bias by criminal justice system actors 
can lead to disproportionate criminal justice involvement for 
black people” at page 7.) Underlying all of this are deep and 
systemic inequities that have resulted in inordinate numbers 
of black Americans living in overpoliced, poor communities, 
surrounded by economic and educational disadvantage—
known drivers of criminal behavior—resulting in a tenacious 
cycle of criminal justice involvement for too many black 
individuals and their families. (See “Communities of color 
are disproportionately impacted by extreme poverty and its 
connection to crime” at page 10.) 
Black people have historically 
been targeted by intentionally 
discriminatory criminal laws
Racial disparities in the criminal justice system have deep 
roots in American history and penal policy. In the South, fol-
lowing Emancipation, black Americans were specific targets 
of unique forms of policing, sentencing, and confinement. 
Laws that capitalized on a loophole in the 13th Amendment 
that states citizens cannot be enslaved unless convicted of a 
crime intentionally targeted newly emancipated black people 
as a means of surveilling them and exploiting their labor. In 
1865 and 1866, the former Confederate legislatures quickly 
enacted a new set of laws known as the Black Codes to force 
former slaves back into an exploitative labor system that 
resembled the plantation regime in all but name.8 Although 
these codes did recognize the new legal status of black 
Americans, in most states newly-freed people could not vote, 
serve on juries, or testify in court.9 Vagrancy laws at the 
center of the Black Codes meant that any black person who 
could not prove he or she worked for a white employer could 
be arrested.10 These “vagrants” most often entered a system 
of incarceration administered by private industry. Known 
as convict leasing, this system allowed for the virtual 
enslavement of people who had been convicted of a crime, 
even if those “crimes” were for things like “walking without 
a purpose” or “walking at night,” for which law enforcement 
officials in the South aggressively targeted black people.11 
Northern states also turned to the criminal justice 
system to exert social control over free black Americans. 
Policymakers in the North did not legally target black 
Americans as explicitly as did their southern counterparts, 
but disparate enforcement of various laws against “suspi-
cious characters,” disorderly conduct, keeping and visiting 
disorderly houses, drunkenness, and violations of city 
ordinances made possible new forms of everyday surveil-
lance and punishment in the lives of black people in the 
Northeast, Midwest, and West.12 Though such criminal justice 


3
involvement was based on racist policies, the results were 
nevertheless used as evidence to link black people and crime. 
After Reconstruction, scholars, policymakers, and reformers 
analyzed the disparate rates of black incarceration in the 
North as empirical “proof” of the “criminal nature” of black 
Americans.13
Higher rates of imprisonment of black people in both the 
North and South deeply informed ongoing national debates 
about racial differences. The publication of the 1890 census 
and the prison statistics it included laid the groundwork for 
discussions about black Americans as a distinctly dangerous 
population.14 Coming 25 years after the Civil War and mea-
suring the first generation removed from slavery, the census 
figures indicated that black people represented 12 percent of 
the nation’s population, but 30 percent of those incarcerated.15 
The high arrest and incarceration rates of black Americans—
though based on the racist policies discussed above—served 
to create what historian Khalil Gibran Muhammad has called 
a “statistical discourse” about black crime in the popular 
and political imagination, and this data deeply informed 
national discussions about racial differences that continue to 
this day.16 Indeed, a 2010 study found that white Americans 
overestimate the share of burglaries, illegal drug sales, and 
juvenile crime committed by black people by approximately 
20 to 30 percent.17 (See “The myth of black-on-black crime,” 
on page 4.)   
These distorted notions of criminality continued to shape 
political discourse and policy decisions throughout the 
20th century. In 1965, President Lyndon Johnson declared 
the “War on Crime” and began the process of expanding and 
modernizing American law enforcement.18 Johnson made 
his declaration despite stable or decreasing crime levels. 
Perceived increases in crime in urban centers at the time 
may be tied in part to changes in law enforcement practices 
and crime reporting as jurisdictions vied for newly-available 
federal funding for law enforcement under his initiatives.19 
Nevertheless, a discourse about high crime in urban areas—
areas largely populated by black people—had taken hold in 
the national consciousness.20 
Statistics linking black people and crime have historically 
overstated the problem of crime in black communities and 
produced a skewed depiction of American crime as a whole.21 
The FBI’s Uniform Crime Report—one commonly cited 
source for U.S. crime statistics—fails to measure criminal 
justice outcomes beyond the point of arrest, and thus does 
not account for whether or not suspects are convicted.22 
In the 1970s, black people had the highest rate of arrest for 
the crimes of murder, robbery, and rape—crimes that also 
had the lowest percentage of arrestees who were eventually 
convicted.23 Yet statistical data on crime based on arrest rates 
deepened federal policymakers’ racialized perception of the 
problem, informing crime control strategies that intensified 
law enforcement in low-income communities of color from 
the 1960s onwards.24 For instance, in trying to understand 
where and when certain crimes occur, researchers from 
the National Commission on Law Enforcement and 
Administration of Justice spoke only with law enforcement 
agencies and officers stationed in low-income black commu-
nities. This skewed the data—which intentionally ignored 
the disproportionate police presence in these neighborhoods 
as well as delinquency among middle class, white, young 
men—yet was used to craft strategies for the War on Crime, 
such as increased patrol and surveillance in low-income 
communities of color.25
Even present-day race-neutral 
laws and policies can have 
disparate impacts on black 
people
Legislators in the United States no longer explicitly write 
laws in the racially discriminatory manner that marked 
the Reconstruction Era. But even laws that are neutral on 
their face can disparately impact black people.26 The “War 
on Drugs,” for example, inspired policies like drug-free 
zones and habitual offender laws that produced differential 
outcomes by race.
›› Drug-free zone laws prohibit the use or sale of drugs 
in proximity of certain protected areas like schools, 
playgrounds, parks, and public housing projects.27 Those 
who use or sell drugs within a certain distance from 
these areas typically receive punitive sentences, such 
as mandatory minimums (up to eight years in some 
states), sentence enhancements (which allow judges to 
increase a person’s sentence beyond the normal range), 
or doubling of the maximum penalty for the underlying 
offense (as in Washington, DC).28 Because of residential 
segregation—which pushes low-income black people to 
high density areas of the city and white people often to 
less dense suburbs—coupled with the high density of the 
neighborhoods where schools in urban areas are located, 
people of color are disproportionately impacted by these 
laws.29 In Massachusetts, for instance, a 2004 review of 


4
The notion that black people commit violence against other 
black people at greater levels than do members of other 
racial and ethnic groups is sometimes colloquially referred 
to as “black-on-black crime.” The term was originally used 
by those in the black community to express concerns about 
the safety of their neighborhoods, but has been wielded 
more broadly by the media and observers to portray violent 
crimes committed by black people.a Recently, the term 
has been invoked to counter #BlackLivesMatter protests of 
police shootings of black men by suggesting that the “real” 
problem is black men shooting each other.b These notions 
of criminality have consequences. Studies have shown that 
“people with racial associations of crime are more punitive 
regardless of whether they are overtly racially prejudiced,” 
making them more likely to support policies such as the 
death penalty.c 
But the notion that black-on-black intraracial violence is 
greater than intraracial violence for other groups is not 
borne out by statistics. A report from the Bureau of Justice 
Statistics found that most violence occurs between victims 
and offenders of the same race, regardless of race: 57 per-
cent of the nearly 3.7 million reported violent crimes commit-
ted against white victims were perpetrated by white offend-
ers; while of the 850,720 reported violent crimes committed 
against black victims, 63 percent were committed by black 
people.d Nor is there an epidemic of black-on-black violence: 
the rate of both black-on-black and white-on-white nonfatal 
violence declined 79 percent between 1993 and 2015.e  The 
number of homicides involving both a black victim and black 
perpetrator fell from 7,361 in 1991 to 2,570 in 2016.f
The myth of black-on-black crime is likely fostered at least in 
part by the way that crime is measured. Federal government 
crime reporting portrays a skewed picture of the relationship 
between race and offending. The FBI’s Uniform Crime Report, 
which is considered the official measure of the national 
crime rate, has always emphasized street crime to the 
exclusion of organized and white-collar crime.g As such, the 
figures that inform law enforcement strategies and priorities 
tend to reflect the crimes committed by low-income and 
unemployed Americans who, in part because of structural 
inequalities, are disproportionately black. (See “Commu-
nities of color are disproportionately impacted by extreme 
poverty and its connection to crime” at page 10.) To the 
extent that black-on-black crime exists, it is better understood 
as a function of structural racism that has led to more black 
people living in conditions of concentrated poverty than as 
an inherently racial issue. 
The myth of “black-on-black” crime
a For an overview of the history and usage of the phrase “black-on-black crime,” see Brentin Mock, “The Origins of the Phrase ‘Black-on-Black Crime,’” CityLab, 
June 11, 2015, https://perma.cc/8267-8442. Also see Zhai Yun Tan, “What Does ‘Black-on-Black Crime’ Actually Mean?” Christian Science Monitor, September 22, 
2016, https://perma.cc/85Q2-TURC.
b Heather MacDonald, “New Data: It’s Still about Black-on-Black Crime,” National Review, December 12, 2014, https://perma.cc/JP6G-K83X; and Alexandrea 
Boguhn, “Right-Wing Media Push ‘Black-on-Black’ Crime Canard to Deflect from Ferguson Police Shooting,” Media Matters for America, August 18, 2014 (collecting 
news articles), https://perma.cc/LUB4-2SHE. Also see Jamelle Bouie, “The Trayvon Martin Killing and the Myth of Black-on-Black Crime,” Daily Beast, July 15, 2013, 
https://perma.cc/5SUB-CA34. 
c Nazgol Ghandnoosh, Race and Punishment: Racial Perceptions of Crime and Support for Punitive Policies (Washington, DC: The Sentencing Project, 2014), 19, 
https://perma.cc/PW6M-CSQA.  
d Rachel E. Morgan, Race and Hispanic Origin of Victims and Offenders, 2012-15 (Washington, DC: Bureau of Justice Statistics, 2017), 2,  
https://perma.cc/4XNR-3DKX. Also see David Neiwart, “White Supremacists’ Favorite Myths about Black Crime Rates Take Another Hit  
from BJS Study,” Southern Poverty Law Center, October 23, 2017, https://perma.cc/2CK7-5QEF. 
e Morgan, Race and Hispanic Origin of Victims and Offenders (2017), at 4.
f For 1991 figures, see James Alan Fox and Marianne W. Zawitz, Homicide Trends in the United States (Washington, DC: BJS, 2010) (trends by race), https://perma.cc/
TFD2-8QRD. For 2016 figures, see Federal Bureau of Investigation, “2016 Crime in the United States: Expanded Homicide Data Table 3,” https://perma.cc/4UFN-KUK7.
g See Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Uniform Crime Reporting Statistics: UCR Offense Definitions,” https://perma.cc/2ZTB-ASCK.


5
sentencing data showed that black and Latino people 
accounted for 80 percent of drug-free zone convictions, 
even though 45 percent of those arrested statewide for 
drug offenses were white.30 
›› Habitual offender and “three strikes” laws penalize 
individuals with repeat offenses more harshly, typically 
increasing the sentence length for each conviction.31 
Under these laws, individuals charged with seemingly 
minor crimes, like possession of a controlled substance, 
can incur significantly enhanced sentences.32 More and 
deeper criminal justice system involvement of black peo-
ple is driven by overpolicing (see discussion of proactive 
policing, below), which leads to more arrests for black 
people; bias by criminal justice system actors (see “Bias 
by system actors can lead to disproportionate criminal 
justice involvement for black people” at page 7), which 
leads to more convictions; and structural inequality (see 
“Communities of color are disproportionately impacted 
by extreme poverty and its connection to crime” at page 
10), which surrounds black people with the drivers of 
criminal behavior. Disproportionate numbers of black 
people are ensnared in the criminal justice system on 
multiple occasions, setting them up to be subject to the 
harsh impact of these laws.33 
›› Location-based proactive policing practices like hot 
spots policing increase preventive police patrols in 
“micro-geographic locations” determined by data to have 
high concentrations of crime.34 Such practices arose in 
response to violent crime in the 1980s and 1990s, and 
were combined with policing strategies like zero toler-
ance and the “broken windows” model, which focused 
police efforts on low-level quality-of-life crimes like 
public drunkenness, loitering, or littering under a theory 
that eliminating such small-scale disorder would also 
decrease more serious offenses.35 Such strategies can dis-
parately impact communities of color. In one study of law 
enforcement and open-air drug markets—places where 
drugs are sold in the open, typically outdoors or out of 
cars—in Seattle, researchers found that police officers are 
more likely to target such markets because the drug trade 
is visible and easier to access.36 Even so, the study found 
that police targeted black open-air markets over white 
ones.37 A similar study using the same data calculated 
both the percentage of people who delivered drugs 
who were black and white, as well as the percentages of 
drug-related arrests based on race. Researchers found 
that black people represented about 47 percent of those 
delivering crack cocaine, but 79 percent of those arrested; 
while white people constituted about 41 percent of those 
delivering the drug, but only 9 percent of those arrested.38 
 
Moreover, a 2018 report on proactive policing concluded 
that the targeting of physical locations that are deemed 
high risk by police data is likely to lead to “large racial 
disparities in the volume and nature of police-citizen 
encounters.”39 According to legal scholar Jonathan Simon, 
this strategy to reduce violent crime “produced its own 
racially neutral rationale for targeting neighborhoods of 
high poverty and crime, which were generally almost 100 
percent Black or Black and Hispanic.”40 For example, a 
2016 NYPD inspector general’s report found that “the rate 
of quality-of-life enforcement in precincts citywide was 
positively correlated with higher proportions of black 
and Hispanic residents….”41 
One well-known example of the disproportionate effect 
of race-neutral laws is New York’s experiment with en-
hanced sentencing for drug offenses.42 In 1973, New York 
State enacted the so-called “Rockefeller drug laws,” a set 
of statutes that established mandatory minimum prison 
sentences for felony drug convictions.43 Under these laws, 
someone convicted of selling two ounces—or possessing four 
ounces—of heroin, morphine, opium, cocaine, or marijuana 
faced a minimum of 15 years in prison.44 The statutes pro-
vide a stark example of the ways in which laws written in 
race-neutral terms can still impact people of different racial 
groups in markedly different ways. Research on the impacts 
of the Rockefeller drug laws, and later reforms to them, has 
found the following:
›› The number of people incarcerated for drug offenses in 
New York State grew from 1,488 to 22,266 between 1973 
and 1999—a nearly 15-fold increase—due in part to these 
laws.45 
›› That impact did not fall equally on people of all races. In 
2001, for every one white male aged 21 to 44 incarcerated 
under the Rockefeller Laws, 40 black males of similar age 
were incarcerated for the same offense.46 
›› A study of 2009 reforms to the Rockefeller drug laws 
found that removing mandatory minimum sentences and 
increasing access to treatment reduced racial disparities 
in prison sentences and decreased rates of re-arrest. 
However, following the reforms, black people arrested on 
felony drug charges were still nearly twice as likely to 
receive a prison sentence compared to similarly situated 
white people.47 


6
New York’s laws were the first in a wave of similar policies 
across the country. The federal government—and many 
states—enacted mandatory minimums that called for longer 
sentences for crack cocaine offenses—a drug more heavily 
used among black people—over powder cocaine—a drug more 
commonly used among white people.48 Combined, these drug 
laws contributed to substantial growth in the number of black 
people behind bars and the extreme racial disparities that 
characterize jails and prisons across the United States today.49 
(See “Drug laws: A case study in disparate impact,” above.)
Figure 1
Racial disparities in drug arrests and sentencing, 2016
60
70
80
50
40
30
20
10
0
13%
15%
73%
71%
77%
27%
31%
31%
38%
22%
U.S. population
Drug users in
the past year
Drug possession and
distribution arrests
Sentenced to state
prison for drug oﬀenses
Sentenced to federal
prison for drug oﬀenses
 Black
 White
Sources: Adapted from Lawrence D. Bobo and Victor Thompson, “Racialized Mass Incarceration: Poverty, Prejudice, and Punishment” in Doing Race: 21 Essays 
for the 21st Century, edited by Hazel Rose Markus and Paula M. L. Moya (New York: Norton, 2010), 322-55. U.S. population data from the U.S. Census Bureau, 
American Community Survey, 2015. Monthly drug users data from the Substance Use and Mental Health Services Administration, Results from the 2016 National 
Survey on Drug Use and Health: Detailed Tables. Drug arrest data from Federal Bureau of Investigation, Uniform Crime Reports, Crime in the United States, 2016. 
Prison sentences data from E. Ann Carson, Prisoners in 2016 (Washington, DC: U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics, 2018). 
Drug laws: A case study in disparate impact
Drug offending provides an important case study because 
information from public surveys consistently demonstrates that 
rates of drug use are fairly consistent across racial and ethnic 
groups. However, the practices of law enforcement agencies 
and the courts have led to widely disparate outcomes depend-
ing on a person’s race. Black people make up about 13 percent 
of the U.S. population and 15 percent of drug users who are 
18 years old or older. Yet 27 percent of those arrested for drug 
possession and distribution, 38 percent of those federally-sen-
tenced for drug-related crimes, and 33 percent of those sen-
tenced by states for drug-related crimes, are black. (See Figure 
1, below.) In other words, the risk of incarceration in the federal 
system for someone who uses drugs monthly and is black is 
more than seven times that of his or her white counterpart. 


7
Bias by system actors can 
lead to disproportionate 
criminal justice involvement for 
black people
Beyond laws and policies that disparately impact black 
people, the bias of individual actors in the criminal justice 
system—police, prosecutors, judges, and juries—can further 
disproportionately involve black people, leading to more 
frequent stops, searches, and arrests, as well as higher rates 
of pretrial detention, harsher plea bargaining outcomes, 
and more severe sentences than similarly situated white 
people. Some of this bias may be the result of overt racism 
but, more often, it manifests as implicit bias. Implicit bias is 
the “automatic positive or negative preference for a group, 
based on one’s subconscious thoughts,” which can produce 
discriminatory behavior even if individuals are unaware that 
such biases form the bases of their decisions.50 Implicit bias 
affects everyone, but is of particular import when it results 
in unequal treatment by criminal justice actors.51 Such biases 
impact individual stages of the process, like policing, and also 
accumulate over multiple stages, through case processing, 
prosecution, and disposition.52 The cumulative effect of such 
individual biases contributes to disproportionately negative 
outcomes for black Americans.
Studies have found police are more likely to 
stop, search, and arrest black people
Because police are the gateway to the court and prison 
systems, understanding how bias affects policing practices is 
critical to understanding larger racial disparities in American 
criminal justice. Studies have shown that police officers can 
hold implicit biases that affect their decisions toward black 
individuals.53 For example, a 2004 study found that when 
police officers were asked “who looks criminal?” and shown 
a series of pictures, they more often chose black faces than 
white ones.54 Likewise, in another 2004 study, researchers 
primed police officers to think about crimes using words like 
“violent,” “stop,” and “arrest,” then showed them a series of 
photographs. The study found that once primed, the officers 
focused more quickly on black male faces and remembered 
those faces to have features that have been considered to be 
stereotypically black—such as a broad nose, thick lips, and 
dark skin.55   
The best available evidence suggests that police bias toward 
black Americans, coupled with strategic decisions to deploy 
certain law enforcement practices—like hot spots policing—
more heavily in black communities, increases the likelihood 
of encounters with police and negative outcomes like stops, 
searches, use of force, and arrest.56 
›› Studies on police use of force reveal that black people are 
more likely than white people to experience use of force 
by police. A study of police use of non-fatal force from 
2002 to 2011 found that in street stops, 14 percent of 
black people experienced non-fatal force compared to 6.9 
percent of white people stopped by the police.57 
›› Studies have found that police are more likely to pull over 
and search black drivers despite lower contraband hit 
rates. In a study of investigatory traffic stops in Kansas 
City among drivers under 25 years old, 28 percent of 
black men and 17 percent of black women were pulled 
over in 2011 for an investigatory stop, compared to 13 
percent of white men and 7 percent of white women.58 In 
2016, a Police Accountability Task Force in Chicago found 
that police searched black and Latino drivers four times 
as often as white drivers. However, police found contra-
band on white drivers twice as often as black and Latino 
drivers.59 In a similar study in 2017 at Stanford University, 
researchers developed a “threshold test” to quantify how 
officers initiate searches. The study found that police 
in North Carolina employ a lower search threshold to 
black and Latino people than they do to white people and 
Asian people, searching 5.4 percent of black people pulled 
over compared to 3.1 percent of white people.60 
›› Studies have shown similar disparities in police pedes-
trian stops. A study of 125,000 pedestrian stops by police 
in New York City found black people were stopped more 
than 23 percent more often than white people—even 
when controlling for “race-specific estimates of crime”—
representing over half of the stops and only 26 percent 
of the city’s population.61 Moreover, stops of black people 
were also less likely to lead to an arrest.62
›› Studies have also shown that police are more likely to 
arrest black people. A meta-analysis of 23 research stud-
ies that focused on the relationship between race and the 
likelihood of an arrest between 1977 and 2004 found that 
black people were more likely to be arrested than their 
white counterparts, even when controlling for factors 
like the seriousness of the offense and the suspect’s 
prior record.63 Similarly, a study of the 1997 National 
Longitudinal Survey of Youth data found that after 


8
controlling for differences in drug offending, non-drug 
offending, and neighborhood context, racial disparities 
in drug-related arrests still persist. This finding suggests 
that just being black significantly raises one’s chances 
of arrest.64 Moreover, a 2010 ACLU study found that 
black people were 3.7 times more likely to be arrested for 
marijuana possession than white people, even though 
both groups use the drug at similar rates.65
Prosecutor bias can lead to harsher out-
comes for black people
Biased decision making by prosecutors also negatively 
impacts people of color. Prosecutors hold a particularly 
outsized role in the criminal justice process, with discretion-
ary decision-making power over charging and plea bargains.66 
Their recommendations also can anchor courtroom discus-
sions about pretrial detention, bail amounts, and sentencing.67 
Research shows that bias can affect how prosecutors exercise 
their discretion in the cases of black people.68 
›› A 2012 review by the Vera Institute of Justice of 34 studies 
looked at the effect of prosecutorial decision making on 
racial disparities in sentencing and at five other discretion 
points.69 A greater number of studies found that people 
of color are more likely to be prosecuted, held in pretrial 
detention, and to receive other harsh treatment.70 
›› A 2013 study found that federal prosecutors are more likely 
to charge black people than similarly situated white people 
with offenses that carry higher mandatory minimum 
sentences.71 A 2006 study found that state prosecutors are 
more likely to charge black people under habitual offender 
statutes than similarly-situated white people.72 
›› Implicit bias can also impact the plea bargaining phase, by 
which the vast majority of criminal cases are resolved.73 
A 2017 study of more than 48,000 misdemeanor and 
felony cases in Wisconsin between 2000 and 2006 found 
that white people were 25 percent more likely to have 
their top charge dropped or reduced by prosecutors than 
black people.74 Disparities were especially glaring when 
misdemeanor cases only were considered: white people 
were nearly 75 percent more likely than black people to 
see all misdemeanor charges carrying a potential sentence 
of incarceration dropped, dismissed, or amended to lesser 
charges.75 The result of these disparities is that black people 
originally charged with misdemeanors are not only more 
likely to be convicted, they are more likely to be sentenced 
to incarceration than white people. 
Judicial bias can lead to worse criminal 
justice outcomes for black people
Judges too have been found to hold implicit biases that can 
impact their treatment of the black people whose cases are 
before them. For example, a 2009 study of judges’ implicit 
biases found that white judges were more motivated to be 
fair when they were told that the accused was black.76 When 
not explicitly told the race of the defendant, but primed with 
cues that implied the defendant was black, judges imposed 
moderately harsher sentences.77 Because judges oversee every 
stage of the court process, their biases can lead to harsher 
outcomes at multiple discretion points in a case, from pretrial 
detention through sentencing.78
›› A 2009 study of drug offense convictions in three 
U.S. district courts found that black people had higher 
odds of pretrial detention than white people. Moreover, 
those charged for offenses related to crack cocaine—a 
charge more common among black people than white 
people—were more likely to be held pretrial than those 
charged for offenses involving powder cocaine. Whether 
a defendant is held pretrial has downstream effects on 
sentencing: this study found that men who were in cus-
tody during their sentencing hearings received sentences 
about eight months longer on average than those who 
were released before their hearings.79
›› A 2013 review of 50 years of studies on racial disparities 
in bail practices found that black people are subject to 
pretrial detention more frequently, and have bail set at 
higher amounts, than white people who have similar 
criminal histories and are facing similar charges. Studies 
documented this disparity in state and federal cases as 
well as juvenile justice proceedings, and in all regions of 
the country.80
›› In a review of 40 studies into the linkage between race 
and ethnicity and sentencing severity, researchers found 
that at both the state and federal levels, black people were 
more likely to receive more severe sentences than their 
white counterparts. This finding holds true even when 
controlling for differences in criminal histories and the 
effects of policies that have a disparate impact on people 
of color, like the drug laws and hot spots policing prac-
tices discussed above.81 Moreover, a 2005 analysis of 40 
studies on racial disparities in sentencing at the state and 
federal levels found that 43 percent of studies at the state 
level and 68 percent at the federal level reported direct 
racially discriminatory sentencing outcomes, impacting 


9
both the initial decision to incarcerate and the length of 
any ultimate sentence to incarceration.82
›› A study of capital cases in Philadelphia found that when 
the victim was white and the accused black, defendants 
who were perceived to have a more “stereotypically Black 
appearance” were more than twice as likely to receive a 
death sentence as black people on trial who were per-
ceived as less so. The accused person’s appearance made 
no difference, however, when both the victim and the 
accused were black.83 
›› Multiple studies demonstrate the impact of skin color 
on sentencing, with lighter-skinned black people often 
receiving more lenient treatment and darker-skinned 
black people receiving more punitive sentences. For 
instance, when controlling for the type of offense, so-
cioeconomic status, and demographic indicators among 
a subset of incarcerated men in Georgia from 1995 to 
2002, dark-skinned black men received prison sentences 
a year-and-a-half longer—and the lightest-skinned black 
men about three-and-a-half months longer—than their 
white counterparts.84 A 2015 study of men facing first-
time felony charges found that darker-skinned black men 
received sentences that were, on average, 400 days longer 
than their white counterparts, while medium-skinned 
black men received sentences about 200 days longer than 
their white counterparts. On average, black men received 
a sentence 270 days longer than white men.85
›› A study of cases in which men were charged with felony 
crimes in urban U.S. counties in 2000 found that black 
defendants were more likely to be detained pretrial; that 
pretrial detention impacted the likelihood of a guilty plea 
for black, white, and Latino defendants; and that both 
detention and guilty pleas affected sentence outcomes. 
Taken together, the effects of cumulative bias increased 
the probability that the average black person charged 
with a felony would go to prison by 26 percent.86 
 Studies have found evidence of racial bias 
against black people in jury verdicts and 
sentencing
The potential racial bias of jurors in criminal cases has been 
examined in studies using archival analysis of case verdicts, 
post-trial juror interviews, and mock jury experiments in 
which researchers can randomly assign subjects to “juries” 
and control for and isolate variables of interest.87 Such stud-
ies have examined both the impact of the racial composition 
of juries on sentences, as well as the effect of the defendant’s 
race on jurors’ decision making. The results are complex 
and the scholarship is incomplete, and while some research 
attributes racial discrimination by jurors to a bias against 
defendants who belong to a race different than their own, 
studies do show evidence that implicit bias may influence 
white jurors in some cases where the accused is black.88  
›› In a 2003 review of empirical research on race and 
juries, the authors found complex relationships between 
implicit juror bias and a defendant’s race depending on 
the type of case at issue. In studies that used summaries 
of trials that were more “racially charged,” like a summary 
of the O.J. Simpson case, white mock jurors appeared less 
likely to exhibit bias. When studies used trials that were 
not racially charged, racial biases were found, suggesting 
that the white mock jurors were motivated to appear less 
racist the more racially salient the case before them.89 
›› A 2005 meta-analysis of 34 studies on mock jury verdict 
decisions and 16 studies on mock juror sentencing 
decisions found a notable effect of racial bias on mock 
jurors’ decision making. The study shows that mock 
jurors are more likely to render both guilty verdicts and 
longer sentences to defendants whose race differsd from 
their own, suggesting that jurors are more lenient toward 
members of their own racial groups.90 
›› A 2010 study found that mock jurors showed racial bias 
toward darker-skinned individuals, evaluating ambig-
uous evidence as a greater indication of guilt than they 
did for lighter-skinned people. Moreover, when asked to 
rate the defendant’s level of guilt on a scale of 1 to 100, 
mock jurors perceived the darker-skinned individuals to 
be more guilty than lighter-skinned individuals. Perhaps 
most notably, the study found that many mock jurors 
could not recall whether the defendant was a lighter- or 
darker-skinned individual, implying that the defendant’s 
skin tone was not consciously, but rather implicitly, 
considered in their evaluation of guilt. These findings 
held true regardless of the race of the mock juror (though 
none of the jurors were black).91 


10
Communities of color are 
disproportionately impacted 
by extreme poverty and its 
connection to crime 
The historical legacy of slavery and racist policymaking and 
norms in America has had significant and long-lasting effects 
on racial inequality. Research shows that well after slavery 
ended, de-industrialization, discriminatory housing practices 
known as red-lining, and white flight from neighborhoods 
as black families migrated north pushed large numbers of 
black people into poverty, perpetuating economic inequalities 
between white and black people.92 These neighborhoods are 
characterized by an extreme concentration of disadvantage 
where formal employment opportunities and access to 
quality education are limited, and neighborhood resources 
are scarce. 93  
While these factors describe the structural realities of 
extreme poverty, they are also known drivers of criminal 
conduct, independent of race or ethnicity.94 Researchers 
have found higher levels of violent crime in poor urban 
neighborhoods, regardless of race. Studies demonstrate that 
when white men are living in an environment characterized 
by poverty, unemployment, and single-parent households, 
they are more likely to commit homicide and other violent 
crimes than black men confronting a similar set of structural 
impediments.95 
But the realities of poverty disproportionately affect black 
people: 22 percent of black people lived in poverty in 2016, 
compared to approximately 9 percent of white people.96 
Thus, higher rates of poverty and the cumulative effects 
of structural racism mean black people are exposed to the 
structural risk factors that make crime more likely at greater 
rates than their white counterparts. Compounded with 
justice system laws and practices that have disparate impacts 
and bias among justice system actors, discussed above, black 
people are consequently arrested for certain crimes at higher 
rates.97  Put differently, racial disparities in the justice system 
are deeply rooted in historical racism that manifests today in 
structural inequalities—from the differences in the quality of 
education to unemployment rates to household wealth.98   
The criminal justice system does not only punish those 
accused and convicted of crimes. With such large numbers of 
black Americans being arrested and incarcerated, it also im-
pacts entire communities. The widening reach of the criminal 
justice system in low-income communities of color—includ-
ing higher rates of arrest and incarceration—further depletes 
resources and social capital in these places, perpetuating 
poverty and criminal justice involvement. 
›› Parental incarceration is now commonplace for black 
children. One in 25 white children born in 1990 had an 
incarcerated parent at some point during childhood, com-
pared to one in four black children.99 The negative impact 
of having an incarcerated parent can include criminal 
justice involvement, behavioral health issues, low educa-
tional attainment, and lack of economic resources.100
›› Disparities in incarceration of black men impacts 
women and families. With such high incarceration rates 
for black men, women are often left to raise children 
alone while their partners cycle in and out of jail and 
prisons, increasing the number of households within 
communities of color headed by women and single 
parents or individual family members.101 Beyond the eco-
nomic challenges these women face, in 2014 researchers 
found that having a family member who is incarcerated 
negatively impacts women’s cardiovascular health.102 
›› The social and economic consequences of a criminal 
record impede successful reentry. People who have 
been incarcerated experience collateral consequences of 
conviction that hinder their ability to access employment, 
housing, education, and other supports following their 
release from prison, making reentry difficult and increas-
ing the chances of recidivism.103 
Conclusion
Highly visible events—from Michael Brown in Ferguson, 
Missouri, to Eric Garner in Staten Island, New York; from 
Sandra Bland in Texas and Stephon Clark in California to 
Philando Castile in Minnesota—in which the lives of black 
men, women, and boys ended after encounters with law 
enforcement, have served to elevate public awareness of 
disproportionate police violence. However, the ways in which 
the criminal justice system operates to disadvantage people 
of color are systemic and ingrained, and more often subtle. 


11
Focusing on high profile incidents of violence and abuse, 
while essential, will only make a small dent in the disparities 
present in the justice system that undercut the life potential 
of people who live in communities of color.
The evidence for racial disparities in the criminal justice 
system is well documented. However, there is no evidence 
that these widely disproportionate rates of criminal justice 
contact and incarceration are making us safer. To the contrary, 
studies have shown that concentrated incarceration in poor 
communities erodes community resources and may actually 
increase crime.104 The disproportionate racial impact of 
certain laws and policies, as well as biased decision making 
by justice system actors, leads to higher rates of arrest and 
incarceration in low-income communities of color which, in 
turn, increases economic strain, further reduces income, and 
stifles wealth creation. Consequently, current approaches to 
criminal justice are extending levels of discrimination that 
are typically associated in the popular consciousness with a 
pre-civil rights era, but still exist today. 
Resources
Bobo, Lawrence D. and Victor Thompson. “Racialized Mass Incarceration: Poverty, Prejudice, and Punishment.” In Doing Race: 
21 Essays for the 21st Century, edited by Hazel Rose Markus and Paula M. L. Moya. New York: Norton, 2010, 322-55.
Butler, Paul. Chokehold: Policing Black Men. New York: The New Press, 2017.
Davis, Angela J., ed. Policing the Black Man: Arrest, Prosecution, Imprisonment. New York: Pantheon, 2017.
Hinton, Elizabeth. From the War on Poverty to the War on Crime: The Making of Mass Incarceration in America. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 2016.
Muhammad, Khalil Gibran. The Condemnation of Blackness: Race, Crime, and the Making of Modern Urban America. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2011.
Jeremy Travis, Bruce Western, and Steve Redburn, eds. The Growth of Incarceration in the United States: Exploring Causes 
and Consequences. Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2014, https://perma.cc/3PKW-CDNQ.
Western, Bruce. Punishment and Inequality in America. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2006.


12
Endnotes
1	
For disparities in jail populations, see Ram Subramanian, Kristine 
Riley, and Chris Mai, Divided Justice: Trends in Black and White 
Jail Incarceration, 1990-2013 (New York: Vera Institute of Justice, 
2017), 21-22 & figure 7 (in 1990, black people were nearly seven 
times more likely than white people to be held in local jails; in 2013, 
they remained 3.6 times more likely to be incarcerated in jail than 
white people), https://perma.cc/VCK2-DNA2. For disparities in 
prison populations, see Eli Hager, “A Mass Incarceration Mystery,” 
Marshall Project, December 15, 2017 (Marshall Project analysis 
of yearly reports by the Bureau of Justice Statistics and the FBI’s 
Uniform Crime Reporting system), https://perma.cc/R6MB-58BY.
2	
Black people are not the only racial and ethnic minorities who 
experience racial discrimination and overrepresentation in the 
criminal justice system. Latinos, for instance, are 17 percent of the U.S. 
population but make up 23 percent of those with a prison sentence 
of more than one year. E. Ann Carson, Prisoners in 2016 (Washington, 
DC: BJS, 2018) (calculated from table 10),  
https://perma.cc/T8PE-TVJ2. The Bureau of Justice Statistics’ 1999 
report on Native American incarceration found that Native American 
people were incarcerated at a rate about 38 percent higher than 
the national rate of incarceration, with 4 percent of the adult Native 
American population behind bars on any given day. The Sentencing 
Project, Fact Sheet: Trends in U.S. Corrections (Washington, DC: The 
Sentencing Project, 2017), viii,  
https://perma.cc/ZQV7-AVQ2. Native Hawaiian people likewise 
experience significant overrepresentation at each stage of the 
criminal justice process in Hawaii, comprising 24 percent of the 
state’s population but 36 percent of those admitted to prison or jail. 
See Office of Hawaiian Affairs, The Disparate Treatment of Native 
Hawaiians in the Criminal Justice System (Honolulu, HI: Office 
of Hawaiian Affairs, 2010), 33, https://perma.cc/5N34-DV9L. This 
brief focuses on criminal justice disparities as they impact black 
Americans due in no small part to the fact that Latino crime patterns 
are importantly absent from the FBI Uniform Crime Report and prison 
records, in part because the FBI decided not to measure Latino arrest 
rates. For a brief period between 1980 and 1987, the FBI began to 
collect crime data by ethnicity in an attempt to fill that statistical 
void. Before that window, and until as recently as 2014, the majority 
of available statistics tabulated arrest data by race, with categories 
for white, black, Asian or Pacific Islander, and American Indian or 
Alaska Native. As such, Latinos largely vanished from American crime 
data in the 20th century. Works that have helped bridge the existing 
statistical gaps by enhancing our view of the criminalization and 
policing of Latino Americans include Rodolfo F. Acuňa, Occupied 
America: A History of Chicanos (New York: Pearson, 2014); Juanita 
Díaz-Cotto, Chicana Lives and Criminal Justice: Voices from El Barrio 
(Austin, TX: University of Texas Press, 2006); Edward J. Escobar, Race, 
Police, and the Making of a Political Identity: Mexican Americans 
and the Los Angeles Police Department, 1900–1945 (Berkeley, CA: 
University of California Press, 1999); Kelly Lytle Hernández, Migra! 
A History of the U.S. Border Patrol (Berkeley, CA: University of 
California Press, 2010); Kelly Lytle Hernández, City of Inmates: 
Conquest, Rebellion, and the Rise of Human Caging in Los Angeles, 
1771–1965 (Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press, 2017); 
Suzanne Oboler, ed., Behind Bars: Latino/as and Prison in the United 
States (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009); and Victor M. Rios, 
Punished: Policing the Lives of Black and Latino Boys (New York: 
New York University Press, 2011). Some of the best analysis of Latino 
crime and incarceration rates can be found in Michael Tonry and 
Matthew Melewski, “The Malign Effects of Drug and Crime Control 
on Black Americans,” in Crime and Justice: A Review of Research—
Volume 37, edited by Michael Tonry (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 2008); and Jeremy Travis, Bruce Western, and Steve Redburn, 
eds., The Growth of Incarceration in the United States: Exploring 
Causes and Consequences (Washington, DC: National Academies 
Press, 2014), 61-64. On white-collar crime, see Max Schanzenbach 
and Michael L. Yager, “Prison Time, Fines, and Federal White-Collar 
Criminals: The Anatomy of a Racial Disparity,” Journal of Criminal 
Law and Criminology 96, no. 2 (2005-2006), 757-94,  
https://perma.cc/ZWN9-622X.
3	
For the percent of black men in the U.S. population, see  
U.S. Census Bureau, “ACS Demographic and Housing Estimates 
2012-2016 American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates,”  
https://perma.cc/85BE-KN7Q. For the percent of black men 
incarcerated in state and federal prisons, see E. Ann Carson, 
Prisoners in 2016 (2018), 15 & table 10. 
4	
The Sentencing Project, Trends in U.S. Corrections (Washington, DC: 
The Sentencing Project, 2017), 5, https://perma.cc/G3Y4-JE3L. 
5	
Ashley Nellis, The Color of Justice: Racial and Ethnic Disparity in 
State Prisons (Washington, DC: The Sentencing Project, 2016), 3, 
https://perma.cc/9WZB-F93P.
6	
The Sentencing Project, Trends in U.S. Corrections (2017), at 5.
7	
For the percentage of women incarcerated, see Elizabeth Swavola, 
Kristine Riley, and Ram Subramanian, Overlooked: Women and 
Jails in an Era of Reform (New York: Vera Institute of Justice, 
2016), 11, https://perma.cc/YW3D-Y8JF. For the percentage of 
black women in the population, see U.S. Census Bureau, “ACS 
DEMOGRAPHIC AND HOUSING ESTIMATES, 2012-2016 American 
Community Survey 5-Year Estimates,” https://perma.cc/PF25-4LKN.
8	
Michelle Alexander, The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the 
Age of Colorblindness (New York: The New Press, 2010), 28-29.


13
9	
Constitutional Rights Foundation, “The Southern ‘Black Codes’ of 
1865-66,” https://perma.cc/YTH8-3N5Z.
10	
On vagrancy laws, see Douglas A. Blackmon, Slavery by Another 
Name: The Re-Enslavement of Black Americans from the Civil War to 
World War II (New York: Anchor, 2009); Alex Lichtenstein, Twice the 
Work of Free Labor: The Political Economy of Convict Labor in the 
New South (London: Verso, 1996); and David M. Oshinsky: “Worse 
than Slavery”: Parchman Farm and the Ordeal of Jim Crow Justice 
(New York: Free Press, 1997).
11	
On convict leasing, see generally Douglas A. Blackmon, Slavery by 
Another Name (2009). On specific vagrancy laws, see Shaun King, 
“We Must Fully Unpack the Complicated Evils of our Justice System 
in Order to Build the Sophisticated Solutions We Need,” Medium, 
March 9, 2018, https://perma.cc/TY3W-XTR4. See also Sarah Haley, 
No Mercy Here: Gender, Punishment, and the Making of Jim Crow 
Modernity (Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press, 
2016); and Talitha L. LeFlouria, Chained in Silence: Black Women 
and Convict Labor in the New South (Chapel Hill, NC: University of 
North Carolina Press, 2015).
12	
See Blackmon, Slavery by Another Name (2009), at 233.
13	
See Khalil Gibran Muhammad, The Condemnation of Blackness: 
Race, Crime, and the Making of Modern Urban America 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2010), 4. See also David 
J. Rothman, The Discovery of the Asylum: Social Order and Disorder 
in the New Republic (Boston: Little Brown, 1971), which offers the 
most sustained consideration of these ties.
14	
Elizabeth Hinton, From the War on Poverty to the War on Crime 
(2016), at 19.
15	
Muhammad, The Condemnation of Blackness (2010), at 3-4. 
16	
See ibid. at 4. 
17	
Ted Chiricos, Kelly Welch, and Marc Gertz, “Reconsidering the 
Relationship Between Perceived Neighborhood Racial Composition 
and Whites’ Perceptions of Victimization Risk: Do Racial Stereotypes 
Matter?,” Criminology 50, no. 1 (2012), 145-86, 155-56 & 160. 
18	
Hinton, From the War on Poverty to the War on Crime (2016), at 1-3.
19	
Ibid. at 6. Also see Jeremy Travis, Bruce Western, and Steve 
Redburn, eds., The Growth of Incarceration in the United States 
(2014), 110 (discussing establishment of Office of Law Enforcement 
Assistance to award grants aimed at improving and expanding law 
enforcement), https://perma.cc/KZY6-RUGF; and David Weisburd 
and Malay K. Majmundar, eds., Proactive Policing: Effects on 
Crime and Communities (Washington, DC: National Academies 
Press, 2018), 268 (discussing the federal Justice Assistance Grant 
program for local law enforcement, which “increased the level 
of policing in areas that recorded more violent crimes, which in 
many areas has led to greater policing of poorer and/or more 
predominantly [b]lack communities”). For example, the number of 
recorded robberies and burglaries in New York City grew threefold 
from 48,000 in 1965 to 143,000 in 1966. One thing that had changed 
in the interim: crime reporting reforms were implemented by Mayor 
John Lindsay in 1966. Hinton, From the War on Poverty to the War 
on Crime (2016), at 6.
20	 See Hinton, From the War on Poverty to the War on Crime (2016), at 
6.
21	
See generally Muhammad, The Condemnation of Blackness 
(2010) (chronicling the link between the misinterpretation of crime 
statistics and notions of black criminality in American history).
22	 The UCR collects information on the following “crimes reported 
to law enforcement agencies:” murder and non-negligent 
manslaughter, forcible rape, robbery, aggravated assault, burglary, 
larceny-theft, motor vehicle theft, and arson. Federal Bureau of 
Investigation, “Uniform Crime Reporting Statistics: The Nation’s Two 
Crime Measures,” https://perma.cc/YF7M-D7SM.
23	 Gwynne Pierson, “Institutional Racism and Crime Clearance,” in 
Black Perspectives on Crime and the Criminal Justice System, 
edited by Robert L. Woodson (Boston: G. K. Hall, 1977), 110.
24	 On the relationship between social science research and its direct 
impact on federal policy, see Hinton, From the War on Poverty to 
the War on Crime (2016), especially chapters 2, 3, and 6.
25	 Ibid. at 83-86.
26	 Salma S. Safiedine, Jihad J. Komis, and Christine M. Kulumani, 
“Policy Reform at the Forefront of Racial Justice: The Racial Justice 
Improvement Project,” Criminal Justice 31, no. 3 (2016), 25-30, 25 
(“a policy can be race-neutral or socioeconomically neutral on its 
face, and still have unintended negative racial and socioeconomic 
impacts on the individual and, based on large concentrations, the 
local community at large”). 
27	
Judith Greene, Kevin Pranis, and Jason Ziedenberg, Disparity by 
Design: How Drug-Free Zone Laws Impact Racial Disparity—and 
Fail to Protect Youth (Washington, DC: Justice Policy Institute, 
2006), 5, https://perma.cc/D247-ZSF5.
28	 Nicole D. Porter and Tyler Clemons, Drug-Free Zone Laws: An 
Overview of State Policies (Washington, DC: The Sentencing Project, 
2013), 2-3, https://perma.cc/KU23-JZF4.
29	 Greene, Pranis, and Ziedenberg, Disparity by Design (2006), 
https://perma.cc/R86F-UFY2. In New Jersey, for example, the 


14
states’ dense urban areas are predominantly populated by black 
and Latino people, while its suburbs are primarily populated by 
white people. As a 2005 state commission on the state’s drug-free 
zone laws noted, “[T]he more densely populated the area, the 
greater number of schools. The more schools per square mile, the 
greater number of drug-free zones. The greater number of zones 
in a municipality, the more zones intersect with one another, 
creating oddly shaped, overlapping entities that leave little else 
unencumbered.” Ibid. at 26. As a result, drug-free zones cover great 
swaths of the state’s majority black and Latino cities: 76 percent of 
Newark, and over half of the cities of Camden and Jersey City. Ibid.
30	 Greene, Pranis, and Ziedenberg, Disparity by Design (2006), at 15-17. 
As shown by this study and several others in this brief, black people 
are not the only group to be affected disproportionately by either 
the racially neutral laws discussed in this section or the implicit bias 
of criminal justice system actors discussed in the following section. 
More research is needed to isolate the impacts of these laws, policies, 
and practices on other racial and ethnic groups.
31	
Three-strikes laws were enacted beginning in 1993 by about half 
the states and the federal government to mandate enhanced 
sentences on the third “strike”—up to life without the possibility 
of parole—for people charged with certain repeat offenses. See 
Elsa Y. Chen, “Impacts of ‘Three Strikes and You’re Out’ on Crime 
Trends in California and Throughout the United States,” Journal of 
Contemporary Criminal Justice, 24, no. 4 (2008), 345-70,  
https://perma.cc/V5SE-J5PN.
32	 James Austin, John Clark, Patricia Hardyman, and D. Alan Henry, 
‘Three Strikes and You’re Out’: The Implementation and Impact of Strike 
Laws (unpublished research paper), https://perma.cc/5DAA-VR3K.
33	 Marc Mauer, “Racial Impact Statements as a Means of Reducing 
Unwarranted Sentencing Disparities,” Ohio State Journal of Criminal 
Law 5 no. 1 (2007), 19-46, 29-30, https://perma.cc/9AGE-LCUQ. Black 
people are more likely to come into contact with police simply 
because they tend to live in cities with populations over 250,000, 
which, because of federal funding programs, have more police 
officers per capita. See David Weisburd and Malay K. Majmundar, 
eds., Proactive Policing: Effects on Crime and Communities 
(Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2018), 269-70.
34	 Weisburd and Majmundar, Proactive Policing (2018), 46-47 & 122-29. 
Perhaps the most well-known hot spots policing model is New York 
City’s Compstat system, a data-driven program developed in the 
1990s to map and respond to concentrations of crime in the city, 
which later became the norm for departments across the country. 
See generally Bureau of Justice Assistance (BJA) and Police 
Executive Research Forum (PERF), Compstat: Its Origins, Evolution, 
and Future in Law Enforcement Agencies (Washington, DC: BJA & 
PERF, 2013), 3-7, https://perma.cc/TJJ9-KTTQ.
35	 On the rise of proactive policing strategies, see Weisburd and 
Majmundar, Proactive Policing (2018), at 1; and Prisoner  
Reentry Institute (PRI), Pretrial Practice: Rethinking the Front End of 
the Criminal Justice System (New York: PRI, 2016), 4-5,  
https://perma.cc/6GTX-GU8V. On broken windows policing, see 
Weisburd and Majmundar, Proactive Policing (2018), at 70-73 & 163. 
The authors found that broken windows policing has little impact 
on public safety. Ibid. at 8 (“available program evaluations suggest 
that aggressive, misdemeanor arrest-based approaches to control 
disorder generate small to null impacts on crime”).
36	 Katherine Beckett, Kris Nyrop, Lori Pfingst, and Melissa Bowen, 
“Drug Use, Drug Possession Arrests, and the Question of Race: 
Lessons from Seattle,” Social Problems 52, no. 3 (2005), 419-41, 434, 
https://perma.cc/8SU6-744M.
37	 Ibid. at 435.
38	 Katherine Beckett, Kris Nyrop, and Lori Pfingst, “Race, Drugs, and 
Policing: Understanding Disparities in Drug Delivery Arrests” 
Criminology 44, no. 1 (2006), 105-37, 118, https://perma.cc/N5PR-HTU3.
39	 Weisburd and Majmundar, Proactive Policing (2018), 301, conclusion 
7-1. 
40	 PRI, Pretrial Practice (2016), at 5.
41	
Mark G. Peters and Philip K. Eure, An Analysis of Quality-of-Life 
Summonses, Quality-of-Life Misdemeanor Arrests, and Felony Crime 
in New York City, 2010-2015 (New York: NYPD Office of the Inspector 
General), 5, https://perma.cc/6CDG-LCGC.
42	 Brian Mann, “The Drug Laws that Changed How We Punish,” NPR, 
February 14, 2013, https://perma.cc/P6GG-KMNS.
43	 The 1973 drug law was enacted as Chapters 276, 277, 278, 676, 
and 1051 of the 1973 Penal Laws of New York State. Significant 
subsequent amendments were contained in Chapters 785 and 832. 
For a summary of the major provisions of the 1973 law, see National 
Institute of Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice, U.S. Department 
of Justice, The Nation’s Toughest Drug Law: Evaluating the New York 
Experience—Final Report of the Joint Committee on New York Drug 
Law Evaluation (Washington, DC: 1978), 33 & appendix,  
https://perma.cc/WM5W-WFRN.
44	 Jim Parsons, Qing Wei, Christian Henrichson, Ernest Drucker, and 
Jennifer Trone, End of an Era? The Impact of Drug Law Reform in 
New York City (New York: Vera Institute of Justice, 2015), 5,  
https://perma.cc/PQ3L-YBD7.


15
45	 New York State Division of Criminal Justice Services (DCJS), Felony 
Drug Arrest, Indictment and Commitment Trends 1973-2008 (Albany, 
NY: DCJS, 2010), 6, https://perma.cc/33S2-JEXM.
46	 Ernest Drucker, A Plague of Prisons: The Epidemiology of Mass 
Incarceration in America (New York: The New Press, 2011), 58-61 & 
table 5.5.
47	
Parsons, et al., End of an Era? (2015), at 17. 
48	 Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986, P.L. 99-570. 100 Stat. 3207, October 27, 
1986, https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/STATUTE-100/pdf/STATUTE-
100-Pg3207.pdf. On the federal crack cocaine law and its impacts, 
see generally Deborah J. Vagins and Jesselyn McCurdy, Cracks 
in the System: Twenty Years of the Unjust Federal Crack Cocaine 
Law (Washington, DC: ACLU, 2006), https://perma.cc/43RP-M8JK; 
and Families Against Mandatory Minimums (FAMM), A Brief History 
of Crack Cocaine Sentencing Laws (Washington, DC: FAMM, 2013), 
https://perma.cc/5LNK-3QGU. The law, which contained a 100-to-
one ratio between sentences for crack versus powder cocaine, was 
repealed in 2010. The Fair Sentencing Act of 2010, SB 1789 (2010), 
https://perma.cc/6P89-KEP4. For an overview of state-level crack 
cocaine sentencing disparities, see Nicole D. Porter and Valerie 
Wright, Cracked Justice (Washington, DC: The Sentencing Project, 
2011), 3, https://perma.cc/FZ8D-ZDPT.
49	 See Alexander, The New Jim Crow (2010).
50	 U.S. Department of Justice, Understanding Bias: A Resource Guide 
(Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice, 2015), 2, https://
perma.cc/XE84-7ME8.
51	
On the prevalence of implicit bias generally, see Justin D. Levinson, 
“Forgotten Racial Equality: Implicit Bias, Decisionmaking, and 
Misremembering,” Duke Law Journal 57, no. 2 (2007), 345-424, 351-
52 (a number of studies have shown that “racially biased implicit 
attitudes and stereotypes” are “real, pervasive, and difficult to 
change”), https://perma.cc/LYY8-5GLA.
52	 Disparate treatment can emerge from any one decision point in 
the process or at multiple points, interacting in complex ways. 
Subramanian, Riley, and Mai, Divided Justice (2017), 24 & n.16. While 
in many instances disparities increase at each cumulative step of the 
criminal justice process, some research shows that this is not always 
the case. Sometimes, initial disparities can “correct” themselves 
later in the justice process. A study looking at “corrections” for bias 
in law enforcement in Driving While Intoxicated (DWI) cases in North 
Carolina found that Latino men were almost two-thirds more likely to 
have the DWI charges against them dropped than similarly situated 
whites. For those who were charged, moreover, Latino men were sent 
to jail for less time than their white counterparts. See Christopher L. 
Griffin, Jr., Frank A. Sloan, and Lindsey M. Eldred, “Corrections for 
Racial Disparities in Law Enforcement,” William & Mary Law Review 
55, no. 4 (2014),1365-1427, 1388-89 and table 3, 
https://perma.cc/2468-MY86. Also see Besiki Kutateladze, Whitney 
Tymas, and Mary Crowley, Race and Prosecution in Manhattan (New 
York: Vera Institute of Justice, 2014), 3 (researchers found that people 
of color were more likely than similarly-situated white people to have 
their cases dismissed. Researchers speculated that this could have 
been because of leniency or because prosecutors believed that  
the arrest charges in these cases were not viable),  
https://perma.cc/V5F3-EJU9; and Vera Institute of Justice, A 
Prosecutor’s Guide for Advancing Racial Equity (New York: Vera 
Institute of Justice, 2014), 15 (in Mecklenburg County, North Carolina 
(Charlotte), black people “were more likely to have more arrest 
charges and more serious arrest charges than whites,” but also  
were “more likely to have their top arrest charge rejected”),  
https://perma.cc/3Y9C-7R2E. 
53	 Implicit bias (as opposed to explicit bias) refers to attitudes and 
beliefs that individuals hold about people without their conscious 
knowledge. Thus, it is possible for individuals to act in biased 
ways toward certain groups of people without making a conscious 
decision to do so. Because most actions occur without conscious 
thought, implicit biases have a significant influence over people’s 
behavior. For more information about implicit bias and how it can 
lead to discrimination, see The Perception Institute, https://perma.
cc/2PNS-7X4G. See also Katheryn Russell-Brown, “Making Implicit 
Bias Explicit: Black Men and the Police,” in Policing the Black Man: 
Arrest, Prosecution, and Imprisonment, edited by Angela J. Davis 
(New York: Pantheon, 2017), 135-60. 
54	 Jennifer L. Eberhardt, Phillip Atiba Goff, Valerie J. Purdie, and Paul 
G. Davies, “Seeing Black: Race, Crime, and Visual Processing,” 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 87, no. 6 (2004), 876-
93, at 878, https://perma.cc/XS7F-3B48.
55	 Ibid. at 885-86. 
56	 On overpolicing communities of color, see Paul Butler,  
Chokehold: Policing Black Men (New York: The New Press, 2017), 
chapters 2 and 3; Marc Mauer, “The Endurance of Racial Disparity 
in the Criminal Justice System,” in Policing the Black Man: Arrest, 
Prosecution, and Imprisonment, edited by Angela J. Davis (New 
York: Pantheon, 2017), 40-46; Alice Goffman,  
“On the Run: Wanted Men in a Philadelphia Ghetto,”  
American Sociological Review 74, no. 3 (2009), 339-57,  
http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/000312240907400301; 
and Hinton, From the War on Poverty to the War on Crime (2016). 
Modern policing has direct roots in practices that explicitly 
targeted people based on their race: the modern police force in the 
United States evolved out of slave patrols and night watches, which 


16
sought to control the movement and behavior of black people and 
Native Americans. See Philip S. Foner, History of Black Americans: 
From Africa to the Emergence of the Cotton Kingdom (Westport, CT: 
Greenwood, 1975), 206.
57	 Shelley Hyland, Lynn Langton, and Elizabeth Davis, Police Use 
of Nonfatal Force, 2002–11 (Washington, DC: Bureau of Justice 
Statistics, 2015), 4, https://perma.cc/GX75-PQND.
58	 The Sentencing Project, Black Lives Matter: Eliminating Racial 
Inequity in the Criminal Justice System (Washington, DC: The 
Sentencing Project, 2017), 10, https://perma.cc/U4H9-TSZ9. For 
an in-depth discussion of investigatory police stops and their 
relationship with race, see Charles R. Epp, Steven Maynard-Moody, 
and Donald P. Haider-Markel, Pulled Over: How Police Stops Define 
Race and Citizenship (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2014).
59	 Police Accountability Task Force, “Recommendations for Reform: 
Restoring Trust between the Chicago Police and the Communities 
They Serve” (Chicago: Police Accountability Task Force, 2016), 8, 
https://perma.cc/QNC8-HY5E
60	 Researchers at Stanford University developed a new measurement 
test called the “threshold test”—a statistically rigorous way to 
quantify the threshold at which officers become suspicious enough 
to initiate searches. After analyzing data from 4.5 million traffic 
stops in 100 North Carolina cities, researchers found that black 
and Latino drivers are subjected to a lower search threshold than 
whites, suggestive of widespread discrimination against these 
groups. See Edmund Andrews, “Stanford Researchers Develop New 
Statistical Test that Shows Racial Profiling in Police Traffic Stops,” 
Stanford News, June 28, 2016, https://perma.cc/5FQ4-CTF8; and 
Camelia Simoiu, Sam Corbett-Davies, and Sharad Goel, “The 
Problem of Infra-marginality in Outcome Tests for Discrimination” 
(unpublished paper, July 18, 2016), https://perma.cc/Z887-URAH.
61	
Andrew Gelman, Jeffrey Fagan, and Alex Kiss, “An Analysis of the New 
York City Police Department’s ‘Stop-and-Frisk’ Policy in the Context of 
Claims of Racial Bias,” Journal of the American Statistical Association 
102, no. 479 (2007), 813-23, 821-22, https://perma.cc/T2LZ-2ZLX .
62	 Ibid. at 821.
63	 Tammy Rinehart Kochel, David B. Wilson, and Stephen D. Mastrofski, 
“Effect of Suspect Race on Officers’ Arrest Decisions,” Criminology 
49, no. 2 (2011), 473-512, 490 & 495-96. 
64	 Ojmarrh Mitchell and Michael S. Caudy, “Examining Racial 
Disparities in Drug Arrests,” Justice Quarterly 32, no. 2 (2013), 288-
313, 309-10, https://perma.cc/T3XU-JZVF.
65	 Ezekiel Edwards, Will Bunting, and Lynda Garcia, The War on 
Marijuana in Black and White: Billions of Dollars Wasted on Racially 
Biased Arrests (Washington, DC: ACLU, 2013), 9, 21-22 & 47,  
https://perma.cc/G4QP-9K9P.
66	 For an overview of the discretionary powers of prosecutors  
and their impact on the criminal justice process, see Vera  
Institute of Justice, “The Discretionary Power of Prosecutors,” 
https://perma.cc/YM5X-B7DX.  
67	
See M. Marit Rehavi and Sonja B. Starr, “Racial Disparity in 
Federal Criminal Sentences,” Journal of Political Economy 
122, no. 6 (2014), 1320-54, 1326 (“Legal scholars, judges and 
practitioners broadly agree that prosecutorial decisions play a 
dominant role in determining sentences”), https://perma.cc/365A-
NM73; Birte Englich, “Blind or Biased? Justitia’s Susceptibility to 
Anchoring Effects in the Courtroom Based on Given Numerical 
Representations,” Law and Policy 28, no. 4 (2006), 497-514; 
and Birte Englich and Thomas Mussweiler, “Sentencing Under 
Uncertainty: Anchoring Effects in the Courtroom,” Journal of 
Applied Social Psychology 31, no. 7 (2001), 1535-51. Also see Colin 
Miller, “Anchors Away: Why the Anchoring Effect Suggests that 
Judges Should Be Able to Participate in Plea Discussions,” Boston 
College Law Review 54, no. 4 (2013), 1667-1725, https://perma.cc/
ED2L-427M; and Joshua A. Haby and Eve M. Brank, “The Role of 
Anchoring in Plea Bargains,” Monitor on Psychology 44, no. 4 
(2013), 30, https://perma.cc/KF2U-BYRX.
68	 Robert J. Smith and Justin D. Levinson, “The Impact of Implicit Racial 
Bias on the Exercise of Prosecutorial Discretion,” Seattle University 
Law Review 35, no. 3 (2012), 795-826, https://perma.cc/377Y-UNMZ. 
Bias may also impact the decisions of defense attorneys. L. Song 
Richardson and Phillip Atiba Goff, “Implicit Racial Bias in Public 
Defender Triage,” Yale Law Journal 122, no. 8 (2013), 2626-49, 2648 
(“Despite the fact that many public defenders are committed 
to zealous and effective advocacy, there is abundant reason for 
concern that implicit racial biases may affect their decisions”), 
https://perma.cc/3WQA-9KZ4.
69	 Besiki Kutateladze, Vanessa Lynn, and Edward Liang, Do Race and 
Ethnicity Matter in Prosecution?: A Review of Empirical Studies (New 
York: Vera Institute of Justice, 2012), https://perma.cc/A3SY-GTE3.
70	
Ibid. This finding did not hold across the board. Researchers also 
found proof of prosecutors treating white defendants more harshly 
for certain offenses and at certain discretion points. Ibid. at 9-10. 
Also see Celesta A. Albonetti and John R. Hepburn, “Prosecutorial 
Discretion to Defer Criminalization: The Effects of Defendant’s 
Ascribed and Achieved Status Characteristics,” Journal of 
Quantitative Criminology 12, no. 1 (1996), 63-81 (discussing factors 
that may influence diversion decisions to a greater extent than 
race, although some of these factors (such as prior record) can 
be inextricably intertwined with race); Travis W. Franklin. “The 


17
Intersection of Defendants’ Race, Gender, and Age in Prosecutorial 
Decision Making,” Journal of Criminal Justice 38, no. 2 (2010), 185-
92 (discussing the ways in which age and gender modify racially 
charged decision making); and Tina L. Freiburger and Kareem L. 
Jordan. “A Multilevel Analysis of Race on the Decision to Petition a 
Case in the Juvenile Court,” Race and Justice 1, no. 2 (2011), 185-201, 
188 (“Not all research examining race and juvenile court processing 
has found minority disadvantage. In fact, several studies have 
produced contradicting results at different decision points”).
71	
Sonja B. Starr and M. Marit Rehavi, “Mandatory Sentencing  
and Racial Disparity: Assessing the Role of Prosecutors and the 
Effects of Booker,” Yale Law Journal 123, no. 1 (2013), 1-265,  
https://perma.cc/29KP-EB5G. Ethnicity can also impact the 
severity of a sentence. A study in Pennsylvania found that while 
prosecutors choose to apply mandatory minimum sentences 
in a minority of cases (about 18 percent), Latino men were 
almost twice as likely to receive a mandatory sentence as their 
white counterparts. Jeffery T. Ulmer, Megan C. Kurlychek, and 
John H. Kramer, “Prosecutorial Discretion and the Imposition of 
Mandatory Minimum Sentences,” Journal of Research in Crime and 
Delinquency 44, no. 4 (2007), 427-58,  442.
72	
Charles Crawford, Ted Chiricos, and Gary Kleck, “Race, Racial 
Threat, and Sentencing of Habitual Offenders,” Criminology 36, no. 
3 (2006), 481-512, 503.
74	
Carlos Berdejó, “Criminalizing Race: Racial Disparities in Plea 
Bargaining,” Boston College Law Review 59 (2018) (forthcoming), 3, 
draft available at https://perma.cc/3FZ9-JC6Y
75	
Ibid. at 3-4.
76	
Jeffrey J. Rachlinski, Sheri Johnson, Andrew J. Wistrich, and Chris 
Guthrie, “Does Unconscious Racial Bias Affect Trial Judges?”  
Notre Dame Law Review, 84, no. 3 (2008-2009), 1195-1246, 1223, 
https://perma.cc/2GRH-97X4. 
77	
In order to assess the role of implicit bias in the decision-making 
process of judges, the researchers in the study calculated the implicit 
bias score of each judge using an implicit associations test (IAT). An 
IAT score reflects a preference toward black or white people and is a 
method of measuring a person’s implicit bias. Each judge was then 
presented with three hypothetical cases. Researchers measured 
whether a judges’ IAT score correlated with any racially disparate 
outcomes in each of the three scenarios. In the first scenario, when 
primed with black-associated words that implied the defendant was 
black, judges with a white preference in the IAT gave slightly harsher 
sentences to defendants. Judges with a black preference on the IAT, 
on the other hand, gave less harsh sentences. See ibid. at 1214-16. 
Fourteen million people had taken the IAT as of 2013, and 75 percent 
showed implicit racial biases that favor white people. Cynthia Lee, 
“Making Race Salient: Trayvon Martin and Implicit Bias in a Not Yet 
Post-Racial Society,” North Carolina Law Review 91, no. 5 (2013), 101-
157, 117-18, https://perma.cc/4U36-LMX2.
78	
Matthew Clair and Alix S. Winter, “How Judges Think about  
Racial Disparities: Situational Decision-Making in the Criminal 
Justice System,” Criminology 54, no. 2 (2016), 332-59, 352-54, 
https://perma.cc/2EET-Y23Q.
79	
Cassia Spohn, “Race, Sex, and Pretrial Detention in Federal  
Court: Indirect Effects and Cumulative Disadvantage,”  
Kansas Law Review 57, no. 4 (2009), 879-901, 888-89 & 895,  
https://perma.cc/LF72-WTPE. 
80	 Cynthia E. Jones, “‘Give Us Free’: Addressing Racial Disparities in 
Bail Determinations,” New York University Journal of Legislation and 
Public Policy 16, no. 4 (2013), 919-62, 938-39,  
https://perma.cc/manage/create?folder=13469-16845-29608-41698.
81	
Cassia Spohn, “Thirty Years of Sentencing Reform: The Quest for a 
Racially Neutral Sentencing Process,” in Policies, Processes, and 
Decisions of the Criminal Justice System—Vol. 3 (Washington, DC: 
U.S. Department of Justice, 2000), 427-501, 429 & 474-75,  
https://perma.cc/849X-VQW9. Also see U.S. Sentencing Commission, 
Demographic Differences in Sentencing: An Update to the 2012 
Booker Report (Washington, DC: U.S. Sentencing Commission, 2017), 
2 (in analysis of federal sentencing data from October 1, 2011 to 
September 30, 2016, finding that black men received sentences 
on average 19.1 percent longer than similarly situated white men), 
https://perma.cc/M6Z6-XUGB.
82	 Tushar Kansal, Racial Disparity in Sentencing: A Review of the 
Literature (Washington, DC: The Sentencing Project, 2005), 4-5, 
https://perma.cc/67L2-2C7S.
83	 Jennifer L. Eberhardt, Paul G. Davies, Valerie J. Purdie-Vaughns, 
and Sheri Lynn Johnson, “Looking Deathworthy: Perceived 
Stereotypicality of Black Defendants Predicts Capital-Sentencing 
Outcomes,” Psychological Science 17, no. 5 (2006), 383-86, 384-85, 
https://perma.cc/2RZ4-R5AX. In this study, researchers showed 
subjects a series of photographs of black men and had them rate 
the appearance of their features—such as lips, nose, hair texture, 
and skin tone—as more or less “stereotypically black.” Researchers 
then compiled these findings into a determination of which features 
were considered most “stereotypically black.”
84	 Jennifer L. Hochschild and Vesla Weaver, “The Skin Color Paradox 
and the American Racial Order,” Social Forces, 86, no. 2 (2007), 
643-70, 649, https://perma.cc/P4H5-22XV.
85	 Traci Burch, “Skin Color and the Criminal Justice System: Beyond 


18
Black-White Disparities in Sentencing,” Journal of Empirical Legal 
Studies 12, no. 3 (2015), 395-420, 408. The study also found that 
light-skinned black men received sentences 20 days shorter than 
white men. Ibid.
86	 John R. Sutton, “Structural Bias in the Sentencing of Felony 
Defendants,” Social Science Research 42 no. 5 (2013), 1207-21, 1214-
16 & 1218-19, https://perma.cc/9E9M-MHPG. 
87	 Samuel R. Sommers and Phoebe C. Ellsworth, “How Much Do We 
Really Know about Race and Juries? A Review of Social Science 
Theory and Research,” Chicago-Kent Law Review 78, no. 3 (2003), 
997-1031, 997-1005 (noting the obstacles and benefits of each 
method of analysis), https://perma.cc/J532-4ZAS; and Nancy J. 
King, “Postconviction Review of Jury Discrimination: Measuring the 
Effects of Juror Race on Jury Decisions,” Michigan Law Review 92, 
no. 1 (1993), 63-130, 75-77, https://perma.cc/5HJS-N592.
88	 Such bias is not limited to white jurors. Studies have found that 
both black and white mock jurors demonstrate “ingroup/outgroup” 
bias, judging same-race defendants more favorably than other-
race defendants. See studies collected in Sommers and Ellsworth, 
“How Much Do We Really Know about Race and Juries? ” (2003), at 
1017-18. Other studies have found evidence of same-race leniency 
among black mock jurors. Ibid. at 1019-20.
89	 Sommers and Ellsworth, “How Much Do We Really Know about Race 
and Juries? ” (2003), at 1013-14 (“Psychologists have suggested 
that racial bias among [w]hites is more likely when salient norms 
regarding racism are absent. In such situations, [w]hite perceivers 
often let their guard down, allowing their behavior to be influenced 
by anti-[b]lack attitudes and prejudice.”) In two experiments 
conducted by the authors, the white jurors were significantly more 
likely to vote to convict a black person accused in a case involving 
a non-race salient fact pattern than in one involving a race salient 
fact pattern. Ibid. at 1014-16.
90	 Tara L. Mitchell, Ryann M. Haw, Jeffrey E. Pfeifer, and Christian A. 
Meissner, “Racial Bias in Mock Juror Decision-Making: A Meta-
Analytic Review of Defendant Treatment,” Law and Human Behavior 
29, no. 6 (2005), 621-37, 627-28. Also see Sommers and Ellsworth, 
“How Much Do We Really Know about Race and Juries?” (2003).
91	
Joshua D. Levinson and Danielle Young, “Different Shades of Bias: 
Skin Tone, Implicit Racial Bias, and Judgments of Ambiguous 
Evidence,” West Virginia Law Review 112 (2010), 307-50, 310-11. 
In this study, researchers showed mock jurors security camera 
footage of either a light-skinned or dark-skinned perpetrator, then 
presented trial evidence and asked them to evaluate just “how 
much each piece of evidence tended to indicate whether the 
defendant was guilty or not guilty.” They found that mock jurors 
who viewed the photo of the dark-skinned perpetrator adjudged the 
evidence as more indicative of guilt compared to those who viewed 
the photo of the light-skinned perpetrator. 
92	 See Douglas S. Massey and Nancy A. Denton, American Apartheid: 
Segregation and the Making of the Underclass, (Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 1993); and William Julius Wilson, The 
Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner City, the Underclass, and Public 
Policy (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1987).
93	 For a more in-depth examination of the systemic factors contributing 
to poverty and inequality and their impact on crime, see generally 
Wilson, The Truly Disadvantaged (1987); Robert J. Sampson and 
William Julius Wilson, “Toward a Theory of Race, Crime, and Urban 
Inequality,” in Crime and Inequality, edited by John Hagan and Ruth 
D. Peterson (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1995), 37-56; 
and Tommie Shelby, Dark Ghettos: Injustice, Dissent, and Reform 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2016).
94	 Danielle Corinne Kuhl, Lauren J. Krivo, and Ruth D. Peterson, 
“Segregation, Racial Structure, and Neighborhood Violent Crime,” 
American Journal of Sociology 114, no. 6 (2009), 1765-1802.
95	 Danielle Corinne Kuhl, Lauren J. Krivo, and Ruth D. Peterson, 
“Neighborhood Violent Crime,” American Journal of Sociology 114, 
no. 6 (2009), 1765-1802. On violence in poor communities of color, 
see Elijah Anderson, Code of the Street: Decency, Violence, and the 
Moral Life of the Inner City (New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 
1999); and Bruce Western, “Lifetimes of Violence in a Sample of 
Released Prisoners,” RSF: The Russell Sage Foundation Journal of 
the Social Sciences 1, no. 2 (2015), 14-30. A full discussion of these 
structural factors is beyond the scope of this brief. For a more in-
depth examination of the systemic factors contributing to poverty 
and inequality and their impact on crime, see generally Wilson, 
The Truly Disadvantaged (1987); Sampson and Wilson, “Toward a 
Theory of Race, Crime, and Urban Inequality” (1995); and Shelby, 
Dark Ghettos (2016).
96	 Jessica L. Semega, Kayla R. Fontenot, and Melissa A. Kollar, Income 
and Poverty in the United States: 2016, (Washington, DC: U.S. 
Census Bureau, 2017), 12,https://perma.cc/B47L-YK2N. Also see 
Robert J. Sampson and Janet L. Lauritsen, “Racial and Ethnic 
Disparities in Crime and Criminal Justice in the United States,” 
Crime and Justice 21, no. 1 (1997), 311-74, 324-30, https://perma.cc/
HZP7-PEZG; and Michael K. Brown, Martin Carnoy, Elliot Currie, 
et al., Whitewashing Race: The Myth of a Color-Blind Society 
(Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2003), 153-59. 
97	
Black people are arrested at higher rates for violent and property 
crimes. In 2015, they accounted for 36 percent of violent crime arrests, 
28 percent of property crime arrests, and 51 percent of murder and 


19
non-negligent manslaughter arrests. Nazgol Ghandnoosh, Race and 
Punishment: Racial Perceptions of Crime and Support for Punitive 
Policies (Washington, DC: The Sentencing Project, 2014), 20 (citing 
Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Crime in the United States 2015,” 
table 43A (arrests by race and ethnicity, 2015),  
https://perma.cc/AKG8-EYNV, https://perma.cc/TA8F-SFEH.  
Arrest rates are an imperfect measure of actual rates of offending, 
however, given the history of overpolicing primarily black 
communities. When comparing arrest rates to imprisonment rates 
for different offenses, Alfred Blumstein found that in 1991 “[d]
ifferential arrest rates accounted for the over-representation 
of blacks in prison by 89 percent for robbery, 75 percent for 
burglary, and 50 percent for drug crimes.” Ghandnoosh, Race 
and Punishment (2014), at 21 (citing Alfred Blumstein, “Racial 
Disproportionality of U.S. Prison Populations Revisited,” University 
of Colorado Law Review 64, no. 3 (1993), 743-60).
98	 On education: While 5 percent of white children grow up with a 
parent who did not graduate from high school, 12 percent of black 
and 40 percent of Latino children grow up with a parent who did 
not graduate from high school. American Psychological Association 
Presidential Task Force on Educational Disparities, Ethnic and 
Racial Disparities in Education: Psychology’s Contributions to 
Understanding and Reducing Disparities (Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association, 2012), 17, https://perma.cc/G87C-X8GB. 
The quality of education sometimes differs based on the racial 
composition of a school. A 2007 study showed that white students 
on average attend schools where 77 percent of the children are 
white, while black or Latino students typically attend schools where 
at approximately two-thirds of the students are also black or Latino. 
Gary Orfield and Chungmei Lee, Historic Reversals, Accelerating 
Resegregation, and the Need for New Integration Strategies (Los 
Angeles: The Civil Rights Project/ Proyecto Derechos Civiles, UCLA, 
2007), 24-26, https://perma.cc/7ZQH-TS2Y. Approximately two-
thirds of teachers in predominantly white schools are certified to 
teach in their subject areas, while only about half of teachers in 
predominantly black or Latino schools are so certified. APA Task 
Force, Ethnic and Racial Disparities, (2012), at 17. On unemployment: 
The unemployment rate for black people in 2016 averaged 8.4 
percent, compared to 4.3 percent for white people and 5.8 percent 
for Latino people. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Unemployment Rate 
and Employment-Population Ratio Vary by Race and Ethnicity,” 
January 13, 2017, https://perma.cc/CD29-ZLTE. Unemployment in 
particular has been linked to a greater likelihood of incarceration, 
particularly for unemployed black men. Theodore G. Chiricos and 
William D. Bales, “Unemployment and Punishment: An Empirical 
Assessment” Criminology 29, no. 4 (1991), 701-24. On household 
wealth: The median household income for black families in 2016 was 
just $39,490, compared to $65,041 for white, non-Latino families. 
Semega, Fontenot, and Kollar, Income and Poverty 2016 (2017), at 5. 
99	 Christopher Wildeman, “Parental Imprisonment, the Prison Boom, 
and the Concentration of Childhood Disadvantage,” Demography 
46, no. 2 (2009), 265-80, 270-71.
100	 Eric Martin, “Hidden Consequences: The Impact of Incarceration on 
Dependent Children,” National Institutes of Justice Journal No. 278, 
March 2017, https://perma.cc/NN9J-ABF2.
101	 Todd R. Clear, “The Effects of High Imprisonment Rates on 
Communities,” Crime and Justice 37, no. 1 (2008), 97-132, 111.
102	 Hedwig Lee, Christopher Wildeman, Emily Wang, et al., “A Heavy 
Burden: The Cardiovascular Health Consequences of Having a 
Family Member Incarcerated,” American Journal of Public Health 
104, no. 3 (2014), 421-27, https://perma.cc/6TGX-8SMT. 
103	 “Collateral consequences are legal and regulatory sanctions 
and restrictions that limit or prohibit people with criminal records 
from accessing employment, occupational licensing, housing, 
voting, education, and other opportunities.” Council of State 
Governments Justice Center, “National Inventory of the Collateral 
Consequences of Conviction,” https://perma.cc/VRZ2-PTH7. On 
collateral consequences and reentry, see Ram Subramanian, 
Rebecka Moreno, and Sophia Gebreselassie, Relief in Sight? States 
Rethink the Collateral Consequences of Criminal Conviction, 
2009-2014 (New York: Vera Institute of Justice, 2014), 8 (when issues 
like mental illness, substance abuse, or lack of vocational skills or 
education are left unaddressed, the risk of recidivism increases), 
https://perma.cc/2PTX-QCD7; Michael Pinard, “Reflections and 
Perspectives on Reentry and Collateral Consequences,” Journal of 
Law and Criminology 100, no. 3 (2010), 1213-24, 1218-22,  
https://perma.cc/KBN2-2KKQ; and Michael Pinard, “An Integrated 
Perspective on the Collateral Consequences of Criminal 
Convictions and Reentry Issues Faced by Formerly Incarcerated 
Individuals,” Boston University Law Review 86, no. 3 (2006), 623-690, 
https://perma.cc/ZS9L-7BYU. On the negative impact of a criminal 
record on employment chances, see Devah Pager, “The Mark of a 
Criminal Record,” American Journal of Sociology 108, no. 5 (2003), 
937-75, https://perma.cc/27YT-2WEV. Moreover, black men without 
a record are less likely to find employment than white men with a 
record, highlighting the way that racial discrimination continues 
to influence black people outside of the confines of the criminal 
justice system. See Pager, Western, and Sugie, “Sequencing 
Disadvantage” (2009); Pager, Marked: Race, Crime and Finding 
Work (Chicago: University Of Chicago Press, 2009); and Pager, 
“The Mark of a Criminal Record” (2003).


20
About Citations
As researchers and readers alike rely more and more on public 
knowledge made available through the Internet, “link rot” has 
become a widely-acknowledged problem with creating useful and 
sustainable citations. To address this issue, the Vera Institute of 
Justice is experimenting with the use of Perma.cc (https://perma.
cc/), a service that helps scholars, journals, and courts create 
permanent links to the online sources cited in their work.
Credits
© Vera Institute of Justice 2018. All rights reserved. An electronic 
version of this report is posted on Vera’s website at   
www.vera.org/for-the-record-unjust-burden.
The Vera Institute of Justice is a justice reform change agent. 
Vera produces ideas, analysis, and research that inspire change 
in the systems people rely upon for safety and justice, and 
works in close partnership with government and civic leaders to 
implement it. Vera is currently pursuing core priorities of ending 
the misuse of jails, transforming conditions of confinement, and 
ensuring that justice systems more effectively serve America’s 
increasingly diverse communities. For more information, visit 
www.vera.org.
For more information about this brief or Vera’s Evidence Brief 
series, contact Jim Parsons, vice president and research 
director, at jparsons@vera.org.
Suggested Citation
Elizabeth Hinton, LeShae Henderson, and Cindy Reed. An Unjust 
Burden: The Disparate Treatment of Black Americans in the 
Criminal Justice System. New York: Vera Institute of Justice, 2018.
104	 Don Stemen, The Prison Paradox: More Incarceration Will Not Make 
Us Safer (New York: Vera Institute of Justice, 2017), 2 (citing Todd 
R. Clear, “The Effects of High Imprisonment Rates on Communities,” 
Crime and Justice 37, no. 1 (2008)), https://perma.cc/5TBR-WSDC.