Moving back to the UK after living abroad
If you've been living abroad, there might have been changes in the UK you need to prepare for before you return.
Means-tested benefits are awarded based on your income and how much capital you have. This creates a fairer system where benefits are given to those who need it most.
Depending on your income and how much capital you have, you may be entitled to means-tested benefits. The means-tested benefits are:
You may be entitled to non-means-tested benefits. In general, these are benefits that don't depend on your income or capital. Below is a list of non-means-tested benefits:
Although you might qualify for more than one of these benefits, you might not be able to claim more than one of these at any one time.
When assessing whether you're eligible to claim a means-tested benefit, some types of income are fully considered but others (such as if you receive Attendance Allowance) are ignored. Your partner’s income and capital may also be taken into account.
Capital includes savings and investments. Examples of capital that are taken into account in means tests include:
- cash
- stocks and shares
- a share of any savings you own jointly with other people
- property other than your main home
- Premium Bonds
- National Savings accounts and certificates (there are special rules for valuing these).
Any lump sum payments you received from deferring your State Pension aren't included as capital.
Your income and capital need to be below a certain limit for you to be eligible to claim any means-tested benefit. This level is an estimate of the amount you'd need to live on and is set by the government.
Each benefit has different eligibility criteria, which your income and capital need to meet for you to be able to claim. If your income and capital are greater than this level then you might not be eligible to claim, or you might receive a reduced amount.
Below are examples of capital limits and how they can affect your benefits claim. The lower capital limit is how much you can have in savings and investments before it affects your benefits claim.
These benefits have a lower capital limit of £6,000 and an upper capital limit of £16,000. If you have less than £6,000 of capital then you should be able to claim the full benefit. If you have between £6,000 and £16,000 then you should get a reduced amount. If you (and your partner) are over State Pension age, the lower capital limit is £10,000.
However, if you have more than £16,000 in capital, then you may not be able to claim Housing Benefit or Council Tax Support. This rule doesn’t apply if you receive the Guarantee Credit part of Pension Credit.
There's no upper capital limit for Pension Credit, but you may receive a reduced amount if you have more than £10,000 of capital.
Do you know what benefits you're entitled to? Our online benefits calculator can help you quickly and easily find out what you could be claiming.
You can call our free Advice Line on 0800 678 1602, open 8am-7pm, 365 days a year. We also have specialist advisers at over 120 local Age UKs.
If you're experiencing a medical emergency or need urgent mental or physical health support, please call 999 or NHS 111.
Free interpreted calls are available through our partner Wordskii. Visit their website and choose your language to find the best number to call.
If you're on a low income and struggling to cover your rent, you might be able to claim Housing Benefit.
If you're on a low income or you're out of work, you might be able to claim Universal Credit to boost your income.
If your spouse or civil partner has died, you may be entitled to Bereavement Support Payment. Read more.
If you're over State Pension age and you're struggling to make ends meet, Pension Credit could help top up your income.
Income Support is a benefit for people on a low income who need help to cover their living costs. Find out more.