CONTENTS 
 
1.      INTRODUCTION AND METHODOLOGY 
2. 
GENDER, HOMELESSNESS AND HOUSING: KEY THEMES 
EMERGING FROM THE LITERATURE 
2.1 Housing as a continuum 
2.2 Systemic gender inequalities 
2.3 Women’s invisibility: in analysis, definitions and data 
3. 
WOMEN & HOMELESSNESS 
3.1 Women’s ‘hidden’ homelessness 
3.2 Women at risk: domestic abuse and other factors 
3.3 Provision of shelter and transitional housing for homeless 
women 
3.4 Broader policy responses: beyond housing 
4. 
WOMEN’S ACCESS TO AFFORDABLE AND ADEQUATE HOUSING 
4.1 Social welfare and social housing 
4.2 Adequate housing standards and women’s specific needs 
4.3 Access to the private market 
5. 
PLANNING, DECISION-MAKING AND BUDGETING 
6. 
CONCLUSION AND KEY GAPS IN THE RESEARCH 
7. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 
 
 
GENDER, HOUSING AND      
HOMELESSNESS:  
A LITERATURE REVIEW 
 


2 
 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION AND METHODOLOGY 
 
Housing and homelessness are policy areas in need of an explicitly gendered 
perspective. Women’s experiences of housing, including their pathways into and out 
of homelessness, are different from men’s, but are poorly studied and understood. In 
2017, Engender submitted written evidence to the Scottish Parliament Local 
Government and Communities Committee demonstrating that existing approaches to 
tackle homelessness in Scotland remain ungendered. The absence of women and girls 
from the discourse on homelessness is symptomatic of a broader issue of ungendered 
housing interventions and policy responses, and needs to be seen as part of larger 
social, economic and political inequalities that marginalise the issues affecting 
women (SWA 2015). This lack of recognition and understanding means that women 
remain largely ‘invisible’ or ‘hidden’ at political, legal and socio-economic levels when 
it comes to housing (Baptista 2010; Young 2010), and ultimately impedes women’s 
ability to access and keep suitable and safe accommodation (CMCH 2018).  
 
This paper seeks to analyse available literature on gender and housing and provide a 
brief overview of the interconnected factors related to women’s housing issues, with a 
particular focus on women’s homelessness, access to affordable housing and the 
differential needs of groups of women who are particularly at risk of housing 
insecurity. It also seeks to identify areas where more research or development work is 
required to develop a feminist policy approach to housing and homelessness. The 
paper is designed to sit alongside a complementary policy review, A Woman’s Place: 
Gender, Housing and Homelessness in Scotland (Engender 2020), which explores the 
housing and homelessness policy landscape in Scotland and the extent to which 
Scottish policies and discourse are gendered. 
 
This review covers recent literature on women, housing and homelessness, placing a 
priority on Scottish and UK-wide papers published since 1999, when the majority of 
housing-related policy and legislation was devolved to Scotland. The review looks at 
academic literature as well as policy papers and evaluations produced by third sector 
organisations and think tanks, including some specific case studies produced on 
housing services for domestic abuse survivors in Fife (SWA 2015), ex-offenders in 
Australia (Grace et al. 2016), refugee women in Bradford (Fuseini 2009) and older 
women in Barnet (LCH 2108). Given the paucity of gender-specific analysis on many 
topics, we also included literature on women and housing from Canada, Australasia 
and Europe where relevant. A full bibliography is included in section 7. 
 
There is a substantial body of literature on housing and homelessness in the UK, but 
much of it does not directly address women or gender. In order to gain a sense of this 
wider literature, this review included a number of other broader scope literature 


3 
 
reviews, for example, Anderson (2001), Minnery and Greenhalgh (2007), Klinker et al. 
(2000) and Third and Yanetta (2000). There are also a number of good papers that 
focus specifically on Scottish policies on housing and homelessness, such as Goodlad 
(2005), Anderson (2007a & 2007b), Gibb (2015), Kintrea (2006), Pawson et al. (2007) 
and multiple policy papers by Shelter Scotland, however these tend to have little to 
no reference to gender or women at all. Scottish Women’s Aid’s 2015 study Change, 
Justice, Fairness: Why should we have to move everywhere and everything because of him? 
which looks in detail at housing services for women experiencing domestic abuse in 
Fife, is one notable exception to this.  
 
The review attempts to look at women’s experiences and policy responses across the 
‘housing continuum’ (see section 2.1) and pulls out key themes emerging from the 
literature (section 2) as well as analysis of women’s homelessness (section 3), 
women’s access to affordable and adequate housing, including to the private market 
(section 4) and gender-based planning and budgeting for housing (section 5).  
 
While gender and housing remains a relatively under-researched area, a burgeoning 
number of analysts in the last two decades have been calling for housing 
interventions and housing policy to address women’s specific needs, and for gender-
sensitive strategies and responses to homelessness. As early as 1986, British 
academics such as Watson and Austerberry began to fully articulate the need for a 
feminist analysis of housing and homelessness. More recently, this has been followed 
by contributions directly to the topic from Baptista (2010), the UK Women’s Budget 
Group (2018), the Women’s Housing Forum (2019), Mayock (2015), St Mungo’s (2014), 
Reeve (2018) and others. However, it is still treated as a relatively new area of 
analysis, and the majority of the literature available specifically on women or gender 
occupies just one or two spaces on the continuum – either focusing on factors which 
are pushing women into homelessness, and women’s differential personal experiences 
of homelessness, or specifically on the relationship between domestic abuse and 
homelessness. Therefore, the balance presented in the structure of this review is not 
reflective of the overall balance of the literature.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


4 
 
2. GENDER, HOMELESSNESS AND HOUSING: KEY 
THEMES EMERGING FROM THE LITERATURE  
 
Housing is a basic human right and is central to everyone’s daily lives. Good housing 
can contribute to improved living standards, increased opportunities and wellbeing, 
while poor housing can contribute to poverty, disadvantage and poor health (UKWBG 
2018).  
 
Housing is also an area of life which women experience differently to men – from 
their pathways into and out of homelessness and their interactions with housing 
services, to their access to adequate standards of living and the private market – and 
recent literature shows a multitude of ways in which gender can shape, define and 
influence the experience of housing instability (Mayock et al. 2015; Anderson 2001). 
Overall, UK-focused literature suggests that women’s housing situation is generally 
less good than that of men’s, that they are more likely to have housing affordability 
problems, and that their specific needs are neither well understood nor appropriately 
met (UKWBG 2018). For many women, often for reasons relating directly to their 
gender, a stable, affordable and habitable home remains out of reach (Engender 
2020). 
 
2.1 HOUSING AS A CONTINUUM 
 
Much of the recent literature on housing and homelessness – in particular from the 
UK, European nations, Canada and Australia – sees housing as a dynamic, non-linear 
‘continuum’ of better to worse housing conditions, with people who are sleeping 
rough at one end of a flexible spectrum, to those stably housed at the other (see 
figure 1) (Anderson 2001; CMCH 2018; Minnery & Greenhalgh 2007; Fitzpatrick et al. 
2000; Savage 2016). Individuals’ life-time housing careers (or ‘pathways’ or 
‘trajectories’) move in and out of the various stages, and people can experience 
multiple episodes of homelessness.  
 
Studies in the USA (and within Europe, to a lesser degree) have also identified three 
main sub-groups of homeless people: transitional, episodic and chronic (Savage 2016; 
Wong et al. 1997). Anderson (2001) explains that while the simplest possible housing 
career would be to reside in one dwelling throughout one’s entire lifetime, in reality, 
individuals experience a variety of housing situations throughout their lifetimes, 
moving in and out of stable and unstable housing situations and different locations, 
quality and type of housing. A key point from this is that homelessness should not be 
seen as a phenomenon which is distinct from other forms of housing circumstances, 
but one manifestation of housing insecurity that is closely interconnected with other 


5 
 
forms of instability, as well as other socio-economic processes, life events and 
associated care and support needs.  
 
 
 
 
Further, while previous literature tended to focus on the individual characteristics 
associated with the person experiencing housing insecurity or homelessness (e.g., 
drug and/or alcohol use, relationship breakdown, mental illness) much of the recent 
literature has shifted to look more at the structural factors that impact on people’s 
access to safe and secure housing, such as poverty, labour market access, welfare 
policies, and the design of the housing system itself (Savage 2016; Anderson 2001; 
Busch-Geertsema et al. 2010; Edgar & Doherty 2001; Stephens et al. 2010). For 
example, the research conducted by Savage in 2016 found that while homeless 
people attributed the cause of their homelessness to individual events or factors, the 
key difference that allowed individual circumstances to lead to homelessness was 
when people lack or are excluded from “resources of human, social, material, or 
financial capital to negate the effects of these individually experienced negative 
events.” Savage (2016), Bowpitt et al. (2011) and McNaughton (2008) suggest that a 
new orthodoxy to understanding housing insecurity is emerging, which understands 
housing instability as a “complex interrelation of societal and individual factors, 
occurring in certain circumstances, to certain people” (McNaughton) and sees lack of 
housing as only one factor within multiple ways in which people can be excluded 
from having safe and secure homes (the ‘Multiple Exclusion Homelessness’ 
framework). 
 
While the majority of the mainstream literature in this mould talks only occasionally 
about women and gender, these concepts lend themselves well to gendered analysis 
of housing. For example, the broader and more dynamic definitions of homelessness 
and housing instability captured within the housing continuum allows more room for 
diverse categories of individuals experiencing housing instability, including women 
and other individuals who may fall outside the ‘traditional’ rough sleeping model of 
homelessness, to be included within analysis and research (see also section 3.1) 
(Baptista 2010; Mayock et al. 2012). Similarly, analyses which look at the structural 
factors underpinning housing instability are well suited to exploring the impact of 
structural gender inequalities on housing, and how gendered power relations 
Figure 1: The Housing Continuum, from CMCH (2018) 


6 
 
influence individuals’ housing pathways and trajectories. In her assessment of women 
and homelessness in Germany, Enders-Dragässer (2010) shows how this approach 
allowed “women’s risks of poverty, of violence, their conflicts and crises because of 
unpaid family work, occupational disadvantages and harassment, their needs in the 
event of pregnancy, separation or divorce, and as single mothers” to come into view. 
This is explored slightly further in the next section.  
 
2.2 SYSTEMIC GENDER INEQUALITIES 
 
Women’s housing needs and their access to safe and adequate housing are intimately 
linked to underlying systemic and structural gender inequalities, in particular violence 
against women and women’s economic inequality (Fotheringham et al. 2014; CMCH 
2018; Savage 2016; SWA 2014; Jerome et al. 2003).  
 
Women’s economically disadvantaged position in the labour market (including often 
working in part time, precarious and/or low-paid employment and managing unpaid 
care responsibilities) has a direct impact on their housing situation. Across the UK and 
elsewhere, women are disproportionately dependent on the social housing sector1 and 
housing benefits, more likely to be paying a higher proportion of their income in rent 
than men, less likely to be able to access adequate standards of housing, more likely 
to be living in overcrowded housing or housing in poor condition, and more 
vulnerable to housing insecurity (see section 4) (CMCH 2018; Novac 1996; SG 2013a; 
SWA 2014; SWA 2015). Watson and Austerberry’s book on women and homelessness, 
published in 1986, was one of the first pieces of research to show how patriarchal 
policies that favour nuclear families account for single women’s vulnerability to 
homelessness within a market-dominated housing system (Novac 1996). More 
recently, in her 2001 paper on women’s pathways in and out of homelessness, Casey 
argues that the primary causes of single women’s homelessness continue to “relate to 
economic disadvantage caused by low income and inadequate affordable housing”.  
 
It is also evident that there is a very strong reciprocal link between violence against 
women (itself both a cause and a consequence of women’s inequality) and women’s 
housing insecurity (see section 4.2). Many studies have shown gender-based violence 
to be one of the most significant factors impeding women’s ability to secure and 
maintain suitable housing; that safe and appropriate housing is one of the most 
crucial forms of support for women experiencing domestic abuse; and that women’s 
loss of safe and secure housing can lead to further experiences of violence (Zufferey 
et al. 2016; Rollins et al. 2001; CMCH 2018). Further, one of the key findings of 
Scottish Women’s Aid’s 2015 study Change, Justice, Fairness: Why should we have to 
move everywhere and everything because of him?, was that “the lack of national or local 
                                                 
1 Around a third of households with a female head of household are in the social rented sector (30%), compared with fewer than one in five 
households with a male head of household (17%). 


7 
 
gendered policy and practice response to homelessness[…] means that the existing 
inequalities experienced by women are repeated and reinforced”.  
 
Finally, women’s access to safe and affordable housing is not only impacted by 
underlying gender inequalities, but also differs according to other structural divisions 
in society (Savage 2016).  
 
Certain groups of women, such as Black and minority ethnic women, disabled women, 
refugee women, women who have been in the criminal justice system, LGBTI 
(particularly transgender women), older women, women who sell sex, lone parents 
and women with other caring responsibilities are more likely to experience housing 
instability, poor housing, homelessness or negative treatment by housing services. 
(CMCH 2018; Spicer et al. 2010) For example, Anderson (2001) found that at a UK 
level, women from minority ethnic groups are over-represented among hostel and 
B&B residents, while a 2018 study by Women’s Aid in England showed that while 
already 60% of referrals to domestic violence refuges are turned away, the proportion 
is even higher for BME women. Home truths: housing for women in the criminal justice 
system, a 2018 report by the Prison Reform Trust, showed that 60% of female 
prisoners in England and Wales do not have homes to go to on release. Further afield 
in Canada, CMCH (2018), Spicer et al (2010) and others report that trans women are 
over-represented among the Canadian homeless population, and those who are able 
to access women-specific housing services (by conforming to a conventional feminine 
gender expression) are vulnerable to negative treatment and harassment from other 
service users and staff.  
 
Data and analysis on these groups in both Scotland and the wider UK is particularly 
hard to come by, as the available literature on housing tends to look at either gender 
or a different characteristic, such as age or ethnicity, rather than both at once. So very 
little is known on either the housing experiences or needs of particular groups of 
women (outside of women experiencing domestic abuse), or effective policy 
responses.  
 
2.3 WOMEN’S INVISIBILITY IN ANALYSIS, DEFINITIONS AND DATA 
 
Outside of papers which look specifically at domestic abuse, women are remarkably 
missing from international literature on both housing and homelessness. As Novac et 
al. argued in 1996, some of the literature at the time “refer[red] to women within a 
demographic profile of who is homeless, or includes narratives about homeless 
woman, but often gender does not enter the analytic or explanatory account”. 
Unfortunately this does not appear to have changed drastically in the successive 20+ 
years. Even third sector organisations with an explicit mandate to explore housing and 
homelessness policy solutions, such as Shelter Scotland, have minimal reference to 


8 
 
women or gender in their policy positions or research (Engender 2020)2. As Savage 
(2016) argues, not only does this gender-blind approach render women invisible in 
definitions, explanations and research on housing and homelessness, but also further 
“masks the depth of inequalities that [women] experience”. 
 
As discussed in section 3.1, below, this invisibility is in part because homelessness has 
been traditionally seen as a ‘male’ experience and problem, and the ways in which 
lots of women experience housing precarity – for example, by spending lengths of 
time ‘sofa surfing’ or staying with family and friends – is less visible in both the 
streets and the available data. In their 1986 work, Watson and Austerberry see this as 
a political decision: a deliberate narrowing down of the definition of homelessness to 
exclude women and households who do not have adequate housing on their own 
terms which serves to ‘reduce’ the size of a given homeless population. Similarly, 
more recently Pleace (2016) and Reeve (2018) argue that decisions not to record 
gender are rooted in assumptions about women's absence from certain spaces or 
forms of homelessness, and Minnery & Greenhalgh (2007) make the link between 
narrow definitions of homelessness and the shirking of state and agency 
responsibility.  
 
The ways in which data on housing more generally is collected, collated and 
interpreted also contributes to women’s invisibility in the analysis and discourse. 
Historically in Scotland, the UK and beyond, the main datasets are not disaggregated 
by sex, but grouped by household type, and only indicate sex in the context of single-
parent families, rather than the population more generally. As the UK Women’s 
Budget Group (2018) notes, “official data provides few breakdowns of women’s and 
men’s housing needs and circumstances and, moreover, the majority of individuals live 
in households with others. In multi-person households, housing conditions are shared 
and income pooled, at least to some extent, and most data sources do not distinguish 
between experiences of individuals or genders within households”. For example, 
census data records the number of ‘persons per room’ irrespective of age or sex, notes 
Shelter Scotland (2011), although the more sophisticated ‘bedroom standard’ (which 
takes into consideration the gender, ages and relationships between household 
members) is used by the Scottish House Condition Survey (SHCS), and by many 
landlords in allocating property.  
 
Many of the available statistics on homelessness specifically pertain to households 
with children and while inferences can be made (e.g. lone parents are far more likely 
to be women), this further skews the picture on gender. For example, looking at young 
homeless people in particular, Anderson (2001) shows that when homeless families 
and single people are considered together the (assumed) gender imbalances in the 
                                                 
2 With respect to its policy positions, Shelter Scotland is focused on three areas: homelessness, the private rented sector and housing conditions. 
None of these areas mention gender. Shelter Scotland (2019) Policy positions Shelter Scotland. Available at: 
https://scotland.shelter.org.uk/housing_policy/policy_positions Accessed on: 18.02.20 


9 
 
young homeless population disappear because almost all young single parents are 
female.  
 
Where official data is disaggregated by sex, it very rarely allows for an intersectional 
analysis against other characteristics – for example, it is not possible to find the 
number of homelessness applications in Scotland from BME women, disabled women 
or LGBT women (Engender 2020). This creates a further series of large gaps in the 
analysis, rendering the experiences of particular groups of women even less visible. 
Similarly, a number quantitative academic studies looking at specific aspects of 
housing and homelessness do disaggregate their data by sex. However, often they are 
simply ‘controlling’ for a different characteristic or factor and fail to explore gender 
differentials or simply do not include enough women in their samples (Reeve 2018).  
 
3. WOMEN & HOMELESSNESS 
 
Historically, the issue of homelessness has tended to be viewed as a primarily ‘male’ 
phenomenon (Mayock 2015; Reeve 2018). However, more recently the relationship 
between women and homelessness is gaining attention, particularly as evidence 
across a number of European countries suggests that increasing numbers of young 
women, single women, women who have experienced violence and women with 
children are entering homeless services. (Mayock 2015; Zugazaga 2004; Schwartz et 
al. 2010; Edgar & Doherty 2001; Chityil 2010; Minnery & Greenhalgh 2007; St 
Mungo’s 2014). In Scotland, the most recent statistics from the Scottish Government 
show increases in homelessness applications for households where the main applicant 
was female and increases in single female applications, as well as increases in 
applications from households with children and increases in the number of homeless 
applications where the main reason given was a violent or abusive relationship (where 
the applicant is more likely to be female). 
 
It is clear from the small but growing body of literature on the topic that not only are 
the number of homeless women potentially increasing, but that women’s experiences 
of homelessness, and pathways in and out of homelessness, are significantly affected 
by their gender (Mayock 2015; Baptista 2010; Batty et al. 2010; Edgar and Doherty 
2001; Young 2010; Savage 2016). Anderson (2001) argues that alongside age group, 
“gender is one of the most significant factors influencing the experience of 
homelessness and pathways through homelessness”. There is increasing recognition 
that there are different contributing factors and risks, both structural and individual, 
that push men and women into homelessness; different health, safety and wellbeing 
impacts of homelessness; different gendered experiences of and interactions with 
homelessness support services; and that women and men face different barriers to 
resolving their housing crises.  
 


10 
 
Savage (2016) and Reeve (2018) write about how gendered factors such as women’s 
poverty, experiences of violence and abuse, bereavement, imprisonment and 
motherhood all heavily influence women’s journeys into, through and out of 
homelessness, and show how the experience of homelessness can present particular 
challenges for women in terms of abuse, harassment, exploitation and ill-health.3 
Reeve (2018) further notes that women who are homeless are also more likely to be 
seen as transgressive (of gender norms) or deviant, and as a result face particular 
forms of isolation and alienation from their communities.  
 
A few, though not many, demographic trends among homeless women have been 
recorded, including that women tend to become homeless at a younger age (including 
in Scotland) and that they are much more likely than men to have dependent children, 
although the process of becoming homeless often separates the family (Anderson 
2001; Fitzpatrick et al 2000). Much of the available research also suggests that 
women tend to have shorter episodes of ‘absolute homelessness’ than men (i.e. 
sleeping rough) – in part because they take additional, extreme measures to avoid 
street sleeping, as explored in the next section - but that many homeless women have 
been homeless on multiple occasions and had move in and out of homeless services 
over prolonged periods (Mayock 2015; Re:gender 2016). Mayock (2015) characterises 
the experiences of the women in her research as having a “complex trajectory of paths 
that led them into, out of, and back to homeless systems and services”. A lot of the 
available evidence on women’s homelessness is qualitative, and looks at the 
homelessness pathways of individual women and their experiences, such as the case 
studies in McNaughton’s 2008 study on homelessness.  
 
3.1 WOMEN’S HIDDEN HOMELESSNESS 
 
Despite efforts to broaden the scope and provide a gender lens to homelessness 
analysis, women and women’s experiences are still notably absent from mainstream 
literature on homelessness (Baptista, 2010; Edgar & Doherty, 2001). One of the main 
reasons given for this is the idea of women’s ‘hidden’ homelessness: that women do 
not appear in the analysis of homelessness because the nature of women’s 
homelessness does not conform with the traditional (male) images of ‘rough sleeping’ 
in the streets under the classic definition of homelessness as ‘rooflessness’. According 
to most (though notably not all) UK sources, single men continue to dominate the 
numbers of people sleeping rough and using mainstream shelter systems (UKWBG 
2018; Anderson 2001). These rough sleeping men are often the main ‘samples’ for 
studying and discussing homelessness and therefore the main reference point for 
policy and the media (Mayock 2015).  
 
                                                 
3 “The impact of domestic abuse on women’s physical and mental health and on the wellbeing of their children has been well documented. The 
impact of homelessness resulting from domestic abuse creates cumulative and long lasting health problems for women and children.” (SWA 2014) 


11 
 
Many commentators argue that this gender imbalance is attributable to the more 
‘concealed’ nature of female homelessness: that instead of rough sleeping or using 
emergency shelters, women experiencing housing instability and intolerable housing 
circumstances go to great lengths to find alternate, and often volatile 
accommodation, such as sharing with family or friends on an informal and temporary 
basis, sleeping in bed and breakfast hostels, ‘sofa surfing’ and sleeping on floors or in 
overcrowded spaces, or (re)entering into relationships with potentially abusive 
partners (Watson and Austerberry 1986; Mayock 2015; Novac 1996; Chityil 2010; 
Bernard 2010;  Baptista 2010; Batty et al. 2010; Ng 2018; McNaughton 2008). These 
women fall under a wider definition of homelessness as having no permanent house, 
and are less likely to be counted in traditional methods of recording homelessness 
(Bretherton & Pleace 2018). Interestingly, Watson and Austerberry (1986) also found 
that beyond security and permanence, poor material conditions (such as overcrowding 
or lack of safety) were an important focus of single homeless women’s definitions of 
homelessness. Bretherton & Pleace, in 2018, had similar findings: that women view 
homelessness in terms of the absence of a settled, adequate, legally and physically 
secure home, not the absence or presence of a roof. 
 
It is worth noting, however, that a handful of recent papers, including Reeve (2018), 
Martins (2010) and Fitzpatrick et al (2000), conclude that these assumptions about 
women’s lack of rough sleeping are incorrect, and that it is likely that women do sleep 
rough in relatively high numbers, though still in ways which make them less visible. In 
Reeve’s 2006 study, she found that 62% of the single homeless women she surveyed 
slept rough, and that rough sleeping was in fact the most common housing situation 
for single women when they first entered homelessness. However, the way in which 
these women occupied public space differed to that of rough sleeping men: the 
women described employing specific strategies of invisibility in order to stay safe(r), 
such as sleeping in sites that are hidden from view (public toilets, garages, bin bays, 
abandoned cars, staircases or lobbies, and spaces located away from busy city centres) 
or remaining in plain sight but disguising their homelessness status. Reeve (2018), 
Enders-Drägasser (2001) and Engender (2017) describe how these assumptions and 
stereotypes “leav[e] space to be filled by policies considered gender-neutral, but 
which really only respond to male experiences of homelessness”. 
 
In both these cases, however, a common factor is that a large number of women do 
not ‘present’ themselves as homeless to services, and therefore a large number of 
women in precarious housing situations are likely to not be captured in official 
statistics, or be known to homelessness services and charities. Mayock (2015) argues 
that many women not only render themselves invisible in the streets, but also avoid 
seeking help because of the perceived stigma and shame associated with the ‘status’ 
of homelessness. 4 This can include women whose situations fall within the narrowest 
                                                 
4 A number of studies, including St Mungo’s 2014, show that homeless women are likely to experience multiple stigmas which experienced 
concurrently can have a reinforcing, demoralising and debilitating impact. Women spoke to St Mungo’s about how society expects them to be 


12 
 
definition of homelessness – rooflessness – who are sleeping rough away from 
known sites and are not in contact with helping agencies (Fitzpatrick et al. 2000). For 
example, in Reeve’s 2006 study, although 66 per cent of the women she surveyed had 
slept rough, only 12 per cent had been in contact with a rough sleeper team (Reeve 
2018). According to Mayock (2015) it also means that women who experience housing 
instability or homelessness “are therefore likely to spend prolonged periods moving 
between unstable housing situations with limited or no support from either formal or 
informal sources”.   
 
Another key area of women’s invisibility is motherhood. As mentioned above in 
section 2.3, much of the gendered analysis thinks about either single women, or 
households headed by women. The latter category tends to exist within analysis of 
child homelessness, which often disconnects the mother’s situation from that of the 
child, rendering the mother’s homelessness hidden (Enders-Dragässer 2010). Both 
Reeve (2018) and Savage (2016) also look at the ‘invisibility’ of mother-child 
separations among homeless women who are considered single. Reeve (2018) was 
surprised to discover that 30% of single homeless women in her study reported having 
children under the age of 16. Savage (2016) argues that explanations for the 
homelessness of this group of women are often subsumed into discourses of male 
homelessness, that additional stigmatization is incurred when mothers are separated 
from their children (the trope of the ‘bad mother’), and that recognition of the needs 
and circumstances of homeless mothers unaccompanied by their children are 
consequently excluded from consideration in policy responses to homelessness.  
 
3.2 WOMEN AT RISK: DOMESTIC ABUSE AND OTHER FACTORS 
 
One of the most well researched areas relating to women and housing is the 
relationship between domestic violence and homelessness (SWA 2014 & 2015; St 
Mungo’s 2014; Burnet 2017; Mayock 2015, FEANTSA 2010, Jerome et al. 2003; SG 
2010 etc.) There is a large body of evidence that shows domestic abuse as a major 
cause of women’s homelessness in Scotland and elsewhere in the UK, with high 
proportions of homeless women reporting domestic abuse as either a chronic factor in 
their lives or as an immediate precipitating factor in homelessness. The experience of 
homelessness can also render women more vulnerable to further violence. In addition, 
a number of studies also show that homeless women are more likely to have 
experienced greater levels of sexual abuse and emotional abuse than men in 
childhood, as well as into adulthood (Savage 2016).  
 
In Scotland domestic abuse is the third most common reason given for a homeless 
application, although it is suspected that these figures are likely to significantly 
underestimate the scale of the problem as women may not disclose that they are 
                                                 
feminine, to be good mothers and to maintain a home. Much of what they experience while homeless conflicts with these expectations, and they 
feel judged as women because they do not meet these ideals. 


13 
 
experiencing domestic abuse when making a homeless application, or become part of 
the ‘hidden’ homeless as discussed above (ALACHO et al. 2019). In England, St 
Mungo’s (2014) found that nearly 50% of their female clients had experienced 
domestic abuse, with 32% of women claiming that their experiences of domestic 
abuse contributed to their homelessness. Similarly, in a survey by Scottish Women’s 
Aid (2015) of domestic abuse survivors in Fife, they found that nearly half (46%) of the 
women who took part in the survey had previously been made homeless (or had been 
at risk of homelessness) more than once because of domestic or sexual abuse and at 
least 39% women had been homeless more than twice.  
 
According to Scottish Women’s Aid (2014), “the prevention or cessation of domestic 
abuse will almost always require the woman to leave that home”, and “for a wide 
range of practitioners, leaving an abuser and leaving the home have become merged 
and the homeless route provided a faster and more straightforward approach”. Many 
researchers note that women who have experienced domestic abuse relocate 
frequently and move long distances in an effort to keep both their children and 
themselves safe (Zufferey et al, 2016; Ponic et al. 2011). With each move, the women 
experience the “impact of cumulative losses, feelings of displacement from friends 
and neighbours and belongings, moving into an unfamiliar area and of having to cope 
with the resulting financial debt”, as well as concerns over their children’s emotional 
wellbeing, health and education (SWA 2015). Reeve (2018) argues that while domestic 
abuse is often cited as a cause of women’s homelessness, rarely do analysts or 
policymakers pose the question of why women become homeless when they leave an 
abusive partner. Such a question warrants analysis of the wider economic and social 
constraints that can leave women dependent on a male partner (as noted in section 
2.2), as well as the nature of the housing system and services provided. For example, 
most women in the Fife study not only felt like they had no choice about moving out, 
but that the abusive partner’s control over the situation and sense of entitlement to 
the home was actually supported and reinforced by the response they received from 
the homeless system (see also section 3.3) (SWA 2015).  
 
As a result of this evidence, there has been a great deal of work across many countries 
to push for the incorporation of domestic abuse in the ‘at risk’ definitions of 
homelessness, and a recognition of the complex support needs of women 
experiencing domestic abuse (Zufferey 2010). This area of research has the most 
detail on homeless women’s experiences of services and potential gender-sensitive 
policy responses, and shows that provision of safe, affordable, appropriate 
accommodation, alongside other gender-sensitive services, is critical for survivors of 
domestic abuse.  
 
Other, less well researched, groups of women who are particularly vulnerable to and 
at risk of homelessness include women who sell sex, refugee women and women 
exiting the criminal justice system. Scottish Refugee Council research indicates that 


14 
 
96% of refugees experience homelessness at some point after receiving refugee 
status, including not just single men and women but also families, who can “spend 
days sleeping in a hotel and returning to homelessness services each morning with 
their belongings to await allocation of temporary accommodation”(SG 2013b). St 
Mungo’s 2014 study revealed that almost half of their female (homeless) clients had 
an offending history, with over a third having spent time in prison. Not only are large 
number of women in prison likely to have nowhere to live on release, women are also 
more likely than men to lose accommodation while in custody (St Mungo’s 2014). 
 
Batty et al. (2010) and Reeve (2018) argue that women who sell sex on the street 
constitute one of the most excluded and marginalised groups within the homeless 
population in the UK, and that there is a clear and reciprocal link between selling sex 
and homelessness; housing options can cause women selling sex to become homeless 
and that homelessness can in turn lead women to sell sex. Precarious housing and 
repeat homelessness were found to be persistent features in the lives of the women 
who sell sex in Batty’s study, often sustained or precipitated by stints in prison, while 
Reeve found that ‘survival sex’5 emerged as a key subsistence strategy for the single 
homeless women in her 2006 study. Batty et al. note that there is little in depth 
analysis available on the experiences of housing and homelessness of women who 
sell sex, with most literature instead preoccupied with issues relating to criminal 
justice, policing and the regulation of the sale of sex in urban spaces. 
 
3.3 PROVISION OF SHELTER AND TRANSITIONAL HOUSING FOR 
HOMELESS WOMEN 
 
Reflecting the similar biases in the analysis and knowledge base, policies, legislation 
and responses to homelessness remain dominated by and orientated towards the 
experiences of men. Women’s needs are sidelined and very few homelessness services 
are gender specific and responsive to women’s multiple disadvantages (Anderson 
2001; Raftery 2017; Reeve 2018; Enders-Dragässer 2010; Mayock 2015; Ponic et al 
2011; Edgar & Doherty, 2001). This is particularly true of the provision of shelter and 
temporary housing, a central aspect of most countries’ responses to ‘rooflessness’. 
These types of accommodation tend to be used for periods no longer than 3-12 
months, are unsuitable for many groups of women (for example, older women, those 
with older male children, and women with larger families) (Fitzpatrick et al 2000) and 
are unlikely to be in people’s preferred community (Ng 2018). Although shelters are 
designed to be ‘places of refuge’, many homeless women see shelters as unsafe and 
unclean – “a place of fear rather than care” – where they are more vulnerable to 
harassment, violations of their privacy and social degradation (Enders-Dragässer 2010; 
May et al 2007; Edgar & Doherty, 2001). As such, these housing services themselves 
                                                 
5 ‘Survival sex’ refers to women having to sell sex in order to afford their basic needs, including food, shelter and clean 
clothes. 


15 
 
can exacerbate the problems around women’s ‘hidden’ homelessness and multiple 
periods of homelessness.  The women-specific services that do exist tend to prioritise 
the needs of mothers and women experiencing domestic abuse, a focus which 
according to Mayock has served to reinforce a distinction between homeless services 
and specialised services such as refuges, forcing ‘single’ women to access generalist 
services that are primarily male-dominated. 
 
There are three key issues that emerge repeatedly throughout the research focusing 
on women’s access to both short-term shelter and medium-term transitional housing 
services: firstly, that there is a clear need to tailor housing support(s) to diverse groups 
of women and offer women options when it comes to housing; secondly, that there is 
a severe lack of gender competency among housing providers, including but not 
limited to a lack of understanding of violence against women. The final key point, 
which will be explored further in section 3.4, is that by the time women first access 
one of these services, the vast majority have multiple, complex needs which are not 
well served by a (temporary) housing centered response.  
 
Temporary accommodation varies widely in type and standard across and within 
European contexts, including Scotland (Shelter Scotland 2011). Mayock’s 2015 
research found that women disliked communal living situations and frequently 
struggled to adapt to settings where they had no privacy and experienced very little 
autonomy; they also frequently experienced a profound sense of aloneness despite 
living in close proximity to others. For women fleeing domestic abuse, it has been 
shown that women are often forced by the system to move from one temporary 
accommodation to another (known as ‘institutional cycling’), and that often women 
felt no safer in a hostel or shelter than they did in the abusive home that they had 
left.  
 
When it comes to medium-term transitional housing, a particular concern emerging 
from SWA’s Fife research (2015) is the lack of appropriate housing options that are 
offered to women, and the lack of agency women have within the system. More than 
half of women that took part in the research said they had not been told about any 
housing options. When women were given options, these were limited to different 
types of homeless accommodation. “Women experienced a lack of control over the 
process, lack of involvement in decision making and a system that disempowered 
them” says Scottish Women’s Aid, and this “has profound effect on her health and 
wellbeing” (SWA 2015). In their recommendations, the research team called on the 
Scottish Government to develop a housing options approach tailored to women 
experiencing domestic or sexual abuse that enables women and children to remain in 
their home. It also called on the Scottish Government to introduce legislation to 
provide protection for women by placing conditions on perpetrators, including 
removing the perpetrator from the household. Mayock (2015) argues that in Ireland 
the lack of appropriate housing options for women leads to the gridlocking of 


16 
 
emergency accommodation services and also “promotes their use as long-term 
housing rather than as temporary arrangements”, thus raising questions about the role 
of emergency shelters in perpetuating trajectories of long-term homelessness.  
 
In the Fife research, and many of the other European and Canadian studies of service 
provision, it is clear that the homelessness and housing sectors in many countries lack 
an adequate understanding of gender, the nature of women’s homelessness, and 
violence against women.  Lack of experience and knowledge among housing sector 
staff comes out as a critical issue, both in mixed sex environments (particularly for 
refugee women) but also in local authority housing services that deal specifically with 
women who have experienced domestic abuse. Scottish Women’s Aid found that 
services in Fife lacked a gendered understanding of domestic abuse as a cause and 
consequence of women’s inequality (and were much more likely to see alcohol as the 
greatest single predictor of homelessness) and also did not know that women are at 
greater risk of injury when they end a relationship with an abusive partner. The SWA 
study shows how local authority staff questioned the validity of the women’s 
experiences of abuse and homelessness, and failed to challenge their partner’s 
entitlement to remain in the family home despite his abusive behaviour or offer any 
safe alternatives to moving out (e.g. tenancy transfer or additional home security 
measures). These findings are echoed by those of Mayock in Ireland (2015). In 
Australia, research by Zufferey (2010) has shown that a lack of understanding among 
service providers of separated mothers’ experiences of homelessness – including 
making women feel they are judged as ‘bad mothers’ - often serves to prolong 
separation of mother and child and impede  mothers from successfully exiting 
homelessness.  
 
Burnet (2017) highlights some best practice policy responses in Australia, where the 
Royal Commission in Victoria argues that a housing response for people experiencing 
family violence should be tailored to the victim’s circumstances, choices and goals, 
and whether they live in urban or rural areas; recognise that keeping victims in their 
home is optimal if it is safe and the victim’s choice and provide support accordingly; 
and ensure that any provided accommodation is of good quality and in a location that 
will help them retain or build on protective factors to support their recovery—
including employment, training, education and natural supports such as family and 
friends. 
 
3.4 BROADER POLICY RESPONSES: BEYOND HOUSING  
 
A key area of policy recommendation from both gendered and non-gendered literature 
is that homelessness policy needs to be better integrated with wider housing policy 
and practice at both local and national levels, as well as with government strategies 
to tackle violence against women and broader support services (Burnet 2017; Jerome 


17 
 
et al 2003).6 According to Minnery & Greenhalgh (2007) and Savage (2016) good 
practice is considered to be policy that treats homelessness and housing as a non-
static experience, and that addresses the interrelated housing, health, welfare and 
social needs of individuals. However, across European states it appears to be that 
housing, homelessness and domestic abuse services and policy responses have 
historically tended to fall under separate portfolios (Baptista 2010; Mayock 2015). 
There is also a lack of coordination between housing and other support services, such 
as domestic abuse services, employability services, counselling services, financial 
support, or education and training, and most other services are treated as secondary 
to matters relating directly to insufficient housing (Savage 2016).  
 
As discussed briefly earlier, homeless women, particularly those who are fleeing 
domestic abuse, are “often dealing with co-occurring challenges, such as mental 
health issues, financial and employment instability, a lack of social support, as well as 
issues surrounding childcare” (CMCH 2018). Services that focus solely on immediate 
‘insufficient housing’ are therefore especially unlikely to meet women’s broader needs 
and help them maintain housing in the longer term, and disconnects in the system 
that separate out domestic violence, housing and homelessness services are likely to 
mean that women continue to “not fit perfectly into either system, and therefore, 
receive insufficient or inappropriate services” (Mayock 2015; Savage 2016). In order 
for women to access adequate housing in the longer term, it is equally important that 
needs around safety, community, and comfort are also met and that women also have 
access to integrated financial counselling, welfare support, legal advice and 
employment assistance (Burnet 2017; Spinney et al. 2013). These various responses 
need to be both coordinated and individualised.  
 
In this vein, St Mungo’s (2014) argues the need for holistic, gender sensitive support 
services that can meet complex needs. They recommend that services include: women 
only support and space; psychologically informed responses which recognise trauma; 
staff training to enable gendered responses; partnership working to address multiple 
support needs (including mental health, substance use, criminal justice and social 
services); pre-engagement steps that build women’s  confidence and motivation; 
client involvement in how and what services should be delivered; peer support; and 
particular support for women with children, including providing access to childcare 
and facilities for children to visit where possible and advocacy, psychological and 
emotional support through adoption proceedings and to help deal with the loss of 
children. They also recommend that local authorities should identify a senior member 
of staff to lead on women and homelessness, including improving and coordinating 
service provision and strategy, and monitoring progress on ending women’s 
homelessness.  
 
                                                 
6 See Engender (2020) A Women’s Place: gender, housing and homelessness for analysis on how well these policy areas are linked up in Scotland. 


18 
 
Similarly, Holleman et al. (2004) propose an integrative model in which family 
physicians, therapists, and psychologists collaborate in the provision of services 
(Schwartz et al 2010), while findings from a pilot project with female ex-offenders in 
Australia, which included assistance with finding employment as well as housing 
support, showed the benefit of a comprehensive package of services including support 
in helping women find housing stability (Grace et al. 2016). In a study of homeless 
women in Germany by Enders-Dragässer (2010), the majority of the women 
interviewed defined themselves as excluded from the workforce, and considered 
housing support and occupational reintegration as equally important. Enders-
Dragässer describes how the women expressed needs far exceeding those that can be 
addressed solely by housing services.  
 
Jerome et al (2003) highlights examples of innovative, integrated service provision 
models and practice in the UK and beyond, including the Eaves Housing for Women 
within which social and housing needs are tackled in a programme that facilitates 
independence through the provision of services and accommodation and recognises a 
range of complex issues that impact on women’s exit pathways from homelessness. 
They note, however, that none of the global examples they draw on deal with all 
aspects of women’s homelessness, and no single model provides all the answers. 
 
Gender ‘neutral’ services can also learn from services that are already tailored to the 
needs of women, such as many domestic abuse services. Schwartz et al. (2010) for 
example argue that while studies indicate similar levels of mental health needs and 
trauma exposure among women in homeless shelters and women in domestic 
violence shelters, the mental health services provided by domestic violence shelters 
far outpaced those provided by homeless shelters. 
 
Ultimately, the evidence suggests that the problem of homelessness among women is 
multifaceted and systemic. There are numerous structural issues that negatively 
impact women’s ability to successfully exit homelessness and sustain housing, and 
much of the literature highlights global policies on homelessness that routinely fail to 
address these underlying issues, or even link them to women’s homelessness. Mayock 
(2015) Schwartz et al (2010) and Anderson (2001) point towards lack of access to 
employment opportunities, women’s financial insecurity, delayed and inadequate 
social welfare payments, long waiting lists for specialist services (e.g. mental health, 
drug and alcohol treatment), and societal attitudes towards women as having 
particular impact on women’s risk and experiences of homelessness. As such, policies 
that seek to prevent women’s homelessness need to take a broader approach that 
encompasses addressing these social inequalities, as well change institutional 
structures, cultures and practices. Schwartz et al (2010) make a case for social justice 
approaches to homelessness prevention which “adopt a wide lens that focuses on 
promoting equal access to resources and opportunities and the empowerment of all 


19 
 
individuals threatened by housing instability”, and include both personal and 
environment-centred prevention initiatives.  
 
 
4. WOMEN’S ACCESS TO AFFORDABLE AND ADEQUATE 
HOUSING 
 
The International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) provides 
that every person has the right to an adequate standard of living, which includes 
housing. Every woman has a right not only to a ‘bricks and mortar’ house (Engender 
2020), but to a safe, secure and affordable home, which includes legal security of 
tenure, habitability, affordability, accessibility and a location where access to 
employment options, health care services, schools, childcare centres and other social 
facilities is ensured. Women should also have access to gender-sensitive programmes 
and services which support them in finding and maintaining accommodation 
(Engender 2017). 
 
However, research suggests that women across the globe, including in the UK and 
Scotland, are not having this right realised, and that access to affordable and 
adequate housing is profoundly gendered and intimately linked to women’s poverty 
(Bernard 2010). In the UK and elsewhere, households headed by women are more 
likely to live in overcrowded homes and substandard homes or homes of ‘poor quality’ 
than those headed by men (SWA 2014; UKWBG 2018; Bernard 2010; EHRC 2010) (see 
section 4.2). Analysis by the UK Women’s Budget Group shows that households made 
up of lone women or single female parents are in general overrepresented in less 
advantageous housing circumstances (UKWBG 2018). 
 
Gendered differences are also notable in household tenure and type, and in access to 
the private market (SWA 2014). Households headed by women are overrepresented in 
small homes (with one or two bedrooms), and less likely to be in homes with one or 
more spare bedrooms (UKWBG 2018). Women are also more likely to be reliant on 
social security to cover housing costs (and therefore harder hit by cuts to such 
benefits), are disproportionately dependent on the social rented sector, and less likely 
to qualify for a mortgage or own their own home than single men (UKWBG 2018; 
UNGA 2013; SWA 2014). 
 
4.1 SOCIAL WELFARE AND SOCIAL HOUSING 
 
In the UK and in Scotland, the biggest safety nets to ensure everyone has adequate 
living standards are the social welfare system, and, to a lesser extent in recent 
decades, social housing. However, the UK Women’s Budget Group (2018) argues that 


20 
 
at a UK level, housing has fared worse than almost any government spending area 
since 2010. They note a sharp reduction in overall government spending on housing, 
reductions in housing benefit rates and eligibility (with £14.9 billion worth of cuts 
having been made to benefits, tax credits, pay and pensions since 2010), the highly 
controversial ‘bedroom tax’,7 and a reduction in the size and status of the social 
housing sector. The UK Women’s Budget Group, plus Engender, Scottish Women’s Aid, 
the Women’s Housing Forum, St Mungo’s and the Scottish Government, all argue that 
these cutbacks have had a hugely disproportionate effect on women, removing much 
of women’s housing safety net. Women in the UK are twice as dependent on social 
security payments than men, are more likely to be in receipt of housing benefit than 
men (including dominating the Housing Benefit single payment caseload in 
Scotland)8, and more likely to be hit by the bedroom tax - and as a result researchers 
estimate that at least 74% of welfare cuts have been taken from British women’s 
income (SG 2013a; Foster 2017; UKWBG 2018).9 While the Scottish Government is 
making efforts to plug some of these gaps (for example, by mitigating for the 
bedroom tax, providing additional crisis grants and extending the Scottish Welfare 
fund to include housing benefit for 18-21 year olds) - little analysis exists on how 
much this is helping women’s access to affordable housing in Scotland.  
 
In Scotland and the wider UK, social housing has traditionally been one of the most 
important aspects of the welfare state, and women have historically been 
overrepresented amongst social renters, largely because they are overrepresented 
amongst those on lower incomes and in housing need and amongst homeless families 
(UKWBG 2018 UK). According to the 2010 Scottish Household Survey, in Scotland 
around a third of households with a female head of household are in the social rented 
sector (30%), compared with fewer than one in five households with a male head of 
household (17%). In 1999 32% of households in Scotland occupied social housing. 
This declined rapidly to 23% in 2007 and has remained around that level since (BBC 
2017). An ‘internal review’ by the Scottish Executive in 2007 revealed a series of 
“complex issues around changes in demand for social housing, perceptions that the 
sector was increasingly stigmatised, and that the increased proportion of lettings to 
homeless households constrained any broader housing role, such as implementing 
renewal and regeneration and helping to nurture balanced/sustainable communities” 
(Anderson 2007b).  
 
                                                 
7 The ‘bedroom tax’ is a cut to Housing Benefit and/or Universal Credit for recipients of working age renting in the social housing sector, if they are 
deemed to be occupying a larger property than necessary. It is also known as the underoccupancy rule, or social sector size criteria. 
8 In 2012, women made up 69% of the caseload for those aged under 35, 55% for those aged 35 to 69, and 72% for those aged over 70. Scottish 
Government (2013) The gender impact of welfare reform Scottish Government 
9 Households who are renting headed by lone females are more likely to be in receipt of housing benefit. Of these, 60% are aged 65 years or more. 
The number of single older women reliant on housing benefit is likely a reflection of lower earnings for women over their lifetime as well as time 
out of work caring for dependents leading to lower pension contributions. Similarly, lone mothers who are renting are more likely to be in receipt of 
housing benefit than lone fathers. In total, 68% of lone mother households who are renting their home receive housing benefit (880,291 
households), compared to 49% of lone fathers (87,497 households). This is likely a reflection of lower earnings of women compared to men. Overall, 
68% of all single person households renting and claiming household benefit are headed by a woman. (WHF 2019 England) 


21 
 
However, like homelessness, most of the data around access to social housing is not 
clearly disaggregated by sex and does not take account of men’s and women’s 
gendered experiences, meaning that little is known about the impact of key social 
housing trends and challenges – including key issues around evictions and rent 
arrears – on women.10  Similarly, proposed solutions that aim to grow or at least 
sustain a social housing sector or deal with a backlog – which often suggests 
increased collaboration with the private sector (Anderson 2007; Ng 2018) – tend to 
look at a net population need, rather than particular needs of women or other 
marginalised groups.  
 
4.2 ADEQUATE HOUSING STANDARDS AND WOMEN’S SPECIFIC 
NEEDS 
 
According to Shelter Scotland (2011), a habitable home should be wind and weather 
tight, warm, and have modern facilities. Poor housing conditions include damp, cold, 
infested houses, overcrowding, structurally unsafe houses or housing in need of 
substantial repair, as well as dwellings that fail the Scottish Housing Quality Standard 
(SHQS). When discussing adequate housing, the Committee on Economic, Social and 
Cultural Rights (CESCR Committee) also includes accessibility and location, it must be 
situated to allow access to employment options, health care services, schools, 
childcare centres and other social facilities – applicable to both large cities and rural 
areas.  
 
There is minimal evidence in the research around whether women and men in 
Scotland or the UK more widely have access to the same type and quality of housing. 
One notable exception to this is data on overcrowding; in Scotland, data suggests that 
there is a greater likelihood for women with children to be in overcrowded housing 
compared to men.11 The same data also shows higher rates of poor housing (e.g. 
overcrowded or in need of repairs) for female headed houses with children (12% 
compared to 3% of male headed households with children) (EHRC 2010). More 
information is available on the housing situation of children – which, given the high 
likelihood of children living with their mothers, gives a further indication of the 
housing situation of women. For example, a Shelter Scotland (2011) report on 
children and young people showed that there were 186,000 children living in homes 
in Scotland which have condensation or damp, or both, and one in ten children living 
in overcrowded homes. 
 
Some of the available literature on women and housing also highlights a 
disproportionate negative impact of poor quality housing on women (although a great 
                                                 
10 A recent report by Shelter Scotland (2019) highlights the continued use of evictions by social landlords as a way of dealing with rent arrears. 
However, while the reports notes particular impacts of this trend on children, it does not mention women.  
11 In the Scottish Household Survey for 2005 and 2006, and the Scottish House Condition Survey for 2005/06 to 2007/08), as reported in EHRC - 10% 
of female-headed households with children in Scotland compared to 6% for male households with children were shown to reside in overcrowded 
housing. 


22 
 
deal of the literature on housing and health has very little reference to gendered 
differences). Research by Gabe et al (1993), for example, shows a correlation between 
poor quality housing, flatted housing and overcrowded housing and low levels of 
mental health and emotional wellbeing among women and children. Other 
researchers also highlight potential causal links between overcrowding and mental 
health issues among women (SHIIAN 2013) but note the difficulty of isolating 
particular factors. Re:gender in the USA (2016) note the correlation between insecure, 
dilapidated housing and neighbourhoods with high crime rates that may have a 
particular impact on the likelihood of women experiencing gendered violence in their 
neighbourhood.  
 
Where the research really falls down is women’s differential needs when it comes to 
housing – particularly when it comes to location and accessibility, and when it comes 
to the specific needs of different groups of women. The UK Women’s Budget Group 
(2018) explains that “whether or not they are part of a household including men, 
women may have distinctive housing needs, because on average they have greater 
caring roles, lower wages, and greater risk of intimate partner violence…These could 
affect housing needs in terms of location, tenure, built form, design, cost, housing-
related support and other features”, but very little detail is known about any of these 
aspects of women’s needs.  
 
This is even more the case for specific groups of women, even when it appears 
obvious that they are likely to have a particular set of requirements when it comes to 
housing – such as carers or disabled women. While decent bodies of literature exists 
that examines, for example, LGBTI people’s housing needs, older people’s housing 
needs, or disabled people’s housing needs, very little, if any, of this literature applies 
any gender analysis – so little to nothing is known about older women’s needs or 
preferences, for example. This is despite the fact that a number of papers note 
demographic changes among the UK population that suggests women are likely in the 
future to be over-represented in older people’s housing, and much more likely to 
retire without a full state pension (Women’s Housing Forum 2019). Even the growing 
body of literature on the housing experiences of transgender people in North America 
by and large fails to differentiate between the experiences and needs of transgender 
women and transgender men.  
 
A notable exception to this is literature on refugees and housing, including from the 
Scottish Refugee Council (SRC) and the Refugee Women’s Strategy Group (RWSG) 
which, while still needing more depth, does attempt to look at gendered differences 
for refugee women and different refugee pathways (for men, women and families) 
through housing options. As part of the Scottish Government’s New Scots Strategy 
(2013b) (co-developed with SRC and other third sector organisations), CoSLA (the 
Convention of Scottish Local Authorities) has committed to establishing a working 
group with remit to address ‘move on’ issues faced by new refugees, specifically 


23 
 
taking account of different issues faced by men, women and families. However, 
despite there perhaps being more efforts to assess refugee women’s housing needs, a 
study in Bradford, England (Fuseini 2009) concluded that although there is a wide-
range of housing and health care services for women seeking asylum in Bradford, 
most services do not meet their needs and expectations, mainly because provider-led 
(rather than client led) approaches to running services were used.  
 
4.3 ACCESS TO THE PRIVATE MARKET 
 
Across multiple different national contexts, market-dominated housing policies tend 
to disadvantage women, particularly female-led households (Novac et al. 1996). 
Closely linked to the gender pay gap, there is a gender property gap in terms of both 
women’s ability to rent and buy homes, and the proportion of women’s income spent 
on rent.  On average, women have lower incomes and less capital than men (which 
partly explains why they are less likely to be designated as heads of households) and 
as a result women heads of household, lone parent households, and households made 
up of lone women are predominantly renters, and tend to be overrepresented in less 
advantageous housing circumstances on the private market (UKWBG 2018). 
 
According to Foster (2017) and the Women’s Housing Forum (2019) women’s average 
lower earnings leads to women paying proportionally more in rent, with women in the 
private rented sector in England spending an average of 55% of their income on rent, 
compared with 36% for men. Across a lifetime, this leaves women with much less 
disposable income, more difficulty saving for a deposit, and less financial security. 
Recent research undertaken in the USA by Re:gender shows how the burden of 
housing costs – which are usually the least flexible item in a household budget - has 
a particularly high impact on low-income families. Women on lower incomes are likely 
to have to reduce the amount they spend on essential items (like food and clothing) in 
order to pay rent or mortgage, while middle-income families may have to cut 
discretionary items like savings (Re:gender 2016). In England, the Women’s Housing 
Forum (2019) estimates that almost four in ten single mothers fall below the poverty 
threshold after housing costs. In the US, research by Re:gender (2016) shows that to 
avoid housing cost burdens, many female-headed households “may ‘choose’ to live in 
poor-quality housing, housing inadequate to their needs, or housing situated in 
neighbourhoods marred by crime, violence and high levels of unemployment”.  
 
The Women’s Housing Forum (2019) finds that the impact of the gender pay gap on 
home ownerships is just as stark: for example, a woman on the median income who 
wants to get a mortgage based on the average (mean) house price will need to borrow 
15.4 times their salary, whereas a man on the median income would only need to 
borrow 10.1 times their wage. Cottrell (2019) notes that while on average as many 


24 
 
women enquire about mortgages as men12 far fewer actually qualify for the mortgage 
due to their lower monthly incomes and on average lower savings.13 Across the UK, 
according to Cottrell, the percentage of single UK women holding down mortgages is 
just 10%, almost half the number of single men (17%). Similarly, the 2005 Scottish 
Household Survey showed that 46% of male single parents were buying a property 
with the help of a loan or mortgage compared to 23% of female single parents (SWA 
2014). Interestingly, in her article on home ownership Australia, Ong (2018) finds that 
women are also more likely to sell their family home to pay for financial emergencies 
so are in fact more prone to housing instability even when they own their own home.  
 
In a society structured around homeownership as the ‘ideal’ form of housing, such as 
the UK and Scotland, and where homeownership is one of the main sources of wealth 
accumulation (and wealth inequality), there are a number of knock-on financial, social 
and health and wellbeing effects of not owning your own home, further cementing 
gender inequalities. The UK Women’s Budget group estimate that, primarily due to 
differences in home-ownership rates, by the time people reach their late 60s in the 
UK, the median man has £100,000 more wealth than the median woman. Research 
from the UK, Australia, Canada and Europe also suggests that home ownership is 
associated with a range of positive social impacts, including neighbourhood stability, 
improved mental health among adults and children, lower levels of stress and 
improved life satisfaction, improved educational attainment for children and improved 
physical health (Bridge et al 2003; Bramley & Kofi Karley 2007; Cairney 2005; Carter 
et al. 2005; Dal Grande et al. 2015). Research by Costa-Font (2008) in Spain has gone 
as far as to conclude that housing equity overrides the effect of income as a 
determinant of health and (absence of) disability in old age.  
 
Much of the available policy recommendations around improving the affordability, 
quality and availability of private sector housing in the UK centres around building 
more low cost homes or increasing first time buyers’ access to mortgages (for 
example, shared ownership and right or help to buy schemes),14 plus a growing body 
of literature from organisations such as IPPR on fair renting. However, very little, if 
any, of this contains any specific gender analysis to look at the differential impact of 
such policies on men and women. Researchers such as Cottrell (2019) and the UK 
Women’s Budget Group (2018) think that building and mortgage access policies are 
unlikely to help British women access the housing market. What is needed, according 
to Cottrell and the UKWBG, are radical changes to the rental market, including 
“secure, affordable rental contracts that, unlike mortgage applications, would not 
penalise a single-income person”, a system where renting is not inferior to home 
ownership, more and improved quality and availability of social housing and a social 
welfare system that ceases to actively penalise women.   
                                                 
12 in the 18 to 25 category, women actually enquire more – at 18 per cent vs 15 per cent of men in the same age bracket (Cottrell 2019) 
13 according to research by Money Supermarket, women have substantially less in savings then men (£18,000 vs £26,000 respectively (Cottrell 2019) 
14 The UNGA Special rapporteur on adequate housing made specific reference to Scotland’s elimination of the Right to Buy housing programme, see 
Engender (2020) and https://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/HRC/RegularSessions/Session25/Documents/A_HRC_25_54_Add.2_ENG.DOC 


25 
 
 
 
5. PLANNING, DECISION-MAKING AND BUDGETING  
 
There are a small number of examples from countries such as Austria and Australia 
that show how gender considerations can be incorporated into both urban planning 
and the planning and design of new homes. The City of Vienna has developed a 
comprehensive manual on gender mainstreaming in urban planning and urban 
development, which includes a list of criteria15 to evaluate the gender equity and 
suitability of new housing projects, entrusted to a gender expert of their Executive 
Group for Construction and Technology (Damyanovic et al. 2013). An example of such 
a project is Vienna’s  ‘Women-Work-City’, which, working from time use surveys 
compiled by Statistik Austria, the Austrian national statistics office, has been designed 
and built to address specific needs of women. This has included ensuring a variety of 
typologies of living spaces, and an on-site kindergarten, pharmacy and doctor’s office. 
The complex also stands in close proximity to public transit to make running errands 
and getting to school and work easier (Foran 2013). Similarly, a study in rural New 
South Wales, Australia, looked at the housing-related aspirations of older women who 
were not homeowners, identifying the need for green space and the ability to 
accommodate visiting family members (WHF 2019).  
 
However, most of the literature that looks at women and gender focuses on pathways 
into homelessness, and doesn’t look at the planning, decision-making and budgeting 
end of the housing spectrum at all. Further, there is very limited evidence or research 
to suggest that gender is considered within Scottish or UK housing planning or 
development either by researchers or decision-makers, or that any concerted efforts 
are being made to involve women in designing or developing affordable, suitable 
housing models. A good practice guide on creating and sustaining mixed income 
communities in Scotland by the Chartered Institute of Housing and the Joseph 
Rowntree Foundation in 2007 makes reference to gender only in terms of the social 
and economic benefits arising from the intermixing of different types of residents 
(Bailey et al. 2007). 
 
More exists on gender concerns within wider town planning or urban public space 
design discourse in the UK, which does contain some reference to women and housing 
                                                 
15 List of criteria to evaluate the gender equity and suitability to meet everyday needs of housing projects:  Manageable size of residential 
community; Clearly organised entrance zones, allowing for contact (sight or earshot) with the surrounding flats; Barrier-free entrances/exits to 
garden or courtyard; Natural lighting for corridors and staircases; Communication-enhancing circulation areas; Clearly organised car park with direct 
access and Natural lighting for car park; Cross-ventilation; Rooms >10 sq m, b >2.5 m; Flexible use for B-type flats; Direct natural lighting and 
ventilation of kitchens; Sufficiently dimensioned storerooms or storage niches; Attractive communal rooms; Attractive playrooms for children; 
Sufficiently dimensioned and conveniently located storage rooms for bicycles and prams; Conveniently located waste bin storerooms; Attractive 
laundry rooms; Sufficiently dimensioned and easily accessible storage rooms. All projects pursued similar goals: Facilitating housework and family 
tasks; Promoting good-neighbourly contacts; Creating a housing environment where residents can move safely even at night; Providing the widest 
possible range of different flat layouts; Economical and flexible flat layouts offering options for women with lower incomes; Attractive range of 
private and semi-public open spaces; Good range of social infrastructure facilities; Promoting the work of women planners (Vienna 2013) 
 


26 
 
design. For example, the 2003 Gender Mainstreaming Toolkit developed by The Royal 
Town Planning Institute for English Local Planning Authorities makes some useful 
observations about the correlation between higher cost housing types (such as urban 
conservation policies that favour the retention of Victorian houses as single dwellings 
rather than as divided units) and women’s income disparity. 
 
Similarly little analysis is available on women in design and housing decision-making 
positions in the UK and Scotland. The Women’s Housing Forum (2019b) note that just 
one in five designers are women in the UK, and that women are under-represented in 
all design disciplines, including architecture, civil engineering, town planning, 
software design, fashion and product design. The Women’s Housing Forum also found 
that in England women are under-represented on housing association boards (36%), 
executive teams (39%) and among chief executives (34%). There’s some growing 
attention on community-led and co-housing projects in England, Wales and Scotland 
(CLH 2018; Demos 2005), within which it appears women may be playing active and 
leadership roles, but little has been written on the gender dynamics or impacts of 
these projects. A 2005 report by Demos goes as far as to suggest that such projects 
have the potential for transforming gender roles, but does not go into any depth on 
how this may be the case.   
 
Beyond the analysis available from the UK Women’s Budget Group (2018), gender is 
rarely if ever mentioned in discussions of national housing budgets, and we could find 
little to no mention of good practice on housing budgeting beyond the main 
principles of gender-based budgeting, nor any examples of application of gender-
based budgeting when it comes to housing.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


27 
 
 
6. CONCLUSION AND KEY GAPS IN THE RESEARCH 
 
Women, housing and homelessness remains an under-researched area. While there is 
a growing body of literature, this tends to be focused on particular areas such as the 
relationship between domestic abuse and homelessness, or is filling in particular gaps 
in knowledge around women’s pathways into homelessness, rather than taking a 
gendered lens to the whole continuum of housing. As a result, very little information 
is available on policy responses that take into account women’s experiences of 
housing and homelessness. Even within the mainstream (non-gendered) literature, 
much more is known about who becomes homeless and the experience of 
homelessness than the process of moving out of homelessness, or policies that help 
people sustain adequate housing (Anderson 2011).  
 
There are also a number of significant gaps around the housing needs of particular 
groups of women, including but not limited to BME women, disabled women, refugee 
women, carers and mothers separated from their children, which serve to further 
marginalise and exclude these groups from policy responses on adequate and 
affordable housing 
 
 
We would recommend that the following areas are 
considered for further research: 
 
 Research into the housing experiences, trajectories 
and needs of particular groups of women, including 
BME women, carers, older women, women exiting the 
criminal justice system and refugee women; 
 
 A fuller assessment of how recent policy, budgeting 
and economic changes have affected women’s housing 
status in Scotland, particularly with regard to tenure 
type and relative security of housing, living standards 
and habitability and location of housing, and how (if at 
all) gender is taken into consideration in the housing 
budgeting process in Scotland; 


28 
 
 
 
 More information on homeless women’s experiences of 
services, both inside and outside of the prism of 
domestic abuse services, including new case studies of 
Scottish local authority service provision, and 
assessments of how well-integrated housing services 
are with other more gender-informed services; 
 
 Analysis of the comparative effectiveness of different 
policy approaches for women in particular, including 
temporary shelter, specialist support services (such as 
services tailored for addiction or domestic abuse), and 
social housing and private sector access schemes; 
 
 More research that looks at both single women and 
female headed households, particularly in relation to 
access and suitability of housing services, and 
longitudinal studies that look at women’s pathways 
into securing long-term sustainable housing, tracking 
moves out of homelessness over longer periods of 
time; 
 
 Research into gender-sensitive, affordable housing 
design models, and where in Scotland and the UK 
organisations and agencies are beginning – if at all – 
to incorporate gender assessments in their design and 
planning , and the role women are playing in 
community-led housing projects, as well as any 
impacts this has on the nature of the housing. 


29 
 
7. BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 
Association of Local Authority Chief Housing Officers (ALACHO), the Chartered 
Institute of Housing (CIH), the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations (SFHA), 
Shelter Scotland and Scottish Women’s Aid. (2019). Domestic Abuse: a good practice 
guide for social landlords. 
 
Anderson, I. (2001). Pathways through homelessness: Towards a dynamic analysis. 
Seminar paper, May, Urban Frontiers Program, University of Western Sydney, Sydney. 
 
Anderson, I. (2007a) Tackling street homelessness in Scotland: the evolution and 
impact of the Rough Sleepers Initiative, Journal of Social Issues, 63(3), pp623-640. 
 
Anderson, I. (2007b) Sustainable Solutions to Homelessness: the Scottish Case. 
European Journal of Homelessness, Volume 1, December 2007 
 
Bailey, N., Haworth, A., Manzi, T. and Roberts, M. (2007) Creating and sustaining 
mixed 
income communities in Scotland: A good practice guide. The Chartered Institute of 
Housing Scotland and Joseph Rowntree Foundation. Retrieved from: 
https://www.jrf.org.uk/sites/default/files/jrf/migrated/files/1946-mixed-income-
communities-scotland.pdf 
 
Baptista, I. (2010) Women and homelessness. In E. O’Sullivan, V. Busch-Geerstema, D. 
Quilgars & 
N. Pleace (Eds) Homelessness Research in Europe. Brussels: FEANTSA. pp. 163-186. 
 
Batty, E.; Casey, R. and Reeve, K. (2010) ‘On the Streets: Sex Workers and 
Homelessness’ Gender Perspectives on Homelessness Homeless in Europe, FEANTSA 
Spring 2010 
 
BBC (2017) 12 stats showing how Scotland’s households are changing. Retrieved 
from: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-41397873 
 
Bernard, Nicolas (2010) “The gender of housing deprivation in Belgium” Gender 
Perspectives on Homelessness Homeless in Europe, FEANTSA Spring 2010 
 
Bowpitt, G., Dwyer. P., Sundin, E., & Weinstein, M. (2011). The Home Study: 
Comparing 
the priorities of multiple exclusion homeless people and support agencies. Salford: 
University of Salford 
 


30 
 
Bramley, G., & Kofi Karley, N. (2007). Homeownership, poverty and educational 
achievement: School effects as neighbourhood effects. Housing Studies , 22 (5), 693-
721. UK 
 
Bretherton, J. & Pleace, N (2018) Women and Rough Sleeping : A Critical Review of 
Current Research and Methodology. Research Report. University of York , York. 
Retrieved from: 
http://eprints.whiterose.ac.uk/138075/1/Women_and_Rough_Sleeping_Report_2018.pd
f 
 
Bridge, C., Cockburn- Campbell, J., Flatau, P., Whelan, S., Wood, G., Yates, J. (2003) 
Housing assistance and non-shelter outcomes , AHURI Final Report No. 40, Australian 
Housing and Urban Research Institute Limited, Melbourne, 
http://www.ahuri.edu.au/research/final-reports/40 
 
Burnet, Gudrun (2017) Domestic Abuse and Housing: International Practice and 
Perspectives. Winston Churchill Fellowship  
 
Busch-Geertsema, V., Edgar, W., O’Sullivan, E. and Pleace, N. (2010) Homelessness 
and Homeless Policies in Europe: Lessons from Research (Brussels: Directorate-
General for Employment, Social Affairs and Equal Opportunities). 
 
Cairney, J. (2005). Housing tenure and psychological well-being during adolescence. 
Environment and Behavior, 37 (4), 552- 564.  
 
Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation (CMCH) (2018) Housing Research Report,  
Women and Housing: Identifying Themes  
 
Carter, S., Paterson, J., & Williams, M. (2005). Housing Tenure: Pacific Families in New 
Zealand. Urban Policy and Research, 23:4, 413-428. New Zealand 
 
Casey, S. (2001). ‘Snakes and Ladders: Women’s Pathways Into and Out of Homeless’ 
in Eardley, T. & Bradbury, B. Competing Visions: Refereed Proceedings of the National 
Social Policy Conference 2001, SPRC Report 1/02, Kensington: Social Policy Research 
Centre, University of New South Wales. 75-90 
 
Chartered Institute of Housing and Joseph Rowntree Foundation (2007) Creating and 
sustaining mixed income communities: a good practice guide. Retrieved from: 
https://www.jrf.org.uk/sites/default/files/jrf/migrated/files/9781905018314.pdf 
 
Chityil, Bea (2010) “Homelessness in Europe: The Role of Gender Equality Policies” 
Gender Perspectives on Homelessness Homeless in Europe, FEANTSA Spring 2010 
 


31 
 
Cottrell, Anna (2019) “Single women excluded from home ownership” Real Homes  
 
Dal Grande, E., Chittleborough, C. R., Wu, J., Shi, Z., Goldney, R. D., & Taylor, A. W. 
(2015). Effect of social mobility in family financial situation and housing tenure on 
mental health conditions among South Australian adults: results from a population 
health surveillance system, 2009 to 2011. BMC Public Health, 15(1),  
 
Damyanovic, D., Reinwald, F., and Weikmann, A. (2013) Manual for Gender 
Mainstreaming in Urban Planning and Urban Development. Urban Development 
Vienna, City of Vienna 
 
Demos (2005) COMMUNITY BUILDERS. Retrieved from: 
https://demos.co.uk/project/community-builders-report/ 
 
Edgar, B. & Doherty, J. (2001). Women and homelessness in Europe: Pathways, 
services and experiences. Bristol: The Policy Press. 
 
Enders-Dragässer, Uta  (2010) “Women and Homelessness in Germany” Gender 
Perspectives on Homelessness Homeless in Europe, FEANTSA Spring 2010 
 
Engender (2017) Submission of evidence on homelessness to Scottish Parliament 
Local Government and Communities Committee  
 
Engender (2020) A Woman’s Place: Gender, Housing and Homelessness in Scotland 
 
Equality and Human Rights Commission (2010) Triennial Review 2010 How fair is 
Britain? Equality, Human Rights and Good Relations in 2010 
 
FEANTSA (2010) Homelessness and Violence Against Women Addressing the Link and 
Responding Effectively. Retrieved from: 
https://www.feantsa.org/download/homelessness_and_vaw_final_en36893196081597
06711.pdf  
 
Fitzpatrick, S., Kemp, P., and Klinker, S. (2000) Single Homelessness: An Overview of 
Research in Britain. Bristol: Policy Press. 
 
Foran, Clare (2013) How to Design a City for Women 
 
Foster, Dawn. (2017) “Housing is a women's issue: the facts” The Guardian  
 
Fotheringham, S., Walsh, C. A., & Burrowes, A. (2014). ‘A place to rest’: The role of 
transitional housing in ending homelessness for women in Calgary, Canada. Gender, 
Place & Culture, 21(7), 834-853. 


32 
 
 
Fuseini, S. (2009) Experiences of Asylum-Seeking Women on Housing and Health-Care 
Services in Bradford (Laurea University) 
 
Gabe J and Williams, P. (1993) Women, crowding and mental health. In: Burridge R, 
Ormandy, D., editor. Unhealthy housing: research, remedies and reform. London: E & FN 
Spon 
 
Gibb, K. (2015) Housing policy in Scotland since devolution: divergence, crisis, 
integration and opportunity. Journal of Poverty and Social Justice, 23(1), pp. 19-42 
 
Goodlad, R. (2005) Scottish Homelessness Policy: Advancing Social Justice ? Scottish 
Affairs 50, winter pp. 86-105." 
 
Grace, M., Malone, J. and Murphy, A. (2016) 'Transferability of the youth foyer model 
for women 
exiting the criminal justice system', Journal of Social Work, 16(4), pp. 470-488. 
 
Holleman, W.L., Bray, J.H., Davis, L., & Holleman, M. (2004). Innovative Ways to 
Address the Mental Health and Medical Needs of Marginalized Patients: 
Collaborations Between Family Physicians, Family Therapists, and Family 
Psychologists. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 74(3), 242-252" 
 
Institute for Public Policy Research (IPPR) Housing and Infrastructure research. 
Retrieved from: https://www.ippr.org/research/topics/housing-
infrastructure?&page_manualSearch=6 
 
Jerome, K., Heffernan, M., Adkins, B., Greenhalgh, E., & Minnery, J. (2003). Women, 
housing and transitions out of homelessness—Stage 2 Report. Report to the 
Commonwealth Office of the 
Status of Women 
 
Kintrea, K. (2006) Having it all? Housing reform under devolution, Housing Studies 21 
(2) pp. 187-207 
 
Klinker, S., Fitzpatrick, S., Mitchell, F., Dean, J. and Burns, N. (2000) A review of single 
homelessness research: research summaries. Bristol: The Policy Press.  
 
Leeds Community Homes (LCH) (2018) Promoting Community-Led Housing 
 
Martins, Ana (2010) Gender and Homelessness: Homeless Women in Lisbon Gender 
Perspectives on Homelessness Homeless in Europe, FEANTSA Spring 2010 
 


33 
 
May, J., Cloke, P. & Johnsen, S. (2007). ‘Alternative cartographies of homelessness: 
Rendering visible British women’s experiences of ‘visible’ homelessness’. Gender, 
Place and Culture. 121-140. 
 
Mayock, P., Parker, S., Sheridan, S. (2012) Migrant Women and Homelessness: The 
Role of Gender-based Violence. European Journal of Homelessness _ Volume 6, No. 1, 
August 2012  
 
Mayock, P., Parker, S., Sheridan, S. (2015) Women, Homelessness and Service 
Provision, Simon Communities  
 
McNaughton, C. (2008). Transitions Through Homelessness, Lives on the Edge. 
Hampshire, 
New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 
 
Minnery, J. and Greenhalgh, Emma (2007) Approaches to Homelessness Policy in 
Europe, the United States, and Australia. Journal of Social Issues 63(3)  
 
Ng, Karen (2018) “6 things we’ve learnt about the housing needs of vulnerable 
women” 
bigsocietycapital.com  
 
Novac, Sylvia, Brown, Joyce and Bourbonnais, Carmen. (1996) No Room of Her Own: A 
Literature Review on Women and Homelessness, Canadian Housing Information 
Centre. 
 
Ong, Rachel (2018) Home ownership foundations are being shaken, and the impacts 
will be felt far and wide, theconversation.com 
 
Pawson, H., Davidson, E. & Netto, G. (2007) Evaluation of homelessness prevention 
activities in Scotland (Edinburgh : Scottish Executive Development Department). 
  
Pleace, N. (2016) ‘Exclusion by Definition: The Under-representation of Women in 
European Homelessness Statistics’ pp.105-126 in eds. Pleace, N. and Bretherton, J. 
Women and homelessness in Europe, London: Palgrave Macmillan 
 
Policy Research Institution Ageing and Ethnicity PRIAE (2003) Minority Elderly Care in 
Europe 
 
Ponic, P., Varcoe, C., Davies, L., Ford-Gilboe, M., Wuest, J., & Hammerton, J. (2011). 
Leaving ≠ Moving: Housing Patterns of Women Who Have Left an Abusive Partner. 
Violence Against Women, 17(12), 1576–1600. 
 


34 
 
PRECIS (2004) Housing and support needs of older lesbian, gay, bisexual and 
transgender (LGBT) people in Scotland 
 
Prison Reform Trust (2018) Home truths: housing for women in the criminal justice 
system 
Revised June 2018  
 
Quinn, Sheila (2009) Gender budgeting: practical implementation handbook. 
Directorate General of Human Rights and Legal Affairs Council of Europe 
 
Raftery, Lisa (2017) Why a Gendered Approach to Supporting Women Experiencing 
Homelessness with Histories of Violence is Vital. Safelives. Retrieved from: 
http://safelives.org.uk/practice_blog/why-gendered-approach-supporting-women-
experiencing-homelessness-histories-violence   
 
Re:gender (2016) A Gender Lens on Affordable Housing  
 
Reeve, Kesia (2018) Women and homelessness: putting gender back on the agenda. 
Sheffield Hallam University. https://extra.shu.ac.uk/ppp-online/wp-
content/uploads/2018/01/women-homelessness-putting-gender-on-the-agenda.pdf 
 
Rich, A. R. and Clark, C. (2005) 'Gender differences in response to homelessness 
services', Evaluation and Program Planning, 28(1), pp. 69-81 
 
Rollins, J. H., Saris, R. N., & Joston-Robledo, I. (2001). Low-income women speak out 
about housing: A high-stakes game of musical chairs. Journal of Social Issues: 57(2), 
277-298 
 
Royal Town Planning Institute, The (2003) Gender Equality and Plan Making: Gender 
Mainstreaming Toolkit  
 
Sanderson, Daniel (2015) New report finds women hardest hit by cuts to welfare 
budget. The Herald. Retrieved from:  
https://www.heraldscotland.com/news/13415835.new-report-finds-women-hardest-
hit-by-cuts-to-welfare-budget/ 
 
Savage, M. (2016). ‘Gendering Women’s Homelessness’. Irish Journal of Applied Social 
Studies. 44-65. 
 
Schwartz, J., Chapman, S., González, L. and Lindley, L.  (2010) “Addressing the 
Problem of Women and Homelessness” Gender Perspectives on Homelessness 
Homeless in Europe, FEANTSA Spring 2010 
 


35 
 
Scottish Executive Social Research (2006) Time to Move? A Literature Review of 
Housing for Older People 
 
Scottish Government (SG) (2010), Domestic abuse, housing and homelessness in 
Scotland: An evidence review, Scottish Government Communities Analytical Services, 
Scotland 
Retrieved from: http://www.gov.scot/Resource/Doc/328505/0106198.pdf) 
 
Scottish Government (SG) (2011) Scotland’s People’s Annual Report: Results from 
2009/2010 Household Survey. Retrieved from: 
https://www.gov.scot/publications/scotlands-people-annual-report-results-2009-
2010-scottish-household-survey/ 
 
Scottish Government (SG) (2013a) Equality Outcomes: Gender Evidence Review 
 
Scottish Government (SG) (2013b) New Scots: Integrating Refugees in Scotland’s 
Communities 2014 – 2017 
 
Scottish Refugee Council (2016) Written evidence submitted by the Scottish Refugee 
Council Evidence given to the Home Affairs Committee inquiry on asylum 
accommodation 
 
Scottish Refugee Council What we do – policy and research. Retrieved from: 
https://www.scottishrefugeecouncil.org.uk/working-for-change/policy-campaigns/ 
 
Scottish Women’s Aid (SWA) (2014) Commission on Housing and Wellbeing 
Consultation 2014 
Submission from Scottish Women’s Aid 
 
Scottish Women’s Aid (SWA). (2015). Change, Justice, Fairness: Why should we have to 
move everywhere and everything because of him? Retrieved from: 
https://womensaid.scot/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/Change-Justice-Fairness.pdf 
 
Shelter Scotland (2011) Research report The facts: bad housing and homelessness for 
children and young people in Scotland. Retrieved from: 
http://scotland.shelter.org.uk/professional_resources/policy_library/policy_library_fo 
lder/the_facts_bad_housing_and_homelessness_for_children_and_young_people_i 
n_scotland_2011 
 
Shelter Scotland. (2019a). Policy positions. Retrieved from: 
https://scotland.shelter.org.uk/housing_policy/policy_positions 
 


36 
 
Shelter Scotland (2019b) Evictions by social landlords in Scotland 2016-2018. 
Retrieved from: 
https://scotland.shelter.org.uk/professional_resources/policy_library/policy_library_fold
er/evictions_by_social_landlords_in_scotland_2016-2018 
 
SHIIAN (2013) Health Impact Assessment of Housing Improvements 
 
Spicer, S., Schwartz, A., Barber, M. (2010) Special issue on homelessness and the 
transgender homeless population. J Gay Lesbian Mental Health 2010;14:267–270. 
 
Spicker (1991) Access to social housing in Scotland a survey of local authorities’ and 
housing associations’ allocation policies. Shelter Scottish Campaign for Homeless 
People 
 
Spinney, A., Blandy, S. and Hulse, K (2013) Preventing homelessness for women and 
children who have experienced domestic and family violence Retrieved from: 
https://www.ahuri.edu.au/research/research-and-policy-bulletins/164 
 
Stephens, M., Fitzpatrick, S., Elsinga, M., van Steen, G. and Chzhen, Y. (2010) Study on 
Housing Exclusion: Welfare Policies, Housing Provision and Labour Markets (Brussels: 
European Commission, Directorate-General for Employment, Social Affairs and Equal 
Opportunities). 
 
St Mungo’s (2014) Rebuilding shattered lives. Retrieved from: 
https://www.mungos.org/publication/rebuilding-shattered-lives-final-report/ 
 
Szoboszlai, Katalin (2010) “Homeless Women in Hungary” Gender Perspectives on 
Homelessness Homeless in Europe, FEANTSA Spring 2010 
 
Third, H., and Yanetta, A., (2000), Homelessness in Scotland: a summary of research 
evidence, Edinburgh: Scottish Homes. 
 
UK Women’s Budget Group (UKWBG) (2018) Housing and Gender Briefing from the UK 
Women’s Budget Group on the gender impact of changes in housing policy since 2010 
 
United Nations General Assembly. (2013). Report of the Special Rapporteur on 
adequate housing as a component of the right to an adequate standard of living, and 
on the right to non-discrimination in this context, Raquel Rolnik. Retrieved from: 
<https://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/HRC/RegularSessions/Session25/Documents/A_
HRC_25_54_Add.2_ENG.DOC> 
 
Watson, S. and H. Austerberry (1986) Housing and homelessness: a feminist 
perspective. Routledge Studies 3.2, 81-93. 


37 
 
Women’s Aid (2018) Nowhere To Turn 2018  
 
Women's Housing Forum (2019a) Women, Money and Housing Report  
 
Women’s Housing Forum (2019b) Women and design factsheet 
 
Wong, Y., Culhane, D., and Kuhn, R. (1997) Predictors of Exit and Re-entry among 
Family Shelter Users in New York City, Social Service Review, 71, 441-62. 
 
Young, S. (2010) Gender perspectives on homelessness. Homelessness in Europe – 
The Magazine 
of FEANTSA, Spring. Brussels: FEANTSA 
 
Zufferey, Carole (2010) “The gendered nature of homelessness service interventions: 
An Australian study” Homelessness in Europe – The Magazine of FEANTSA, Spring. 
Brussels: FEANTSA 
 
Zufferey, C., Chung, D., Franzway, S., Wendt, S., & Moulding, N. (2016). Intimate 
partner violence and housing: Eroding women's citizenship. Affilia: Journal of Women 
& Social Work, 31(4), 463-478. 
 
Zugazaga, C. (2004). Stressful life event experiences of homeless adults: A 
comparison of single men, single women, and women with children. Journal of 
Community Psychology, 32(6), 643-654.