•	 Far too many women are drawn into the criminal 
justice system. Arrests of women, which are 
the first point of contact with the criminal justice 
system, fell by 1,785 to 97,117 in the year 
ending 31 March 2019. This is a welcome start, 
but police forces should do more to reduce the 
unnecessary criminalisation of women 
•	 The APPG received original and detailed evidence 
from five police forces in England and Wales 
providing anonymised data on more than 600 
arrests of women over specified periods of time
•	 Analysis of the data provided by forces showed 
that 40 per cent of arrests of women resulted in 
no further action. This suggests that thousands 
of women each year are arrested, held in police 
custody and then released without charge, 
which is an unnecessary and wasteful use of 
police resources
•	 There were 50,374 arrests of women for non-
violent incidents in the year ending 31 March 2019
•	 There were more than 43,000 arrests of women 
for alleged violence in the year ending 31 
March 2019. Evidence provided by police forces 
showed that around half of arrests of women 
for alleged violence resulted in no further action. 
Further investigation is needed to explain the 
high number of arrests of women for alleged 
violent offences. Police need to be responding 
to incidents of alleged violence in a gender-
informed way 
•	 Black and ethnic minority women are more than 
twice as likely to be arrested as white women. 
A reduction in the arrests of women must also 
lead to a reduction in disproportionality
•	 All forces should adopt a set of principles 
for policing women taking into account the 
factors that bring women into contact with the 
police and preventing criminalisation when it is 
unnecessary and inappropriate
•	 Some women come into conflict with the police 
when they need support. Rather than arresting 
them, police should be diverting them to 
services that can address their needs 
•	 There are examples of good practice where 
forces are doing things differently and not 
making arrests, providing women with a way 
out of – rather than a way into – the criminal 
justice system.
Key points
Briefing Two
All Party Parliamentary Group on 
Women in the Penal System
Arresting the entry of women into 
the criminal justice system


Introduction 
The All Party Parliamentary Group (APPG) 
on Women in the Penal System launched 
an inquiry in May 2019 to investigate what 
could be done to reduce arrests of women 
in England and Wales and stem the flow 
of women into the criminal justice system. 
The APPG is chaired by Jackie Doyle-Price 
MP, Debbie Abrahams MP, and Baroness 
Corston. It receives administrative and 
research support from the Howard League 
for Penal Reform.
As part of its inquiry, the APPG has held oral 
evidence sessions with expert witnesses, 
investigating examples of good practice in 
reducing arrests of women. An initial briefing 
paper was published in 2019. This is the 
inquiry’s second briefing paper. 
The APPG inquiry is complemented by a 
programme of work by the Howard League for 
Penal Reform, which is conducting a three-
year programme, supported by Lloyds Bank 
Foundation, to arrest the entry of women into 
the criminal justice system. 
1. Too many women are being drawn 
into the criminal justice system 
Far too many women are being drawn into the 
criminal justice system when it is inappropriate 
and unnecessary. Women account for about 
one in seven adult arrests. Arrests of women, 
which are the first point of contact with the 
criminal justice system, fell by 1,785 to 
97,117 in the year ending 31 March 2019. 
This is a welcome start, but police forces 
could do more to reduce the unnecessary 
criminalisation of women. 
There were more than 50,000 arrests of 
women for non-violent offences in the year 
ending 31 March 2019, including more than 
20,000 arrests for theft and almost 7,000 
arrests for public order offences. 
Evidence provided by police forces showed 
that many arrests of women resulted in no 
further action. Thousands of women are 
being arrested and held in police custody 
then released with no further action. As the 
examples that follow demonstrate, police 
forces could be dealing with women differently 
and do not need to always arrest. Current 
practice is expensive, a waste of police time, 
and abusive towards women. 
2. Evidence on arrests
The Howard League has held a series of 
meetings with senior police officers as part 
of its programme to reduce the arrests of 
women. Following these meetings, five forces 
agreed to provide anonymised data on 
arrests of women to inform the APPG inquiry 
on reducing arrests. The forces varied in 
terms of size, population and geography:
•	 Police force A: A large police force policing 
an ethnically diverse metropolitan area 
with a population of almost 3 million
•	 Police force B: A large force policing a 
population of more than 1 million living in 
urban and rural areas, including areas of 
high deprivation
•	 Police force C: A medium-sized police 
force policing a population of about 
600,000 living in both rural and urban 
areas
•	 Police force D: A large police force policing 
an economically diverse population of 
more than 1 million in rural and urban 
areas
•	 Police force E: A large police force policing 
a population of more than 1 million in rural, 
urban and metropolitan areas.
The forces provided anonymised data on 
more than 640 arrests of women and girls. 
It included information on more than 300 
arrests of women for alleged violent offences 
and more than 200 arrests for alleged 
incidents involving a partner or close family 
member. Some forces provided data on 
incidents flagged by officers as alleged 
domestic abuse.
The anonymised information included the 
circumstances of the incident that resulted 
in arrest, the reasons given for making the 
arrests and the outcomes that followed. The 
APPG on Women in the Penal System is 
extremely grateful to the forces who provided 
this unique resource of evidence to the inquiry.


3. Analysis of arrests
The anonymised data provided by the five 
police forces showed that 40 per cent of the 
arrests of women and girls resulted in no 
further action (NFA). The percentage was 
even higher for arrests for alleged violent 
offences, with more than half resulting in no 
further action. For incidents which involved a 
partner or close family member it was more 
than 60 per cent.
While the forces did not provide standardised 
snapshots of arrests, the pattern of extensive 
NFAs can be seen in all the evidence provided.
Police force A provided information on 
37 cases of arrests of females for alleged 
violence in the month of January 2020. This 
revealed that 18 arrests resulted in NFA. 
Nineteen of the arrests were in relation to 
an alleged assault on a partner or a family 
member, of which 12 resulted in NFA. 
Police force B provided information on 100 
arrests of females for a range of alleged 
offences in the month of February 2020. Fifty-
five arrests were for non-violent offences, 
including 12 for alleged theft. Forty-two arrests 
were for allegations of violence against the 
person, of which 23 resulted in NFA. Twenty-
nine arrests were flagged as ‘DA’ – domestic 
abuse related incidents – of which 17 resulted 
in NFA. 
Police force C provided information on 55 
arrests of females for alleged assaults in the 
month of January 2020 of which 28 arrests 
resulted in NFA. Twenty-four arrests were 
in relation to alleged domestic violence 
incidents, of which 20 resulted in NFA.
Police force D provided information on 64 
arrests of females for alleged offences of 
violence in the month of January 2020, of 
which 17 arrests resulted in release without 
charge. Thirty arrests were in relation 
to alleged assault on a partner or family 
member, of which 14 resulted in release 
without charge. 
Police force E provided information on 401 
arrests of females for a range of offences 
in the month of January 2020, of which 169 
resulted in NFA.  
There were 172 arrests for non-violent 
offences, including theft and being drunk 
and disorderly in a public place. There were 
131 arrests for alleged violent offences, 77 of 
which resulted in NFA. Eighty-three of the 119 
arrests tagged as domestic-related incidents 
resulted in NFA.
Every year, thousands of women are arrested 
for alleged offences that are non-violent. 
Fifty-two per cent of the arrests of women 
in the year ending 31 March 2019 were for 
non-violent offences. There were 20,928 
arrests for theft and 6,959 arrests for public 
order offences. A further 6,475 arrests were 
for alleged miscellaneous crimes against 
society.
The evidence submitted by the five police 
forces provided numerous examples where 
women were arrested for alleged non-violent 
offences. For example:
•	 A woman was arrested for being drunk and 
disorderly. She was allegedly shouting 
and swearing in the street after her friend 
refused to let her stay in her house
•	 A woman was arrested after she walked 
into a main road repeatedly
•	 A woman was arrested for trespassing on 
railway property. She was allegedly drunk 
and was known to have mental health 
problems
•	 A woman was arrested for begging 
outside a supermarket
•	 A woman was arrested for allegedly 
stealing cleaning products from a shop
Police have operational discretion over the 
decision to arrest. There are still too many 
women being arrested when they do not 
need to be.  Women who are drunk, behaving 
badly or putting themselves at risk could be 
sent – or even taken – home and do not need 
to be arrested or diverted to other services. 
Police forces are often being asked to deal 
with problems which other public services 
have failed to resolve, such as mental ill-health, 
drug and alcohol addiction, homelessness or 


unstable accommodation. Women facing a 
mental health crisis are likely to be a danger to 
themselves rather than others and do not need 
arresting. 
If women do need support, arresting them 
for begging or shop theft will not tackle 
underlying issues causing poverty and may 
even drive women further into the criminal 
justice system if they end up with fines which 
they have no means to pay.
Evidence from police forces showed that 
some forces were conducting more than 400 
arrests in a month. Forces should examine 
their own data on arrests of women, including 
outcomes, to see where arrest decisions 
were unnecessary.
4.  Arrests for alleged violence
Too many women are being drawn into the 
criminal justice system after being arrested 
for alleged violent offences. There were more 
than 43,000 arrests for alleged violence 
in the year ending 31 March 2019. A large 
proportion of arrests of women for alleged 
violence result in no further action and around 
1,300 women will go on to receive a court-
ordered supervision or custodial sentence 
for violence in a year, a tiny percentage of all 
those arrested for alleged violent offences. 
Further investigation is needed to explain 
the anomaly of the high number of arrests of 
women for violence.
Data obtained by the Howard League showed 
that at least 19,000 of the arrests of women 
for alleged violence resulted in no further 
action. As outlined above, the evidence 
received from the five police forces supports 
this finding.
The five forces provided data on 317 arrests 
of women for alleged violent incidents. More 
than half of the arrests for alleged violence 
(163) resulted in no further action or release 
without charge.
There were 221 arrests tagged as an alleged 
domestic abuse incident or in relation to an 
alleged assault of a partner or close family 
member. They included arrests for common 
assault and criminal damage. Of the 221 
arrests, more than 60 per cent (146) resulted 
in no further action or release without charge. 
It seems little has changed since a study on 
domestic abuse and gender (Hester, 2013) 
found that women were three times more 
likely than men to be arrested in domestic 
violence cases.
Women’s organisations working with women 
arrested for violent offences reported that 
many were victims of domestic abuse 
themselves. Evidence provided by the five 
police forces showed that sometimes when 
women contacted the police regarding a 
domestic incident it resulted in their own 
arrest. Examples from the evidence included:
•	 A woman had called the police. Her 
partner had returned home after losing all 
his money. The partner alleged she had 
pushed him and thrown his belongings 
out the house, damaging his glasses and 
tearing his jumper. She was arrested for 
alleged common assault and criminal 
damage to property under £5,000. Both 
arrests resulted in no further action.
•	 A woman called the police about domestic 
abuse. When the police arrived, her 
partner alleged she had threatened to 
kill him and she was arrested. She was 
released with no further action.
The importance of this for police forces 
should be clear. In addition to the data-
gathering exercise with the five police forces 
detailed above, the Howard League asked a 
police force to conduct an analysis of its data 
on arrests of women and girls over a two-year 
period. This found that almost three quarters 
of the women arrested by the force had 
previously come to the attention of the police 
as a victim of violence or sexual violence. 
More than half of them had been victims of 
domestic abuse.
One senior police officer described women’s 
use of violence as ‘defensive violence’, used 
when women felt threatened by their partner 
or by the police. 
Police forces have taken steps to prioritise 
their response to alleged domestic abuse. 
The 
College 
of 
Policing’s 
authorised 
professional practice on domestic abuse 
(College of Policing, 2020) states: 


‘Police officers have a duty to take positive 
action when dealing with domestic abuse 
incidents. Often this means making an 
arrest, provided the grounds exist and it is 
a necessary and proportionate response. 
Officers must be able to justify the decision 
not to arrest in those circumstances.’ 
Forces should investigate whether the duty 
to take positive action in alleged domestic 
violence incidents is unnecessarily driving 
up arrests of women. Officers do not have 
to arrest and can take alternative positive 
action, such as finding somewhere safe for 
the woman to go, where she is not in the 
same house as the other party.  
If officers arrive at the scene and have no or 
limited knowledge of the background to the 
incident, they may arrest women when it is not 
necessary or proportionate. An unnecessary 
arrest can be distressing and damaging for 
women and it is important that officers have 
the skills to make the right decision quickly.
Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary, 
Fire and Rescue Services (HMICFRS 2019) 
published an update report on the police 
response to domestic abuse. It stated: ‘The 
way officers behave when they arrive at the 
scene of domestic abuse is vital. It can be 
the first face-to-face contact the victim has 
had with the police, even if the abuse has 
been going on for some time.’  
For too many women, contact with the police 
results in their criminalisation rather than 
a recognition that they might be victims of 
domestic abuse. Women may not feel safe 
to disclose that they are a victim of domestic 
abuse. Presence or lack of physical injury is 
not always an indicator of who is the victim 
and who is the perpetrator.
One force had looked at the decision-making 
in domestic incidents after an officer raised 
concerns that a woman was arrested as an 
alleged perpetrator at the scene but, when 
in police custody, was found actually to be 
a victim of violence. She had not disclosed 
her injuries when officers first arrived. Senior 
police officers should support a culture of 
gender-informed decision-making around 
arrests in domestic incidents. 
There has been a rise in the number of women 
prosecuted for assault on an emergency 
worker. Evidence provided by police forces 
showed that incidents of alleged assault on 
an emergency worker were often related to 
incidents of alleged domestic abuse. Further 
investigation is needed to determine the 
factors driving this increase and to ensure 
that incidents of heightened stress involving 
women are not resulting in their unnecessary 
criminalisation. 
5. Arrests and race
Officers must have an understanding of 
the experiences of Black, Asian and ethnic 
minority women. Black and ethnic minority 
women are more than twice as likely to be 
arrested as white women. A reduction in 
the arrests of women must also lead to a 
reduction in disproportionality.
A study published by the Ministry of Justice 
(2016) found that ‘a statistically significant 
difference exists between the experiences of 
BME women and those of white women at the 
arrest, charging and prosecution stages and 
that BME women are more likely to receive 
custodial sentences on conviction’. 
Annual data is published on arrests by 
gender and by ethnicity but not by both 
characteristics together. The intersection of 
gender and ethnicity on arrests needs further 
investigation. An analysis of disaggregated 
data on gender and ethnicity is needed 
to determine if Black and ethnic minority 
women are more likely than white women to 
be arrested for certain offences for example. 
The Lammy Review (2017) found that Black 
women were less likely to be charged than 
white women. There should be greater 
challenge to prevent arrests of women when 
it is unnecessary and inappropriate. This 
would help to prevent the disproportionate 
criminalisation of Black and ethnic minority 
women. There is a need for more specialist 
support services for these women and 
for secure funding to ensure services are 
sustainable. Clinks (2020) found that charities 
working with Black and ethnic minority people 
in contact with the criminal justice system 
had been disproportionately affected by the 
impact of coronavirus.


Police forces should be aware of specialist 
services for women in their area and should 
work with them to ensure Black and ethnic 
minority women with complex needs are kept 
out of the criminal justice system.
6. Principles and good practice for 
policing women
The Ministry of Justice female offender 
strategy in 2018 (Ministry of Justice, 2018) 
identified a number of factors which brought 
women into contact with the criminal justice 
system including mental health problems, 
domestic abuse, housing, employment and 
financial issues. It also outlined the clear 
benefits for intervening earlier to reduce the 
number of women coming into contact with 
the criminal justice system. 
The accompanying police fact pack for 
managing vulnerable outlined key principles 
for policing women, including:
•	 Ensuring police officers take a gender-
informed approach to all women with 
whom they come into contact, whether or 
not they are arrested 
•	 Identifying and building partnerships with 
other organisations, both statutory and in 
the third sector, to whom women can be 
referred for support 
•	 Ensuring that the cultural and practical 
changes required for this approach to 
women are led by senior police officers.
Despite the government strategy and the 
recognition of gender-specific needs, women 
continue to be drawn into the criminal justice 
system, often repeatedly. Police forces can 
and should police women differently, in line 
with the government strategy.
Some women come into conflict with the 
police when they need support. 
Rather than arresting women, police forces 
could be diverting them to services which can 
address their underlying needs. The APPG 
found examples of good practice where 
forces were diverting women who needed 
support, without arresting them first.
However, in too many police forces, women 
could only be diverted to appropriate support 
after arrest. Arresting women should not be a 
necessary gateway to diversion. 
Women’s centres were key in delivering 
gender-specific services for women. Police 
forces such as Avon and Somerset, Surrey, 
Thames Valley and West Yorkshire had 
developed close links with their local women’s 
centres and were diverting women with unmet 
needs who came into contact with the police 
to the centres for assessment and support. 
However, in some areas of the country, police 
officers were unaware of services available 
locally for women and some forces did not 
have a local women’s centre. Specialist 
services for women should not be a postcode 
lottery. The APPG found that forces which had 
a ‘champion’ or dedicated lead for women 
were more likely to know about the specialist 
services available in their area and therefore 
more likely to make use of them. 
Some forces were developing gender-
informed 
police 
practice. 
As 
part 
of 
Cleveland Police and Crime Commissioner’s 
equality, diversity and inclusion strategy, 
Cleveland Police had established a women’s 
Retail Triage Scheme, Wakefield 
West Yorkshire Police are piloting a retail 
triage scheme, working in partnership 
with the West Yorkshire Liaison and 
Diversion Service, Well Women centre 
in Wakefield and local retailers. If a 
woman is detained in a store for shop 
theft, the store can call a dedicated 
police phone line for the retail triage 
scheme. Women who are eligible for the 
scheme are not arrested by the police 
but instead diverted to Liaison and 
Diversion’s female specialist practitioner 
based within the women’s centre for full 
holistic assessment to look at what may 
be contributing to committing shop theft. 
A programme of intervention, including 
using a restorative approach, will be 
developed with the woman to address 
any specific needs. Once completed, 
the police are notified and no further 
action is taken.  


staff network. The network brought together 
female police officers at a range of levels to 
look at responses to women in contact with 
the police and to explore what could be done 
differently to improve outcomes for women. 
Conclusions
Thousands of women are being arrested and 
held in police custody for alleged offences 
which often result in no further action. This 
is a drain on police time and resources and 
leads to worse outcomes for women. 
The data provided by police forces to the 
APPG showed that hundreds of women were 
being arrested for alleged violent offences, 
often in relation to domestic incidents.
There is widespread recognition of the 
factors that bring women into contact with the 
police yet women continue to be criminalised 
for experiencing disadvantage, poverty or 
abuse. If women need support, they should 
be able to receive it without receiving a police 
record at the same time.
Police forces need to consider how they 
are dealing with women and use different 
responses where appropriate.
References
APPG on Women in the Penal System (2019) 
Arresting the entry of women into the criminal 
justice system, London: the Howard League
College 
of 
Policing 
(2020) 
Authorised 
professional practice: Major investigation 
and public protection, Domestic abuse
https://www.app.college.police.uk/app-
content/major-investigation-and-public-
protection/domestic-abuse/arrest-and-other-
positive-approaches/
Hester, M (2013) Who Does What to Whom? 
Gender and Domestic Violence Perpetrators 
in English Police Records’, European Journal 
of Criminology,1: 623–37
HMICFRS (2019) The police response to 
domestic abuse: an update report. London: 
HMCFRS.
https://www.justiceinspectorates.gov.uk/
hmicfrs/wp-content/uploads/the-police-
response-to-domestic-abuse-an-update-
report.pdf
Lammy, D (2017) The Lammy Review: an 
independent review into the treatment of and 
outcomes for Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic 
individuals in the criminal justice system. 
London: Gov.uk
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/
government/uploads/system/uploads/
attachment_data/file/643001/lammy-review-
final-report.pdf
Office for National Statistics (2019). Domestic 
abuse in England and Wales overview: 
November 2019. London: ONS
h t t p s : / / w w w . o n s . g o v . u k /
p e o p l e p o p u l a t i o n a n d c o m m u n i t y /
c r i m e a n d j u s t i c e / b u l l e t i n s /
domesticabuseinenglandandwalesoverview/
november2019
Checkpoint plus scheme, 
Surrey Police 
Building on previous work to prevent 
the criminalisation of young people and 
women, Surrey Police has developed 
Checkpoint and Checkpoint plus, based 
on Durham Police’s Checkpoint scheme.  
Checkpoint plus was set up in 
recognition of the need to treat 
vulnerable people in the criminal 
justice system differently. If a woman 
or care leaver comes into contact with 
the police for low-level offences, their 
case is put before a multi-agency 
panel, which decides whether they 
can receive a Checkpoint outcome or 
a conditional caution or a charge. 
Specialist navigators or case workers 
from 
the 
local 
women’s 
centre 
support women with complex needs. 
Once a women’s needs have been 
assessed, she is offered a contract 
with interventions designed to tackle 
the reasons for their offending. It 
includes a restorative element agreed 
with the victim, such as an apology, 
or compensation.  If the woman 
completes the contract, she receives 
a community resolution.


ISBN  978-1-911114-49-9
t   020 7249 7373
e  info@howardleague.org
w  www.howardleague.org
@TheHowardLeague
1 Ardleigh Road
London
N1 4HS
Registered charity
No. 251926  
Company limited by guarantee 
No. 898514
9 781911 114499
ISBN 978-1-911114-49-9
2020
About the APPG on Women in the Penal 
System
The APPG on Women in the Penal System was 
set up in July 2009 with administrative support 
from the Howard League for Penal Reform.
 
The APPG comprises MPs and Members of 
the House of Lords from all parties and works 
to increase knowledge and awareness of 
issues around women in the penal system.
The APPG has conducted inquiries into the 
sentencing of women, the treatment of women 
in the criminal justice system, preventing the 
unnecessary criminalisation of women and 
on girls in the penal system.
 
The following APPG reports are available on 
the Howard League website: 
www.howardleague.org
Arresting the entry of women into the criminal 
justice system
 
Sentencers 
and 
sentenced: 
exploring 
knowledge, agency and sentencing women 
to prison.
 
Is this the end of women’s centres?
Report on the Inquiry into preventing 
unnecessary criminalisation of women
 
Keeping girls out of the penal system
 
Inquiry on girls: from courts to custody
Women in the penal system: second report 
on women with particular vulnerabilities in 
the criminal justice system
About the Howard League for Penal 
Reform
The Howard League is a national charity 
working for less crime, safer communities 
and fewer people in prison. 
We campaign, research and take legal 
action on a wide range of issues. We work 
with parliament, the media, criminal justice 
professions, stakeholders and members of 
the public, influencing debate and forcing 
through meaningful change.
www.howardleague.org