BIAS IN THE 
CRIMINAL LEGAL SYSTEM
A Report on Racial Bias in the Criminal Process and its Impact on 
Noncitizens of Color in Removal Proceedings
Published June 2024


2
Copyright 2024
National Immigration Project (NIPNLG)
Immigrants’ Rights Clinic, Stanford Law School
ABOUT THE NATIONAL IMMIGRATION 
PROJECT: 
The National Immigration Project (NIPNLG) is a membership organization of attorneys, 
advocates, and community members who are driven by the belief that all people should be 
treated with dignity, live freely, and flourish. We litigate, advocate, educate, and build bridges 
across movements to ensure that those most impacted by the immigration and criminal 
systems are uplifted and supported. Learn more at nipnlg.org. Follow NIPNLG on Facebook, X, 
and Instagram at @NIPNLG.
ABOUT THE STANFORD LAW SCHOOL 
IMMIGRANTS’ RIGHTS CLINIC: 
The Immigrants’ Rights Clinic (IRC) at Stanford Law School is a clinical education program 
specializing in deportation defense and immigrants’ rights advocacy. The IRC has a 
longstanding commitment to working alongside local and national nonprofits committed 
to community-based lawyering. For almost twenty years, IRC lawyers and students have 
challenged the federal government’s detention practices, addressed the unfair immigration 
consequences of criminal convictions, and advanced access to justice.


3
INTRODUCTION 
Racial bias exists at each stage of the criminal process—from stops and arrests through to charges and 
convictions. As Attorney General Merrick Garland explained, “there is discrimination and widespread 
disparate treatment of communities of color and ethnic minorities in this country,” and it is “plain” that 
the legal system does not “treat people equally.”1 
This report aggregates decades of research conducted by social scientists, government agencies, and 
nonpartisan organizations on racial bias in the criminal legal system. This research overwhelmingly 
suggests that racial bias—both implicit and explicit—infects every stage of the criminal process. Black 
and Latinx people are subject to more policing and arrests, increased pretrial detention, and harsher 
sentences than similarly situated white individuals. Racial disparities are especially stark for minor traffic, 
drug, and property offenses.2 And empirical analyses do not support the notion that people of color are 
disproportionately represented in the criminal legal system solely as a result of committing more crime.3 
Rather, individual and systemic racial biases drive disparities in the criminal legal system. Because of 
pervasive racial bias, Black and Latinx individuals are more likely to have had contact with the criminal 
legal system than their white counterparts, regardless of any other factor.
Immigration Judges (IJs) routinely consider noncitizens’ 
criminal history when exercising discretion for relief, 
waivers, and bond.4 For Black and Latinx noncitizens, the 
consequences of racially biased policing and prosecution 
can be far-reaching and devastating. Contact with the 
criminal legal system is often a precursor to removal 
proceedings, and convictions can disqualify a person 
from immigration relief.5 Where relief is available, criminal 
history is a relevant factor in the discretionary adjudication of applications for relief. For example, when 
deciding whether to grant or deny relief as a matter of discretion, IJs typically consider the “totality of 
the circumstances,” including evidence of the noncitizen’s contact with the criminal legal system.6 IJs 
similarly consider criminal records when deciding whether to release noncitizens on bond. Specifically, 
IJs evaluate the nature, recency, and seriousness of the criminal offenses to determine whether the 
noncitizen poses a danger to the community or is a flight risk.7 The same is true for consideration of 
waivers: when weighing favorable and unfavorable factors in consideration of an application for a 
waiver under § 212(c) of the Immigration and Nationality Act, for instance, IJs must consider the “nature, 
recency, and seriousness” of any crimes committed by the applicant.8 
Evidence of racial bias in the criminal legal system should be relevant to discretionary immigration 
determinations. For Black and Latinx noncitizens, evidence of bias in policing suggests that criminal 
records stemming from arrests and stops may not be reliable indicators of the noncitizen’s moral 
character, dangerousness, propensity to recidivate, or ability to rehabilitate. Similarly, because the 
consequences defendants experience differ drastically based on race, for Black and Latinx defendants, 
evidence of racial bias is a relevant feature of the criminal legal system that should be considered 
alongside criminal records in immigration discretionary determinations. 
IJs can mitigate the racial bias embedded in the criminal legal system from invading decision-making in 
immigration court. Under governing legal standards, IJs have broad discretion to consider racial bias in 
the criminal legal system in discretionary determinations. This report is meant to assist IJs in assessing 
the comprehensive circumstances surrounding a criminal history to ensure their final decisions are fair, 
just, accurate, and impartial, as encouraged by Executive Office for Immigration Review standards.9 By 
synthesizing a large body of research on racial bias in the criminal legal system, this report presents 
compelling evidence that IJs should consider when evaluating the impact of criminal records in 
discretionary determinations. 1011121314
For Black and Latinx noncitizens, 
the consequences of racial-biased 
policing and prosecution can be far-
reaching and devastating.


4
STAGES OF THE CRIMINAL LEGAL SYSTEM
Noncitizens of color are more likely to 
be arrested.
Stat: Black youths, for example, who 
account for 17% of the U.S. juvenile 
population, make up over 50% of arrests 
for many common crimes. 10
ARRESTS
Of people arrested, noncitizens of color 
are also more likely to receive higher bail.
Stat: For example, after Kentucky 
implemented a pretrial risk assessment 
tool to predict an individual’s risk of 
failing to appear in court or committing a 
crime while on bail, the racial gap in the 
granting of release without bail between 
Black and white defendants increased 
from about 2% to 10%. 11
BAIL
Those who receive higher bail are also 
more likely to receive more serious 
charges and less favorable plea offers.
Stat: For instance, Denver County 
prosecutors were found to be twice 
as likely to offer white defendants the 
chance of deferred judgment. 12
CHARGES & PLEAS
This disproportionate impact 
culminates in noncitizens of color 
receiving harsher sentences and 
less lenient probation or parole 
arrangements.
Stat: Black people are incarcerated in 
state prisons at nearly 5 times the rate 
of white people and Latinx people are 
incarcerated in state prisons at 1.3 times 
the incarceration rate of white people. 13
SENTENCING, PROBATION, PAROLE
Black and Latinx individuals also suffer 
extensive collateral consequences as a 
result of their criminal record.
Stat: For example, men who were 
incarcerated for more than 6 months were 
much less likely (50-58%) to have a job a 
year and a half post-release compared to 
men who were never incarcerated (82-
87%). 14
COLLATERAL CONSEQUENCES
IMMIGRATION COURT
CRIMINAL RECORDS


5
RACIAL BIAS IMPACTS POLICE STOPS & 
ARRESTS
Criminal records that result from police stops—including traffic citations, arrest records, and police 
reports—are likely to be tainted by racial bias. Individuals are introduced to the criminal legal system 
when police stop them, an encounter studies demonstrate is deeply biased.15 Police then have the 
discretion to decide whether to arrest the individual, and this too happens in a racially disproportionate 
manner. Black and Latinx individuals are stopped, arrested, and cited with disproportionate frequency. 
Consequently, people of color are more likely than other individuals to have records of these 
encounters. 
Black and Latinx people are stopped and searched 
frequently by police officers because of implicit and 
explicit racial biases. A 2020 study of nearly 100 million 
traffic stops across the country found evidence of 
“persistent racial bias” in police stops.16 Specifically, the 
researchers found that Black drivers were much more 
likely than white drivers to be stopped during daylight 
hours when it is easier for law enforcement officers to distinguish drivers by race.17 After 
sunset, when a “veil of darkness” masks drivers’ race, Black drivers are less likely to be stopped 
than white drivers.18 These findings are consistent with numerous other studies from across 
the country that have found disparate treatment of Black and Latinx individuals attributable 
to implicit and explicit bias.19 For example, in 2023, the California Racial Identity and Profiling 
Advisory (RIPA) Board reviewed data 3.2 million stops in California between January and 
December 2021 and found that “Black and Hispanic/Latine(x) individuals represented a higher 
proportion of stopped individuals than their relative proportion of the weighted California 
population.”20 Similarly, a 2022 study of 130 million police traffic stops in 1,413 U.S. counties 
compared data from police stops with regional data on racial prejudice and found that Black 
drivers were stopped at disproportionately high rates and that “racial disparities in police 
traffic stops were related to white people’s local levels of racial bias.”21 
Once stopped, Black and Latinx individuals are searched more frequently and experience 
harsher treatment because of biased policing practices. Across the country, Black and Latinx 
drivers are searched “about twice as often as stopped white drivers,” but the threshold for 
searching Black and Latinx drivers is significantly lower than for searching white drivers.22 That 
is, law enforcement officers search Black and Latinx individuals on the basis of less evidence, 
which is indicative of racial bias. For example, in California,  law enforcement officers reported 
“no action taken” after stops of Black individuals more than 2.2 times as often as they did 
for white individuals, indicating that Black individuals were stopped regardless of whether 
they were engaged in criminal activity.23 Similarly, a 2018 study of 2.9 million stops conducted 
by the New York City Police Department found that Black and Latinx individuals were 
disproportionately represented in searches that failed to turn up evidence of contraband.24 
After controlling for other factors, researchers attributed this, in part, to racially discriminatory 
enforcement.25 Black and Latinx people also  more frequently report experiencing harsh 
treatment—including the threat or use of force—when stopped.26 And a recent study of body 
camera footage from 981 stops found that Black community members are 61% more likely 
to hear disrespectful utterances from police officers during stops and that “police officers’ 
interactions with [B]lacks tend to be more fraught” generally.27 The low threshold required to 
search Black and Latinx individuals combined with evidence of harsher treatment suggest that 
such stops are influenced by implicit and explicit racial bias.  
Black and Latinx people are stopped 
and searched frequently by police 
officers because of implicit and 
explicit racial biases. 


6
Black and Latinx individuals are arrested at disproportionate rates but are not engaged in more 
criminal activity. According to the Federal Bureau of Investigations, Black and Latinx people 
are “overrepresented among persons arrested for nonfatal violent crimes” relative to their 
representation in the general population while white people were underrepresented.28 This 
overrepresentation occurs across age ranges, as even Black youths, who account for 17% of 
the U.S. juvenile population, make up over 50%  of arrests for many common crimes.29 Despite 
being arrested at disproportionately high rates, empirical evidence does not suggest that 
Black or Latinx individuals are engaged in correspondingly high levels of criminal activity. 
For example, relying on data from 8,984 youth in the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 
researchers found that Black and Latinx people were “more likely to be arrested for drug 
distribution, but less likely to be involved in drug offenses.”30  Similarly, a 2019 study found 
that “black men were more likely than white men to be arrested and report no illegal activity” 
while in contrast “white men were more likely than black men to indicate engaging in criminal 
offenses but not being arrested.”31 
Though IJs are allowed to consider arrest records in discretionary contexts, the pervasive evidence 
of racial bias in police stops, searches, and arrests undermines the probative value of these 
records in discretionary determinations. While arrest records may reliably indicate that a noncitizen 
was stopped by the police, for Black and Latinx noncitizens, the overwhelming body of research 
demonstrates that they may not indicate that the noncitizen was engaged in criminal or even suspicious 
activity. They are, therefore, not probative of a noncitizen’s dangerousness, rehabilitation, or likelihood 
of reoffending and should be given less weight in discretionary determinations.  
Racial bias is not the only reason why IJs should give less evidentiary weight to 
arrest reports. If racial bias motivated the initial stop, it is likely such bias also colors 
the arrest report’s narrative. BIA precedent cautions against relying heavily on these 
documents as evidence of a noncitizen’s danger to society or potential to recidivate, 
particularly where no conviction results. See In re Catalina Arreguin De Rodriguez, 21 
I. & N. Dec. 38, 42 (BIA 1995) (explaining court was “hesitant to give substantial weight 
to an arrest report, absent a conviction or corroborating evidence of the allegations 
contained therein” and subsequently giving document “little weight”); Avila-Ramirez 
v. Holder, 764 F.3d 717 (8th Cir. 2014) (determining BIA erred by not following its own 
binding precedent of Arreguin when it gave significant weight to arrest reports in 
denying individual discretionary relief from removal under former INA §212(c)). Given 
this precedent, in addition to considering the racially-biased atmosphere when 
exercising discretion, IJs should give even less evidentiary weight to arrest records or 
police reports at the outset of a discretionary determination and consider excluding 
them entirely.


7
BAIL
Criminal court decisions about pretrial detention, including defendants’ access to bail, differ drastically 
based on the defendant’s race and economic circumstances. Black and Latinx defendants are more 
likely to be subject to punitive bail requests, are subject to higher bail requests, and are more likely 
to be incarcerated pretrial than similarly situated white defendants. Poor outcomes at the bail 
stage negatively impact Black and Latinx defendants at subsequent stages of the criminal process. 
Individuals detained pretrial are more likely to be convicted, incarcerated, and receive longer sentences 
after conviction.32 Those who experience pretrial detention also experience negative downstream 
consequences. Individuals who are unable to post bail are more likely to lose income, housing, and 
employment.33 
Black and Latinx people experience disparate outcomes at the pretrial phase of criminal 
proceedings because of implicit and explicit racial bias. According to a study by the U.S. 
Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Black and Latinx jail inmates are overrepresented 
among the “unconvicted” jail population, which includes those unable to afford bail.34 This 
overrepresentation of people of color is explained, in part, by racially biased pretrial practices that 
produce worse pretrial outcomes—including higher and more punitive bail requests— for non-
white defendants.35 For example, one 2018 study of 162,836 cases from 93,914 unique defendants in 
Philadelphia and 93,417 cases from 65,944 unique defendants in Miami-Dade found “substantial bias 
against [B]lack defendants,” even after controlling for statistical discrimination.36 As a result, “[B]lack 
defendants are 3.6 percentage points more likely to be assigned monetary bail compared with white 
defendants and receive bail amounts that are $7,281 greater than white defendants.”37 Researchers 
also found that Black defendants were less likely to be released on their own recognizance or 
assigned nonmonetary conditions of release.38 Similarly, a 2023 study of pretrial decisions from federal 
district court over a ten-year period found that Latinx defendants were released at lower rates than 
white defendants of similar safety and nonappearance risk.39 
Black and Latinx individuals experience worse outcomes 
in criminal pretrial because of biased risk assessments. 
Some jurisdictions employ “risk assessment tools” to predict 
an individual’s risk of failing to appear in court or committing 
a crime while on bail. These mechanisms often rely on data 
that may reflect racial disparities in law enforcement and 
criminal justice (e.g., historical arrests or convictions records).40 
Consequently, these tools can unintentionally perpetuate these disparities by leading to higher risk 
scores, higher bail amounts, and higher rates of pretrial detention for individuals from these groups.41 For 
example, a study of a pretrial risk assessment tool adopted in Kentucky found that the racial gap in the 
granting of release without bail between Black and white defendants increased after implementing the 
tool from about 2% to 10%.42
Poverty, not dangerousness, is a primary reason why individuals of color cannot post criminal 
bail. Even when Black and Latinx defendants are offered bail, they are less likely to be able to make bail 
than white defendants.43 Poverty is frequently a driver of a failure to post bail,44 and Black and Latinx 
populations are more likely to be indigent.45 
Evidence of racial bias in pretrial decisions is relevant to discretionary immigration 
determinations. For Black and Latinx defendants, bias at the pretrial stage carries through the entire 
criminal process. Negative pretrial outcomes increase the likelihood of conviction, regardless of whether 
or not the defendant committed the offense, particularly when the defendant is facing minor charges.46 
Black and Latinx individuals 
experience worse outcomes in 
criminal pretrial because of biased 
risk assessments. 


8
Pretrial detention is also correlated with harsher and longer sentences, even when controlling for 
factors such as charge type and criminal history.47 Given the significant impact that pretrial decisions 
can have on case outcomes, for Black and Latinx noncitizens, pervasive evidence of racial bias at 
the pretrial stage is a relevant consideration when evaluating the impact of criminal convictions on 
discretionary determinations. Evidence that a noncitizen has had contact with the criminal legal system 
should be balanced against evidence of pervasive racial bias and afforded correspondingly less weight 
in discretionary decisions. 
CHARGING & PLEAS
Empirical evidence suggests that because of implicit and explicit racial bias, Black and Latinx individuals 
are more likely to be charged for the same offense as similarly situated white individuals and receive 
harsher charges, less favorable pleas, and more severe sentences, as compared to white defendants. 
Prosecutors have significant discretion in deciding what charges to assign to an individual and 
what plea deal to offer them, and these decisions are often tainted by racial bias. Prosecutors have 
broad discretionary power to decide whether to bring charges against an individual, what charges 
to file, and whether to seek severe penalties or agree to defer prosecution or suspend a sentence. 
Numerous studies have shown that “similarly situated defendants of different races were treated 
differently at . . . initial case screening, charging, [and] plea offers.”48 Black and Latinx defendants are 
charged more frequently and are less likely to have their cases dismissed than white defendants, but do 
not have a higher propensity for criminal behavior.49 For instance, a 2020 study conducted in Wisconsin 
found that Black and Latinx defendants were 11% more likely to have misdemeanor drug case filed 
against them than white defendants,50 despite similar rates of drug use across racial groups.51 Similarly, 
a 2021 study found that “relative to their engagement in alcohol-impaired driving, Latino men are 
convicted of DUI more frequently than are white men.”52 The disproportionally high rate of conviction 
result suggests bias in decisions to stop, test, and arrest drivers and at the charging and ruling stages of 
the case.53 Black and Latinx defendants also receive more severe initial charges than white defendant for 
similar conduct.54 For example, federal prosecutors are 1.75 times more likely to charge Black defendants 
with offenses carrying higher mandatory minimum sentences than white defendants with the same 
criminal records.55 The discretion prosecutors have in deciding what initial charges to bring accounts for 
most of the persistent, nationwide racial disparity in sentencing.56 And these racial disparities suggest 
that inherent racial bias shapes individual prosecutors’ decision-making.57 
Individuals of color are given less favorable options 
to plead, and consequently plead to charges with 
harsher punishments because of racial bias. Over 90% of 
federal and state court cases are resolved through pleas.58  
Prosecutors’ tendency to charge Black and Latinx defendants 
with more severe charges and the overrepresentation of 
Black and Latinx individuals in pretrial detention have a 
compounding effect when it comes to plea bargaining. 
Where a prosecutor chooses to bring severe charges, such as those that carry mandatory minimums, 
“the threat of the initial charges may induce the defendant to plead guilty on less favorable terms.”59 
Individuals subjected to pretrial custody are less likely to have charges against them dropped during 
plea bargaining and more likely to agree to a plea.60 During plea bargaining, prosecutors are also less 
likely to give Black and Latinx individuals a reduced charge and the benefits of reduced sentences than 
similarly situated white individuals.61 For instance, a study in Denver County found that prosecutors were 
twice as likely to offer white defendants the chance of deferred judgment – a favorable plea agreement 
Individuals of color are given less 
favorable options to plead, and 
consequently plead to charges with 
harsher punishments because of 
racial bias.


9
in which a defendant, in exchange for completing supervision and maintaining a clean criminal record, 
can choose to have their entire case or most severe charges dismissed.62
The pervasive racial bias in criminal proceedings during the plea and charging phase should be a 
consideration in discretionary immigration determinations. Evidence of racial bias against Black and 
Latinx defendants in the charging and plea stages is a relevant factor that should be considered alongside 
criminal records in discretionary determinations. Because of entrenched racial bias, for Black and Latinx 
noncitizens, charging documents—and convictions more generally—may not be reliable indicators of 
the noncitizen’s dangerousness, propensity to recidivate, or ability to rehabilitate. IJs should consider 
the pervasive racial bias of the criminal legal system, including at the plea and charging phase, when 
determining whether Black and Latinx noncitizens are entitled to a favorable exercise of discretion. 
SENTENCING, PROBATION & PAROLE
The impact of racial bias at each stage of the criminal legal process culminates in racial disparities in 
sentencing, probation, and parole. People of color are held under correctional supervision at higher 
rates and for greater periods of time than white people. 
Because of racial bias throughout the criminal process, Black and Latinx individuals receive 
harsher sentences. Black and Latinx male defendants receive sentences that are on average 19% longer 
than white defendants who are arrested for the same crimes.63 Sentencing enhancements partially 
explain the disparities in sentencing,64 but regardless Black adults are being sentenced to increasingly 
long sentences compared to white adults for most offenses.65 Moreover, while the disparity ratios have 
fallen, there are still racial differences in rates of sentencing for drug crimes, property crimes, and violent 
offenses.66 Black people are incarcerated in state prisons at nearly 5 times the rate of white people and 
Latinx people are incarcerated in state prisons at a rate that is 1.3 times the incarceration rate of white 
people.67 Additionally, 1 in 19 Black individuals are under correctional supervision compared to 1 in 62 
white individuals who are under correctional supervision.68 
Black and Latinx people are more likely to be subjected 
to parole and probation than similarly situated white 
individuals and for longer periods of time. Community 
supervision is also marked by significant racial disparities and 
is a major contributor to mass incarceration.69 Black people 
are more than twice as likely to be on probation and nearly 4 
times more likely to be on parole than white people.70 Black 
probationers are revoked,71 charged with parole violations, 
and returned to prison for a parole violation at higher rates 
than white and Latinx probationers.72 Black and Latinx people remain on probation and parole longer than 
similarly situated white people.73 The persistence of racial bias throughout the criminal legal system results 
in longer terms of community supervision for people of color and the disproportionate impacts on these 
communities is central to an IJ’s review of a noncitizen of color who has been on probation or parole.
Evidence of pervasive racial bias in criminal proceedings, including in the sentencing phase, is a 
relevant consideration in discretionary immigration determinations.  The racially disparate treatment 
of Black and Latinx defendants in sentencing decisions undermines the probative value of sentencing 
records when evaluating a noncitizen’s dangerousness, ability to rehabilitate, or risk of recidivism.  And 
under a “totality of the circumstances” test, evidence of pervasive racial bias against Black and Latinx 
defendants is a relevant circumstance that should be considered and weighed against criminal records 
in discretionary determinations.  
Black and Latinx people are more 
likely to be subjected to parole and 
probation than similarly situated 
white individuals and for longer 
periods of time. 


10
COLLATERAL CONSEQUENCES
Contact with the criminal legal system can impact all aspects of someone’s life and “creates barriers 
to jobs, occupational licensing, housing. . . higher education opportunities,” and other factors that tend 
to be viewed positively in discretionary assessments.74 Racial bias can explain not just the existence of 
an individual’s criminal record, but also the absence of certain positive equities, such as a long-term 
employment history, steady income, and stable housing.
Racial bias from the criminal legal system unfairly affects individuals even after they have served their 
sentences because they may struggle to obtain and retain jobs. For individuals with a criminal history, 
it can be difficult to obtain steady employment. According to the U.S. Department of Justice, incarcerated 
people are “are unemployed at a rate of over 27 percent, higher than the total U.S. unemployment rate 
during any historical period, including the Great Depression.”75 
The impact of racial bias within the criminal legal system, 
particularly at the sentencing phase, heightens the unfair 
disadvantage people of color experience during their job 
search. Studies suggest this disparity in employment rates is 
linked not only to the presence of a conviction, but also to the 
length of one’s prison sentence. For example, the U.S. Bureau 
of Labor Statistics (BLS) has determined that men who were 
incarcerated for more than 6 months were much less likely (50-
58%) to have a job a year and a half post-release compared to 
men who were never incarcerated (82-87%).76 This downstream consequence disproportionately impacts 
Black and Latinx men, who are 13.6% and 6.4% more likely than white men to receive prison sentences 
longer than 6 months.77  As the white House acknowledged, “combined with undue disparities in the 
criminal legal system, these barriers leave people of color... disproportionately locked out of gainful 
employment after release” from prison.78 
A criminal record unjustly impacts a person of color’s earning potential and ability to secure stable 
housing. In the first full year after release, individuals had an average annual income half the size of their 
peers who had no high school degree but also had not spent time in prison. 79 Low earnings impact an 
individual’s “ability to cover basic costs like childcare, transportation and housing, and can perpetuate 
or exacerbate household poverty.”80 A criminal record can also independently bar housing opportunities. 
Landlords and homeless shelters frequently deny housing to people with a criminal history, and laws 
that criminalize homelessness further place an individual at risk of adding to their criminal record.81 As 
such, a criminal record creates multiple compounding factors that hinder an individual from obtaining 
stable housing.
Evidence of pervasive racial bias is a relevant consideration when balancing equities in discretionary 
immigration determinations. For Black and Latinx noncitizens, evidence of pervasive racial bias 
throughout the criminal legal process offers important context for understanding the existence of 
negative equities—like arrest records and convictions—as well as the potential absence of positive 
equities. Because of pervasive racial bias in the criminal legal system, Black and Latinx individuals bear 
the brunt of the well-documented collateral consequences of contact with the criminal legal system. 
Evidence of pervasive racial bias is, therefore, one factor among many, that should be considered when 
exercising discretion. 
The impact of racial bias within the 
criminal legal system, particularly 
at the sentencing phase, heightens 
the unfair disadvantage people of 
color experience during their job 
search.


11
CONCLUSION
As this report demonstrates, decades of empirical research have concluded that racial bias pervades 
every stage of the criminal legal system. This racial bias has lasting consequences for noncitizens of color 
when their criminal records are considered by IJs in the exercise of discretion. In discretionary immigration 
proceedings, criminal records can be used as evidence of a noncitizen’s dangerousness, the potential to 
rehabilitate, and the likelihood of recidivism. Criminal records may also be used as evidence against the 
positive exercise of discretion. However, evidence of pervasive racial bias in the criminal legal system 
cautions against overreliance on criminal records in discretionary determinations. Because of the pervasive 
bias embedded within the criminal system, evidence that a noncitizen has had contact with the criminal 
system must be considered in context and is not probative of the noncitizen’s character. IJs can mitigate 
the disproportionate impact that racial bias within the criminal legal system has long had on noncitizens 
of color as they make their way through the immigration system by considering evidence of pervasive 
racial bias when evaluating the totality of circumstances and assigning criminal records less weight in 
discretionary determinations. 


12
ENDNOTES
1	
 Merrick Garland, Attorney General Confirmation Hearing – Day 1, at 03:03:16; 04:11:42 (Feb. 22, 
2021), https://www.c-span.org/video/?508877-1/attorney-general-confirmation-hearing-day-1. 
2	
 See, e.g., Decriminalization and Policing, Harvard Kennedy School Malcolm Wiener Ctr. for Soc. Pol’y 
(last visited May 26, 2023), https://www.hks.harvard.edu/centers/wiener/programs/criminaljustice/
research-publications/roundtable-racial-disparities-ma-criminal-courts/decriminalization-and-policing 
(analyzing this phenomenon in a Massachusetts study).
3	
 See data cited herein. 
4	
 See, e.g., Matter of Marin, 16 I&N Dec. 581, 584 (BIA 1978) (finding that waiver requires 
“balanc[ing] the adverse factors evidencing the alien’s undesirability as a permanent resident with the 
social and humane considerations presented in his [or her] behalf”); Matter of C–V–T–, 22 I&N Dec. 7 
(BIA 1998) (adopting the same standard for cancellation of removal).
5	
 See, e.g., Pereida v. Wilkinson, 592 U.S. 224 (2021); Immigrant Defense Project and Nat’l Immigration 
Project, Practice alert: Overview of Pereida v. Wilkinson for Immigration and Criminal Defense Counsel (2021), 
https://nipnlg.org/work/resources/overview-pereida-v-wilkinson-immigration-and-criminal-defense-
counsel. 
6	
 See Matter of Pula, 19 I&N Dec. 467, 473 (BIA 1987). 
7	
 See Matter of Guerra, 24 I&N Dec. 37, 40 (BIA 2006). See also Singh v. Holder, 638 F.3d 1196, 1206 
(9th Cir. 2011).
8	
 Tipu v. I.N.S., 20 F.3d 580, 584 (3d Cir. 1994).
9	
 Executive Office for Immigration Review, Immigration Court Practice Manual, 1.3(c) (last updated June 
27, 2023), https://www.justice.gov/eoir/reference-materials/ic/chapter-1/3 (“Immigration Judges strive 
to act honorably, fairly, and in accordance with the highest ethical standards, thereby ensuring public 
confidence in the integrity and impartiality of Immigration Court proceedings.”). 
10	
Charles Puzzanchera et al., Nat’l Ctr. Juv. Just., Youth and the Juvenile Justice System: 2022 National 
Report, 108 (2022), https://ojjdp.ojp.gov/publications/2022-national-report.pdf (detailing how Black 
youths account for “62% of juvenile arrests for robbery and stolen property offenses, and 50% of arrests 
for murder and motor vehicle theft”).
11	
Megan Stevenson, Assessing Risk in Assessment in Action, 103 Minn. L. Rev. 303, 363 (2018). 
12	
Stacey J. Bosick, Univ. of Denver Colo. Evaluation and Action Lab, Racial Disparities in Prosecutorial 
Outcomes 19 (2021), https://www.denverda.org/wp-content/uploads/news-release/2021/Racial-
Disparities-in-Prosecutorial-Outcomes_March2021_final-002.pdf.
13	
Employment of Young Men After Arrest or Incarceration, U.S. Bureau of Lab. Stat.  (last updated 
May 20, 2019), https://www.bls.gov/opub/ted/2019/employment-of-young-men-after-arrest-or-
incarceration.htm.
14	
Ashley Nellis, The Sent’g Project, The Color of Justice: Racial and Ethnic Disparity in State Prisons (2021), 
https://www.sentencingproject.org/reports/the-color-of-justice-racial-and-ethnic-disparity-in-state-
prisons-the-sentencing-project/.
15	
 Nat’l Conf. of State Legislatures, The Legislative Primer Series for Front-End Justice: Racial and Ethnic 
Disparities in the Justice System 1 (2022), https://documents.ncsl.org/wwwncsl/Criminal-Justice/Racial-and-
Ethnic-Disparities-in-the-Justice-System_v03.pdf (“[P]eople of color are far more likely to enter the 
nation’s justice system than the general population.”).
16	
 Pierson et al., A Large-Scale Analysis of Racial Disparities in Police Stops Across the United 
States, 4 Nature Hum. Behav. 736, 736 (2020).  
17	
 Id. 
18	
 Id. 
19	
 See Kate Antonovics & Brian Knight, A New Look at Racial Profiling: Evidence from the Boston 
Police Department 19 Rev. Econ. & Stat. 163, 177 (2009) (“[O]ur results strongly suggest that officers are 


13
more likely to conduct a search if the race of the motorist differs from the race of the officer…our 
results suggest that preference-based discrimination plays a role in explaining differences in the rate at 
which motorists from different racial groups are searched during traffic stops.”); Andrew Gelman et al., 
An Analysis of the New York City Police Department’s “Stop and Frisk” Policy in the Context of Claims of 
Racial Bias 102 J. Am. Stat. Ass’n 813, 822  (“[T]he NYPD’s records indicate that they were stopping blacks 
and Hispanics more often than whites, in comparison to both the population of these groups and the 
best estimates of the rates of crimes committed by each group.”).
20	
 California Racial Identity Profiling Advisory Board (RIPA), Annual Report 8 (2023) [hereinafter “RIPA 
Annual Report”], https://oag.ca.gov/system/files/media/ripa-board-report-2023.pdf.  
21	
 Marleen Stelter et al., Racial Bias in Police Traffic Stops, 33 Psychol. Sci. 483, 492 (2022) 
22	
 Pierson et al., supra note 16 at 739.  
23	
 RIPA Annual Report, supra note 20. 
24	
 Sharad Goel et al., Precinct or Prejudice? Understanding Racial Disparities in New York City’s 
Stop and Frisk, 10 Annals Applied Stats. 365, 367 (2016). 
25	
 Id. 
26	
 Bureau of Just. Stat., Contact Between Police and Public, 2020 10 (2022), https://bjs.ojp.gov/sites/g/
files/xyckuh236/files/media/document/cbpp20.pdf.
27	
 Rob Voigt et al., Language From Police Body Camera Footage Shows Racial Disparity in Officer 
Respect, 114 PNAS 6521, 6524 (2017).
28	
 Bureau of Just. Stat., Race and Ethnicity of Violent Offenders and Arrestees, 2018 1 (2022), https://bjs.
ojp.gov/content/pub/pdf/revcoa18.pdf (noting that white people make up “60% of U.S. residents, but 
46% of all persons arrested for rape, robbery, aggravated assault, and other assault, and 39% of all 
arrestees for nonfatal violent crimes excluding other assault.”).
29	
Puzzanchera et al., supra note 10 at 108. 
30	
 Ojmarrh Mitchell & Michael S. Caudy, Race Differences in Drug Offending and Drug Distribution 
Arrests, 63 Crime & Delinq. 91, 111 (2017).
31	
 Vesla M. Weaver et al., The Great Decoupling: The Disconnection Between Criminal Offending 
and Experience of Arrest Across Two Cohorts, 5 The Russell Sage Foundation J. Soc. Sci. 89, 91 (2019). 
32	
 Will Dobbie et al., The Effects of Pretrial Detention on Conviction, Future Crime, and 
Employment: Evidence from Randomly Assigned Judges, 108 Am. Econ. Rev. 201, 203 (2018) (“[I]nital 
pretrial release decreases the probability of being found guilty by 14 percentage points.”); Arpit Gupta et 
al., The Heavy Costs of High Bail: Evidence from Judge Randomization, 45 J. Legal Stud. 471 (2016) (finding 
that money bail is a significant cause of conviction); Emily Leslie and Nolan G. Pope, The Unintended 
Impact of Pretrial Detention on Case Outcomes: Evidence from New York City Arraignments, 60 J. 
Legal Stud. 529 (2017) (finding that pretrial detention increases minimum sentence length); Brandon 
P. Martinez et al., Time, Money, and Punishment: Institutional Racial-Ethnic Inequalities in Pretrial 
Detention and Case Outcomes, 66 Crime and Delinq. 837 (2020) (finding that Black defendants are held 
longer in pretrial detention and have higher bond amounts, increasing their rate of conviction and 
incarceration); J.C. Oleson et al., The Effect of Pretrial Detention on Sentencing in Two Federal Districts, 
33 Just. Q. 1103 (2016) (finding that pretrial detention is associated with increased sentence length); 
Meghan Sacks and Alissa R. Akerman, Bail and Sentencing: Does Pretrial Detention Lead to Harsher 
Punishment? 25 Crim. Just. Pol’y. Rev. 59 (2014) (same).
33	
 Dobbie et al., supra note 32 at 236 (finding that pretrial release increases formal sector 
employment); Shima Baughman, Costs of Pretrial Detention 97 B.U. L. Rev. 1, 5 (2017) (noting that pretrial 
detention imposes direct and indirect economic costs on detainees, including lost employment and 
disruptions to family life); Crim. Just. Pol’y Program Harv. L. Sch., Moving Beyond Money: A Primer On Bail 
Reform 7 (2016), https://www.prisonpolicy.org/scans/cjpp/FINAL-Primer-on-Bail-Reform.pdf (noting that 
pretrial detention can threaten a person’s employment, housing stability, child care and access to health 
insurance).  


14
34	
 Bureau of Just. Stat., Profile of Jail Inmates, 2002, at 2 (2004), https://bjs.ojp.gov/content/pub/
pdf/pji02.pdf. See also U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, The Civil Rights Implications of Cash Bail, (2022), at 
34 (noting “a persistent disparity between white and Black/Latinx defendants” in rates of pretrial 
detention). 
35	
 David Arnold et al., Racial Bias in Bail Decisions, 133 Q. J. Economics 1885, 1886 (2018); U.S. 
Commission on Civil Rights, supra note 31 at 34 (nothing that Black and Latinx defendants have higher rates 
of pretrial detention and are more likely to have financial conditions imposed and set at higher amounts 
compared to white defendants). See also David Arnold et al., Measuring Racial Discrimination in Bail 
Decisions, 112 Am. Econ. Rev. 2992, 3036 (2022) (finding that disparate impact in pretrial decisions is driven 
“by both racial bias and statistical discrimination”); Andy Wen et al., Racial Disparities in Youth Pretrial 
Detention: A Retrospective Cohort Study Grounded in Critical Race Theory, 11 Heath & Just. 1, 8 (2023) 
(finding that Black and Latinx youth were more likely to experience pretrial detention than white youth, 
even after controlling for other variables like crime severity); Wendy Sawyer, How Race Impacts Who 
Is Detained Pretrial, Prison Policy Initiative (Oct. 9, 2019), https://www.prisonpolicy.org/blog/2019/10/09/
pretrial_race/#:~:text=Black%20and%20brown%20defendants%20receive,disparities%20persist%20
in%20pretrial%20detention (finding that defendants of color receive bail amounts that are twice as 
high as white defendants).
36	
 David Arnold et al., supra note 35 at 1929.
37	
 Id. at 1906. 
38	
 Id. 
39	
 Joshua Grossman et al., Racial Bias as a Multi-Stage, Multi-Actor problem: An Analysis of Pretrial 
Detention, J. Empir. Leg. Stud. 1, 5 (2023). 
40	
 Crim. Just. Pol’y Program Harv. L. Sch., Bail Reform A Guide for State and Local Policymakers 13-15 
(2019), https://static.prisonpolicy.org/scans/Harvard%20Guide%20to%20Bail%20Reform.pdf. See 
also Nat'l Inst. of Just., Predicting Recidivism: Continuing to Improve the Bureau of Prisons’ Risk Assessment Tool, 
PATTERN (2022), https://nij.ojp.gov/topics/articles/predicting-recidivism-continuing-improve-bureau-
prisons-risk-assessment-tool (finding that the risk passement tool overpredicted people of color on “the 
general recidivism” metrics).
41	
 Ember McCoy, The Risks of Pretrial Risk Assessment Tools: Policy Considerations for Michigan 5 (2023), 
https://stpp.fordschool.umich.edu/sites/stpp/files/2023-05/Risk%20Assessment%20Policy%20Brief%20
Final%205.2.23_0.pdf. 
42	
 Stevenson supra note 11 at 364. 
43	
Sawyer supra note 35. 
44	
Nick Pinto, The Bail Trap, N.Y. Times (Aug. 13, 2015), https://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/16/
magazine/the-bail-trap.html. 
45	
 John Creamer, Poverty Rates for Blacks and Hispanics Reached Historic Lows in 2019, U.S. Census 
Bureau (Sept. 15, 2020), https://www.census.gov/library/stories/2020/09/poverty-rates-for-blacks-and-
hispanics-reached-historic-lows-in-2019.html. 
46	
 Leon Digard, Vera Inst. of Justice, Justice Denied: The Harmful and Lasting Effects of Pretrial Detention, 
Vera Inst. of Justice 3-4 (2019), https://www.vera.org/downloads/publications/Justice-Denied-Evidence-
Brief.pdf.  
47	
 Id. at 5.
48	
 Sunita Sah et al., Blinding Prosecutors to Defendants’ Race: A Policy Proposal to Reduce 
Unconscious Bias in the Criminal Justice System, 2 Behav. Sci. & Pol’y 69, 71 (2015). See also Besiki 
Kutateladze et al., Vera Inst. of Just., Do Race and Ethnicity Matter in Prosecution? A Review of Empirical Studies 
6 (2012) (reviewing 34 different empirical studies on prosecutorial discretion and race and finding 
that most suggested that, the victims’ or the defendants’ race directly or indirectly influenced case 
outcomes, even when controlling for other factors). Though some studies suggest that Black and 
Latinx defendants are more likely than their white counterparts to have charges reduced, this is likely 


15
to “correct for an initial overcharging of Black and Latinx defendants, rather than to impart an overall 
advantage.” Besiki Kutateladze, Tracing Charge Trajectories, 56 Criminology 123, 128 (2018). 
49	
 Racial and Ethnic Differences, Prosecutorial Performance Indicators (last visited Sept. 19, 2023), 
https://prosecutorialperformanceindicators.org/racial-ethnic-differences/. See also Analise Oritz & 
Melissa Kovacs, Aclu of Arizona, The Racial Divide of Prosecutions in Maricopa County (2020), https://www.
acluaz.org/sites/default/files/7.16embargofinal_the_racial_divide_2020.pdf.
50	
 Nat’l Conf. of State Legislatures, supra note 15  at 8. 
51	
 Criminal Justice Fact Sheet, NAACP (last visited Sept. 19, 2023), https://naacp.org/resources/
criminal-justice-fact-sheet (noting that “African Americans and whites use drugs at similar rates, but the 
imprisonment rate of African Americans is almost 6 times that of whites.”).
52	
 Rose M.C. Kagawa et al., Racial Bias and DUI Enforcement: Comparing Conviction Rates with 
Frequency of Behavior, 20 Criminology & Pub. Pol’y 645, 655-66 (2021). 
53	
 Id. at 656-57. 
54	
 Elizabeth Tsai Bishop et al., Crim. Just. Pol’y. Program, Racial Disparities in the Massachusetts Criminal 
System 21, 62 (2020), https://hls.harvard.edu/wp-content/uploads/2022/08/Massachusetts-Racial-
Disparity-Report-FINAL.pdf. 
55	
 M. Marit Rehavi & Sonja B. Starr, Racial Disparity in Federal Criminal Sentences, 122 J. Pol. Econ. 
1320, 1323 (2014).  
56	
 See Rehavi & Starr, supra note 55 at 1323 (“the initial mandatory minimum charging decision 
alone is capable of explaining more than half of the [B]lack-[W]hite sentence disparities.”). See also U.S. 
Sent’g Comm’n, Demographic Differences in Sentencing: An Update to the 2012 Booker Report (Nov. 2017), https://
www.ussc.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/research-and-publications/research-publications/2017/20171114_
Demographics.pdf (documenting racial disparity in sentencing). 
57	
 Id. See also Bishop, supra note 54, at 64 (finding that the lack of racial disparity in conviction 
offense severity and conviction rates, did not support the conclusion that criminal conduct across race 
is responsible for racial disparities in incarceration sentences). 
58	
 Bureau of Just. Stat., Plea and Charge Bargaining: Research Summary, 1 (2011), https://bja.ojp.gov/
sites/g/files/xyckuh186/files/media/document/PleaBargainingResearchSummary.pdf.   
59	
 Rehavi & Starr, supra note 55, at 1325.
60	
 Bureau of Just. Stat., supra note 58, at 2.
61	
 Hinton et al., An Unjust Burden: The Disparate Treatment of Black Americans in the Criminal 
Justice System, Vera Inst. of Just. 8 (May 2018), https://www.vera.org/downloads/publications/for-
the-record-unjust-burden-racial-disparities.pdf (noting that a study of 48,000 misdemeanor cases in 
Wisconsin found white defendants were “nearly 75 percent more likely than Black people to see all 
misdemeanor charges carrying a potential sentence of incarceration dropped, dismissed, or amended 
to lesser charges.”); Kutateladze, Tracing Charge Trajectories, supra note 45 at 145 (finding “Black and 
Latino defendants were less likely to experience charge reductions at arraignment, disposition, and 
cumulatively; they also experienced charge reductions at fewer total decision points.”). See also Christi 
Metcalfe & Ted Chiricos, Race, Plea, and Charge Reduction: An Assessment of Racial Disparities in the 
Plea Process, 35 Just. Q. 223, 242 (reviewing 411 trial cases and 500 felony plea cases and finding that 
in comparison to white males, Black male defendants had a significantly lower probability of a charge 
reduction when they plead guilty); Marc Mauer, Addressing Racial Disparities in Incarceration, 91 Prison 
J. 87 (2011) (“A study of federal mandatory sentencing by the U.S. Sentencing Commission, for example, 
found that…prosecutors were more likely to offer white defendants a negotiated plea below the 
mandatory minimum than African American or Latino defendants.”). 
62	
 Bosick, supra note 12, at 3. 
63	
 U.S. Sent’g Comm’n, supra note 56, at 2. 
64	
 Nat’l Conf. of State Legislatures, supra note 15.
65	
 Council on Crim. Just., Long Sentences by Race (2020), https://counciloncj.foleon.com/tfls/long-


16
sentences-by-the-numbers/#Long-Sentences-by-Race. 
66	
 William J. Sabol et al., Council on Crim. Just., Trends in Correctional Control by Race and Sex, (2019),  
https://counciloncj.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/09/Trends-in-Correctional-Control-FINAL.pdf. 
67	
 Ashley Nellis, The Sent’g Project, The Color of Justice: Racial and Ethnic Disparity in State Prisons 5 
(2021), https://www.sentencingproject.org/app/uploads/2022/08/The-Color-of-Justice-Racial-and-
Ethnic-Disparity-in-State-Prisons.pdf. 
68	
 E. Ann Carson & Rich Kluckow, Bureau of Just. Stat., Correctional Populations in the United States, 2021- 
Statistical Tables 11-12 (2023), https://bjs.ojp.gov/document/cpus21st.pdf. 
69	
 Kendra Bradner et al., Colum. Univ. Just. Lab, More Work to Do: Analysis of Probation and Parole in the 
United States 1, 6 (2020), https://justicelab.columbia.edu/sites/default/files/content/More%20Work%20
to%20Do.pdf.  
70	
 Id.
71	
 Jesse Jannetta et al., Urb. Inst.,  Examining Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Probation Revocation: Summary 
Findings and Implications from a Multisite Study 3 (2014), https://www.urban.org/sites/default/files/
publication/22746/413174-Examining-Racial-and-Ethnic-Disparities-in-Probation-Revocation.PDF. 
72	
 Bradner et al., supra note 69, at 7, 13. 
73	
 Id. at 7.
74	
 Criminal Records and Reentry Toolkit, Nat’l Conf. of St. Legislatures (last updated Mar. 31, 2023), 
https://www.ncsl.org/civil-and-criminal-justice/criminal-records-and-reentry-toolkit. See also Matter of 
Marin, 16 I&N Dec. at 583 (listing favorable discretionary factors to employment, property or business 
ties, service to the community, rehabilitation, and other evidence attesting to a respondent’s good 
character). 
75	
 A Second Chance: The Impact of Unsuccessful Reentry and the Need for Reintegration 
Resources in Communities, Cmty. Policing Dispatch (Apr. 2022), https://cops.usdoj.gov/html/
dispatch/04-2022/reintegration_resources.html.  
76	
 U.S. Bureau of Lab. Stat., supra note 14 . 
77	
 Id.
78	
 White House, Incarceration to Employment: A Comprehensive Strategy to Expand Employment Opportunities 
for Formerly Incarcerated Persons 2 (2022), https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/04/
Incarceration-to-Employment-Strategy.pdf. 
79	
 Adam Looney & Nicholas Turner, Brookings Inst. Work and Opportunity Before and After Incarceration 7 
(2018), https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/es_20180314_looneyincarceration_
final.pdf. 
80	
 White House, supra note 78, at 2.
81	
 U.S. Interagency Council on Homelessness, All In: The Federal Strategy to Prevent and End Homelessness 
19-20, 52 (2022), https://www.usich.gov/sites/default/files/document/All_In.pdf.