Look to the STARs for Pathways to Mobility for Hispanic Workers
Hispanics represent almost one in five workers in the workforce and they are overrepresented in lower-wage occupations. A majority of Hispanic workers are STARs: they are Skilled Through Alternative Routes such as community colleges, apprenticeships, and on-the-job learning. Efforts to expand job pathways for STARs will increase economic mobility for Hispanic workers.
Pathways to mobility for Hispanic STARs go through jobs with similar skills
Our research shows that many low- and middle-wage jobs provide on-the-job skills that are transferable to higher-wage work, paving the way for skills-based transitions that offer wage gain.
The tool below illustrates the opportunity for such skills-based transitions for Hispanic STARs. We identified the ten highest volume jobs for Hispanic STARs (their “origin” job) and for each, we show feasible skills-based job transitions that offer a wage gain of 10% or more. Each of these job transitions has been observed for workers in the labor market, with marker size illustrating the number of people who have made these exact job transitions over the past 10 years. We plot these “destination” jobs based on their potential wage gain, as well as the number of STARs already employed in these roles.
The tool shows that Hispanic STARs have more mobility than one might expect given high occupational segregation illustrated above. We see a large number of transitions to higher wage jobs in the trades – such as construction laborer to insulation workers (offering a 16% wage gain), but also see transitions from customer service representative and front-line sales supervisor to higher wage jobs in sales and management. These latter transitions, however, are often hindered by formal educational degree requirements.
What Can Employers Do?
As employers commit to diversity and inclusion, they must reexamine how they assess talent. 13.5 million Hispanic STARs – more than half the Hispanic workforce – are often overlooked and concentrated in lower-wage jobs, in part due to employers’ educational pedigree requirements for career advancement.
However, that doesn’t make these workers low skilled. Employers can increase mobility for Hispanic STARs if they focus on the skills these workers demonstrate on the job.
More on Hispanic Workers
Of the 25.6 million Hispanic workers in the labor force, 54% are STARs. And, while those workers are represented in every occupation, they are overrepresented in lower-wage jobs, earning a median wage of $19.00 an hour. This of course should not be the case.