Table of Contents
For the first time in its 50-year history, the American Housing Survey (AHS) reported data separated by gender in its most recent release. Sponsored by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau, the AHS is the most comprehensive housing survey in the United States. It provides important information about the housing arrangements of U.S. households, including their housing costs and quality.
This new AHS data emphasizes that households led by gender-expansive people – people who identify as transgender or another gender-expansive term – face greater obstacles in accessing affordable housing, putting them at greater risk of housing instability and homelessness.
Implications of Increased Housing Instability
This increased risk has important implications for every local, state, and national elected leader. As this brief explains in more detail, leaders who want to create prosperous, stable, and affordable communities need to focus on:
- developing and preserving deeply affordable housing;
- ensuring universal access to rental assistance for low-income households; and
- protecting and expanding targeted homeless assistance.
At the same time, communities cannot prosper if they leave certain groups behind. Elected leaders must also specifically address wide disparities in housing outcomes for gender-expansive households. At a minimum, elected leaders at all levels can uplift the most marginalized groups and create stronger communities for everyone by:
- supporting, protecting, and preserving regulations and legislation that ensure equal access to housing and emergency shelter (such as HUD’s Equal Access Rule and Congress’ Equality Act);
- removing burdensome requirements to show identity documents (specifically, documents aligned with a person’s sex assigned at birth) to access public facilities or receive public assistance;
- ensuring that housing and homelessness programs meet the specific needs of gender-expansive households; and
- protecting and expanding access to housing and services that support gender-expansive peoples’ health needs.
In the current political context, many of the goals in this report may seem aspirational at best. This does not change the fact that building more prosperous, secure, and stable communities requires taking seriously the needs of people who are most at risk of homelessness. While federal action is important, in its absence, state and local leaders can also take many of the steps outlined in this report to promote housing stability for their gender-expansive constituents.
How Discrimination Impacts Gender-Expansive Housing Access
Numerous researchers and people with lived experience have pointed out that gender-expansive households face some of the greatest challenges securing safe, stable housing. Discrimination creates barriers to education, employment, public assistance, and healthcare, making it challenging to afford housing.
Renters vs. Homeowners
The AHS demonstrates that gender-expansive households are more likely to rent their homes – and pay more of their income on housing – than their cisgender counterparts. Advocates also note how direct exclusion from affordable units, home loans, and long-term housing programs purely on the basis of gender reduce housing options for gender-expansive people.
The AHS data confirms these concerns and further demonstrates the need for leaders to support real solutions.
Disproportionate Racial and Ethnic Impacts
Cost burden statistics and rental trends are important indicators of larger housing disparities: Black, Indigenous, Latino and Asian people are more likely to rent their homes and experience severe cost burdens. While the AHS data does not specify how many respondents identify as both people of color and as gender-expansive, it is likely that this context especially impacts Black, Indigenous, Latino and/or Asian gender-expansive people.
Policies, practices and individual discrimination have, and continue to, systematically exclude these groups from building wealth and owning a home, impacting housing outcomes. Improving housing costs for these groups is critical for ensuring stability for all communities.
Intentional Exclusion and Gender-Based Discrimination
Cisgender people have access to more robust social networks, services, and income than gender-expansive households. Public and private safety nets often exclude gender-expansive people by requiring their identity documents to match their sex assigned at birth or by targeting assistance to married households and households with children. Previous experiences of discrimination may also discourage gender-expansive people from seeking income, housing, or health support.
Discrimination is not without consequences. If gender-expansive people cannot access these needed supports, services, and housing, they face a greater chance of entering homelessness.
Unaffordable housing, coupled with lower incomes, means that gender-expansive people continue to be overrepresented among people experiencing unsheltered homelessness. Research indicates that once they are homeless, gender-expansive people also face numerous barriers accessing shelter, including concerns about personal safety and a lack of available programs to address their specific needs.
How Elected Leaders Can Promote Housing Stability
AHS data has important policy implications for lawmakers and advocates in search of evidence-based solutions to make progress on housing instability and homelessness. Unfortunately, many of these solutions are under threat.
Some threats intentionally target the most vulnerable groups, like gender-expansive people. In February 2025, HUD indicated a desire to reverse years of effective policy and systematically exclude gender-expansive people from its programs by eliminating the Equal Access Rule, which ensures access to safe housing for everyone.
In some communities and states, elected officials have enacted robust protections for their gender-expansive residents, recognizing the importance of supporting all their constituents. However, there is still important progress to be made to ensure that gender-expansive people have access to housing.
22 states, the US Virgin Islands and the District of Columbia prohibit housing discrimination based on gender identity. Most of these states also prohibit discrimination in employment, public accommodation and private health insurance.
While federal lawmakers could lead these efforts, in the absence of federal action, state and local leaders must be willing to protect their gender-expansive constituents and help address disparities by making housing affordability possible for everyone. Elected leaders can take a variety of steps to specifically address these challenges and help improve housing outcomes for constituents.
1. Utilize federal, state, and local laws and regulations to ensure that gender-expansive households have access to critical housing and social programs.
2. Reduce the administrative burden in housing and social programs by removing requirements for difficult-to-obtain, government-issued identity documents that include gender or sex markers.
3. Develop and preserve deeply affordable housing.
4. Preserve and expand funding for critical Homeless Assistance Grants (HAG) in the FY2026 budget and in future appropriation bills.
Housing Access Improves Community Stability
Efforts to support housing affordability and stability, regardless of a person’s gender, improve prosperity for the entire community. When people have access to a home, they can more easily work, go to school and shop at local businesses.
On the other hand, housing unaffordability and homelessness negatively impact a community’s well-being: Limited housing options significantly reduces individual health and public health, putting strain on medical systems. Studies also indicate that local economies suffer when people do not have access to a safe, affordable place to live. Failing to invest in housing security for the most marginalized groups or intentionally excluding people from housing on the basis of their gender, will only lead to less safe, stable and prosperous communities for everyone.
Higher housing cost burdens and increasing rates of homelessness are not inevitable. Lawmakers can help create more abundant communities for everyone by making housing support more accessible to gender-expansive households. Specifically addressing housing disparities between cisgender people and gender-expansive people is efficient: it ensures that people most in need of resources have access to them. It is also urgent: it helps correct structural barriers to housing stability that prevent communities from prospering.
While some elected officials have opposed protections against housing discrimination for gender-expansive constituents, it is well past time to be honest about the real problem: federal, state, and local leaders do not adequately support policies, programs and protections that promote access to safe, affordable housing. Embracing these policies offers an opportunity for elected officials to build communities that support all constituents.
Interested in
learning more?
Subscribe today to stay informed and get regular updates from the Alliance.