Social Security Benefits
			
The Social Security Administration (SSA) provides financial protection for the nation’s people, supporting Americans throughout all of life’s journeys. They administer retirement, disability, survivor, and family benefits, and enroll individuals in Medicare. They also provide Social Security numbers, which are unique identifiers needed to work, handle financial transactions, and determine eligibility for certain government services.
The Social Security Administration website www.ssa.gov is the best way to get help. If you cannot use the website, you may telephone the National 800 number at 1-800-772-1213 or visit the office. If you visit, they may not be able to serve you that day and may schedule an appointment or phone call for a different day. You can find your office through the Social Security Office Locator.
Many things can be done by registering on my SSA Account. Be sure to write down the email you use, and the password you create.
With a personal my Social Security account, you can check the status of an application or appeal, request a replacement Social Security card (in most areas), print a benefit verification letter, and more – from anywhere and from any of your devices!
SSA strives to deliver great customer service and helpful information to everyone, including people who are more comfortable reading and speaking Spanish. Their Spanish-language website provides information about their programs and services. You can learn how to get a Social Security card, plan for retirement, apply for benefits, and much more.
If you legally change your name because of marriage, divorce, or court order or need to correct your name for other reasons, you need to tell the Social Security Administration. This way you can get a replacement Social Security number (SSN) card with your correct legal name. There are opportunities to change and request a new card online or at least start the process online to make the process move more quickly.
You can complete your application online or in-person in the local Social Security office. In most states, you can use the personal my Social Security account to request a replacement card. If you are not able to do that, you can still begin your application online and self-schedule an appointment to complete it in your local Social Security office or Card Center. Scheduling online can save you time when you visit SSA to complete the application.
If you cannot complete the application online using my Social Security, you will need to provide the required documents in person. You are required to provide different documents depending on your citizenship and the type of card you are requesting. You will need to complete a paper Application for a Social Security Card (Form SS-5) and bring your required documents to a local Social Security office or Card Center. To save time, you can download, complete, and print the paper application SS-5 form before you arrive.
If your Medicare card was lost, stolen, or destroyed, you can request a replacement online at Medicare.gov. You can also print an official copy from your online Medicare account or call 1-800-MEDICARE (1-800-633-4227 TTY 1-877-486-2048) to orer a replacement card to be sent in the mail.
SSDI and SSI payments are both programs that fall under the Social Security Administration (SSA). They have different eligibility criteria.
Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI)
- SSDI provides income to adults who are unable to work and earn countable income that is more than Substantial Gainful Activity (SGA) due to disability and have contributed into Social Security through Social Security payroll taxes from recent employment. To be eligible, the work record of the person that the benefits are paid under, must have enough work credits. Work credits are earned by paying FICA/Social Security taxes on earnings. The number of work credits needed increases based upon the person’s age when they apply for benefits. Some people may qualify through a spouse’s, or parents’ work record.
- In addition to medical factors, eligibility is based upon the person’s inability to work and earn more than $1,690 or $2,830 if blind (2026), in countable earnings in any month, for 12 months.
- Family members of the disabled individual may also be eligible for dependent benefits.
- Individuals who are approved for SSDI have a 5-month waiting period before SSDI is paid. Most must also wait24 months before they receive Medicare. There are exceptions for ALS disease and end stage renal disease so that Medicare starts without a waiting period.
Supplemental Security Income (SSI)
- SSI is a needs-based program that provides financial assistance to children and to adults who are disabled or blind and have limited income and resources. The program also pays a benefit to individuals age 65 and older who do not have a disability. They may or may not qualify for retirement benefits but if their income and savings are low enough, it may be supplemented with SSI.
- In most states, eligibility for SSI includes Medicaid eligibility. In some states a person who is SSI eligible needs to apply for Medicaid. Some states also provide a state supplement payment for residents who receive SSI.
Some individuals may receive SSDI and SSI if their income and resources are limited.
A person can sign up online at My SSA Account to see if their work history indicates that they have enough work credits to be fully insured. Their estimated payment amount would be shown there too. Otherwise, a person who has not worked long enough or recently enough could apply for SSI.
The Social Security Administration (SSA) encourages people to apply directly online or to make an appointment to file by phone as soon as the person becomes disabled.
A person who has a severe physical or mental disability that has lasted, or is expected to last, for at least one year or more or result in death may apply if they also are limited in their ability to work. If a person is able to work and their monthly earnings are more than $1,690 a month or more than $2,830 (if blind) the person is not eligible for SSDI or SSI. Unlike some organizations or government programs, SSA does not pay benefits for partial disability or for short term disability of less than 12 months.
If the person is not working or if their earnings are under the countable income limits, they can apply if they have a severe impairment or a combination of impairments. There are two programs under which SSA pays a monthly benefit based on a disability:
- Social Security Disability Insurance Benefits (SSDI) can pay adults (called wage earners) who are ages 18 up to their full retirement age, 67) If, they have worked long enough and recently enough and paid Social Security income taxes. If approved, the wage earner’s eligible dependent children can be paid a benefit called Childhood Disability Benefits (CDB) if the child is over age 18 when that adult child’s disability began before age 22. Benefits may also be paid to various dependents or to a surviving disabled widow/widower (DWB) who is between the age of 50-60 and meets certain technical rules of eligibility.
- Supplemental Security Income (SSI) Benefits are paid to children and adults who have limited income and limited resources. If a child is under age 18, the parent’s income and resources (savings) are counted to determine eligibility After age 18 the parent’s income and resources (savings) are no longer considered.
  - If an SSI applicant has more than $2,000 or $3,000 for a couple, in countable resources, they may want to consider opening an ABLE account for saving cash. ABLE savings up to $100,000 are not counted as a resource for SSI.
  - Keep in mind that SSI benefit amounts vary based upon living arrangements. A person who pays their fair share of rent may receive 1/3 more SSI benefits, up to the full federal benefit rate. That is why many parents charge their adult child who receives SSI benefits rent. This is a strategy that can bring more money into the household to cover the extra expenses associated with having a disability. The extra money may even be deposited, saved and invested in an ABLE account.
If you have questions about which benefit you may qualify for, you may want to telephone SSA before filing or starting the process at (800) 772-1213.
There are several ways that you can apply for benefits or start the process:
- SSDI
  - Apply Online for Disability Benefitsto file the SSDI application. At this time, you cannot file for benefits as a Childhood Disability Beneficiary (CDB) or Disabled Widow Benefits (DWB)online; or
  - Schedule an appointment at 1-800-772-1213 (TTY 1-800-325-0778).
  - In all cases, complete the Adult Disability Reportonline in advance. This will speed up the process.
- SSI
  - You can get started but you cannot file the SSI application online. After you complete the online process, a Social Security representative will schedule an appointment for you to help you apply for benefits; or
  - Set up an appointment at 1-800-772-1213 to apply for SSI disability benefits. SSA will decide if you can come into the office to file or whether you can file by phone interview. If someone is deaf or hard of hearing, they may call the toll-free TTY number 1-800-325-0778 to review their options.
Learn what you need when applying for Disability Benefits such as information about yourself, about your disability condition, doctor contact information and any employment information for the last five years. After you have applied, you can check the status of your application online or you can appeal the decision within 60 days of getting a denial letter.
To help you get ready for your disability interview or online application, review the Disability Starter Kit. There is a kit for adults and a kit for children.
If you don’t agree with a decision the Social Security Administration (SSA) made, you have opportunities to appeal the decision. The process starts by asking the SSA to reconsider their decision and it must be requested within 60 days of the date the notice of denial is received. If you are denied again then you can continue through the appeals process by requesting a hearing with a Social Security Administrative Law judge. Your local Center for Independent Living may be able to assist you.
The Social Security Administration announced a new service for people awaiting a hearing decision. In addition to telephone hearings, Social Security offers online video hearings using the Microsoft Teams. This new free service allows applicants and their representatives to participate in the hearing from anywhere they have access to a camera-enabled smartphone, tablet or computer. All hearings are conducted the same. The Social Security judge will swear in all participants, listen to testimony, and ask questions.
You can apply for SSI payments and Medicaid but to qualify, the family income and savings must be limited. Children under the age of 18 can get SSI if they meet the Social Security definition of disability for children. Their physical or mental condition must be very serious and limit their activities AND it must have lasted or can be expected to last at least 12 full months or result in death. A child’s income does not count towards the parents’ disability benefit.
To apply, complete the online Child Disability Report – Form 3820 (ssa.gov). After you complete the report, Social Security will telephone you within 3-5 business days to review the report, discuss your income and resources, and start the rest of the application. If you do not have access to a computer, you may use the computers in the Social Security office or you can make an appointment to file in person or over the phone. SSA will request medical and school records based on the information you give to them. In most states, when someone receives SSI, they also receive Medicaid because Social Security makes that decision.
Social Security may pay benefits to grandchildren when the grandparent retires, becomes disabled or dies when certain conditions are met. Both biological parents of the child must be deceased or disabled, or the grandparent must legally adopt the child, and the grandparent must be providing more than half of the child’s support. Having legal custody of the grandchildren is not enough to qualify for benefits. Contact your local Social Security Office for more information or to start the application!
The earliest a person can receive a Social Security retirement benefit is age 62, however, claiming the benefit at this age results in a reduction in the monthly payment amount compared to claiming it at the full retirement age. Full retirement age does vary based upon the year of your birth. For those born in 1960 or later, the full retirement age is 67.
Delaying claiming retirement benefits beyond full retirement age can result in an increased monthly payment amount up to age 70.
If you don’t have enough Social Security credits to qualify for benefits on your own record, you may be able to receive benefits on your spouse’s record. To qualify for spouse’s benefits, you must be one of the following: Either 62 years of age or older, or any age and have in your care a child younger than age 16, or who has a disability and is entitled to receive benefits on your spouse’s record.
The Social Security Administration (SSA) looks to see how much a person has earned and paid in payroll taxes (FICA) taxes over their years of working. This is called an earnings test. A person must have sufficient credits to be eligible or the person is automatically denied benefits before SSA even evaluates the disability. The number of credits needed depends on the person’s age. The SSDI benefit amount may be more for a person who had higher wages.
You can open a my Social Security account to help you estimate future benefits or manage benefits you already receive.
In 2026, the maximum monthly SSI payment is $994 for an individual and $1,491 for a couple who are married and both disabled. Your amount may be lower based on your income, certain family members’ income, your living arrangement, or other factors. A person’s state may also supplement that monthly payment.
The amount may be higher if you live in a state that supplements an SSI payment. Most states supplement the payment but six do not: Arizona, Arkansas, Mississippi, North Dakota, Tennessee, and West Virginia. The amount of the supplement depends upon whether a person pays for their fair share of rent and if they live alone or with others.
The adult child must apply for the benefit and must meet other eligibility rules. Marriage of the CDB may affect eligibility for this benefit.
The Social Security Administration has trained staff to help people who need to report a death and/or who may be eligible for survivor benefits. Services may be provided over the phone, reducing the need for in-person appointments. Call Social Security Administration 1-800-772-1213 (TTY 1-800-325-0778) Monday through Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. local time. State that you want to report a death and ask if a family member is eligible for survivor benefits.
The Social Security Administration (SSA) publishes the Red Book to share their incentives and supports for people who choose to work to reach an employment goal to secure their financial well-being. SSA has special rules that allow disability beneficiaries to work without jeopardizing their payments or Medicare/Medicaid benefits.
The LEAD Center, under the Department of Labor, Office of Disability Employment Policy, also shares their support and provides a path forward, depending upon where you are in your employment journey: Preparing for a Job, Starting a Job, Maintaining a Job, Changing or Losing a Job, and Retiring from a Job.
No. Supplemental Security Income (SSI) is a program of last resort (unlike Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI), Childhood Disability Benefits (CDB) or Disabled Widow(er)’s Benefits (DWB)) and the law requires that an SSI recipient apply for any benefit they may be eligible to receive or risk termination of SSI.
If you decide to save some or all of these payments, an ABLE account, which is open to eligible individuals with a disability, is a great option for funds to grow tax free. Although unemployment compensation and many other types of unearned income count towards the SSI income limit, up to $100,000 in savings is not counted as a resource for SSI. There is no limit for ABLE savings for those who receive SSDI, Medicare or any type of Medicaid. To learn more about ABLE accounts, visit: ABLENRC.org.
The Social Security Administration provides guidance regarding telephone contact, online services and options for requesting information.
Yes, it can. If you rent or own your own place and pay for your own shelter costs or live in someone else’s household and pay for your share of shelter costs you could get up to the SSI full benefit amount in your state. If you do not live alone, but live with others, even your own child, your SSI state supplement could be reduced. Other things are considered too like your other income, your spouse’s income, or parent’s income if you are under age 18, including your countable savings.
If you are homeless, SSA (Social Security Administration) figures your benefit payment the same as they do for someone who lives in their own house, apartment or other dwelling.
In kind support and maintenance is shelter costs or value that someone provides for you for shelter. It is counted as income when SSA figures your monthly SSI payment amount. There are some programs that are not counted: Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Benefits, housing assistance and some others.
If someone helps pay for your housing or housing related costs, SSA will reduce your monthly SSI payment by as much as one-third, depending on the value of the help you get.
There are two recent changes in the ISM policy beginning September 30, 2024:
- SSA will no longer include food in the ISM calculations; it used to be that help from others to afford food could reduce SSI. The new policy removes a critical barrier for SSI eligibility due to a SSI applicant’s or recipient’s receipt of informal food assistance from friends, family, and community networks of support. Learn about “Omitting Food from In-Kind Support and Maintenance (ISM) Calculations.”
- In the past, if an SSI applicant or recipient was paying a “discounted rent”, it could be charged to ISM and reduce the SSI payment amount. This policy was applied in all but 7 states. SSA policy will change on 9/30/24, so that the same rules are applied in all states. If someone receives discounted rent and if their rent equals or exceeds the presumed maximum value (PMV) or at least 1/3 of the full benefit rate, the SSI payment will not be reduced due to ISM.
Do not ignore an overpayment notice. If you do nothing, SSA will start to collect the overpayment from your benefits. Starting March 25, 2024, SSA will withhold 10% of monthly benefits to recover the overpayment. For most beneficiaries they will approve repayment plans of up to 60 months or 5 years. To qualify, you would have to give them a verbal summary of your income, resources and expenses. If you receive SSI, you will not have to do this. SSA is also making it easier to ask SSA to forgive the overpayment and they are in the process of developing their policy now. Please visit SSA.gov for further updates.
Benefits.gov is a great tool to help you find benefits you may be eligible to receive, such as income assistance, employment accommodations, housing, caregiver assistance and other programs. You can browse by category or search using keywords. While this website does not accept or manage applications for benefits, it does provide you with details on programs and guides you through the process.
The American Dream Employment Network (ADEN), a program of National Disability Institute, is committed to helping Americans with disabilities achieve their American Dream. If you receive Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) or Supplemental Security Income (SSI) benefits, are age 18 through 64 and you’re ready to return to work, ADEN is available to support you. Whether you are entering the workforce for the first time, returning to work or currently working, ADEN can support you in your efforts. ADEN is an approved Employment Network operating under Social Security’s Ticket to Work program.
TANF can temporarily assist low-income needy families with children (or expecting a child) experiencing financial difficulties. The criteria for “needy,” income eligibility and services vary by state. Each individual state, territory and tribe uses the TANF grants for monthly assistance payments and services.
Special refugee cash assistance (RCA) and refugee medical assistance (RMA) may be available through a refugee program during their first eight months in the U.S. The Office of Refugee Resettlement (ORR) provides funding for a broad range of social services to refugees through the states and, in some cases, through grants. The purpose is to help refugees obtain employment, achieve economic self-sufficiency and adjust socially as quickly as possible.
In order to qualify for this benefit program, you must not be a U.S. citizen who is a refugee that has been granted asylum, Haitian, Cuban, Amerasian or a victim of trafficking.
Social Security benefits include monthly retirement, survivor and disability benefits; the benefits may be taxable. Supplemental security income payments are not taxable.
You are required to pay taxes on up to 85% of your Social Security benefits if you file a:
- Federal tax return as an “individual” and your “combined income” exceeds $25,000
- Joint return, and you and your spouse have “combined income” of more than $32,000.
- Some states do not apply taxation on Social Security benefit income.
If you are married and file a separate return, you probably will have to pay taxes on your benefits. If you did not receive your SSA-1099 from Social Security, also called a Social Security Benefit Statement, you can request one online with a my Social Security account