Colleges and universities are beginning to consider the
needs of transgender students, but few understand how to
offer support to this segment of the campus community.
This chapter address issues and provides suggestions for
student affairs professionals.
NEW DIRECTIONS FOR STUDENT SERVICES, no. 111, Fall 2005
© Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
49
5
Transgender Issues on College
Campuses
Brett Beemyn, Billy Curtis, Masen Davis, 
Nancy Jean Tubbs
Anecdotal evidence suggests that students are coming out as transgender on
campuses across the country. The term transgender encompasses a wide
range of identities, appearances, and behaviors that blur or cross gender
lines. Within this transgender umbrella are transsexuals, who live some or
all of the time in a sex different from their biological sex; cross-dressers (for-
merly called transvestites), who wear clothes typically associated with the
“opposite” gender; drag kings and drag queens, who cross-dress within a
performance context; and genderqueers, who identify outside of binary gen-
der or sex systems (Lombardi and Davis, forthcoming).
This chapter discusses the experiences of transgender students and how
student affairs professionals may effectively address these students’ needs in
areas of campus life where transgender students have unique concerns: pro-
gramming, housing, bathrooms and locker rooms, counseling and health care,
and records and documents. Although a growing number of colleges and uni-
versities are beginning to consider the needs of transgender students, most
institutions still offer little or no support to this segment of the campus com-
munity (Transgender Law and Policy Institute, 2005). If student affairs pro-
fessionals are committed to working with all students and helping foster their
personal development and academic success, then they cannot ignore trans-
gender students. As this chapter demonstrates, transgender students regularly
encounter institutional discrimination in higher education, which makes it
particularly important that student affairs professionals understand their expe-
riences and the obstacles they confront at most colleges and universities.


50
GENDER IDENTITY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION
Who Are Transgender Students?
Transgender students may be of any age, ethnicity, race, class, or sexual ori-
entation. Some enter higher education open about being transgender, while
others come out during college or graduate school. Still others may never
use the term transgender, but will strongly identify themselves as male,
female, transsexual, or another (or no) gender. Some students may choose
to transition; that is, to live as a gender different from the one assigned to
them at birth. Transitioning is a complex, individual process that often
includes changing one’s name, appearance, and body (Lombardi and Davis,
forthcoming).
Identity development is a dynamic process for many transgender col-
lege students (Bilodeau, 2005). Consider the following composite portraits
that represent but a fraction of the diverse identities of and challenges faced
by transgender students. Sky, for example, entered college as a lesbian.
During her sophomore year, she realized she felt like neither a woman nor
a man and began identifying as genderqueer. Over time, Sky identiﬁed as
an effeminate gay man, but found it difﬁcult to ﬁnd male partners as a
gender-different student. During Sky’s senior year, he initiated hormone
treatment and lived as a man.
Many transgender students experience isolation and rejection from
family and friends (Pusch, 2005). Curt, an eighteen-year-old heterosexual
male, had been placed into foster care after being rejected by his family
when he came out as a female-to-male transsexual two years earlier. Now
in his ﬁrst year of college, Curt is legally changing his name and gender. He
is frustrated that professors keep calling him by his female name even
though he presents as male and has asked to be called Curt. He feels iso-
lated and is considering leaving school.
Transgender students confront a number of challenges within campus
environments, including a lack of access to health care and difﬁculties with
sex-segregated facilities (Beemyn, 2003; Nakamura, 1998). Maria, a Latina
student, was assigned male at birth. Although Maria would prefer that no
one know that she is a transsexual woman, she must negotiate with student
health to ensure access to hormones and other services. Maria works extra
hours so she can afford genital surgery some day.
Other students live genderqueer lives by refusing to limit themselves
to any single gender. Ron, a nineteen-year-old African American male,
proudly wears a dress around campus, weathering chronic harassment from
other students. Chris, a graduate student, wants to be gender-free and
prefers gender-neutral pronouns.
Transgender students offer unique contributions to the campus com-
munity. With the assistance of student service professionals who can help
them navigate campus resources and sex-segregated facilities, transgender
students can fully realize their potential.


TRANSGENDER ISSUES ON COLLEGE CAMPUSES
51
Addressing Speciﬁc Transgender Concerns
Primary issue areas regarding the concerns of transgender students are
described here.
Programming. College events and activities play a signiﬁcant role in a
student’s sense of belonging and connection with the greater campus com-
munity. The quality and quantity of a student’s involvement on campus also
has a positive effect on the student’s learning and development (Astin, 1984).
Institutions should thus develop programs that are welcoming to transgender
students, including programs that focus speciﬁcally on transgender issues. A
campus with a variety of events and activities that are inclusive of transgender
experiences and needs can also provide nontrans-gender students with a more
valuable college experience.
Educational Programs. In order for transgender students to feel wel-
comed and included in campus life and activities, programming must reﬂect
their experiences and allow for their full participation. Similar to other
underrepresented communities on campus, transgender students may feel
invisible or marginalized if little or no effort is made to acknowledge their
presence, much less meet their needs. Yet most campuses offer few oppor-
tunities for students to learn about transgender issues and experiences
(Beemyn, 2003; Sausa, 2002).
Creating and widely advertising transgender-focused educational pro-
grams can increase campus awareness of the unique challenges faced by
transgender students. Colleges and universities can also develop a trans-
gender ally program or speakers bureau, create a transgender FAQ bulletin
board packet for residence halls, invite leading transgender speakers to cam-
pus, schedule a separate awareness week for transgender issues, include
transgender-related information throughout the institution’s Web site, and
offer regular training sessions for staff and students on transgender issues.
Support Services. Support for transgender students is typically com-
bined with support for lesbian, gay, and bisexual (LGB) students. But many
LGB student organizations and academic programs, even ones that include
or have added “transgender” to their names in recent years, rarely address
gender identity issues and often provide limited support to transgender stu-
dents, especially to transgender students who self-identify as heterosexual
(Beemyn, 2003). As a result, transgender students are forming their own
groups at some colleges and universities, particularly where there are a large
number of openly transgender students and a more supportive campus cli-
mate. In the absence of a transgender student organization, a campus LGBT
ofﬁce or counseling center can work with students to create a transgender
support group (Beemyn, 2003; Lees, 1998).
Inclusive Policies. Campus nondiscrimination policies include the
categories of “sex” and sometimes “sexual orientation,” but neither category
necessarily covers transgender people, who face discrimination based on


52
GENDER IDENTITY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION
their gender identity and expression rather than their biological gender or
sexual identity (Beemyn, 2003). To protect the rights of transgender peo-
ple, more than twenty colleges and college systems have added protection
of “gender identity or expression” to their nondiscrimination policies. A
number of institutions are also changing policies and practices that exclude
or marginalize transgender students by conceptualizing gender as male and
female, such as college forms that allow students to identify only as male or
female (Transgender Law and Policy Institute, 2005). (See also Chapter One
of this volume.)
Campus Housing. Housing policies and practices that assume that
students are male or female fail to serve transgender students, especially
those who are in the process of transitioning from one gender to another or
who do not identify as either dominant gender. If college administrators are
to continue to meet the changing needs of students, they must develop pro-
cedures that recognize diverse gender identities and expressions. This 
professional obligation is also a legal requirement at institutions where state
or municipal laws or college policies ban discrimination against people
because of their gender identity or expression.
Given the diversity of individual student needs and the immense diver-
sity of housing facilities and programs, the housing needs of transgender
students must be addressed on a case-by-case basis. However, a formal writ-
ten policy can guide institutional practice and provide a foundation for
ensuring the fair, safe, and legal treatment of transgender students.
Several colleges and universities have adopted such housing policies.
The University of Minnesota, Twin Cities, developed a policy that respects
the gender identity a student establishes with the university and strives to
provide accommodations when possible (Transgender Law and Policy
Institute, 2005). The Ohio State University created a similar policy, which
also states that no student “whom they know to be transgendered [will]
have to ﬁnd a comfortable, welcoming housing assignment on their own”
(Ohio State University, 2005). The policy of the University of California,
Riverside, emphasizes the principle of “reasonable accommodations” when
the University is notiﬁed in a timely manner (University of California,
Riverside, 2005).
In order to identify and assist transgender students, some colleges and
universities are changing the sex designation on their housing intake forms
(Transgender Law and Policy Institute, 2005). Asking if someone is male
or female not only fails to recognize the full complexity of gender identity,
but also provides insufﬁcient information for roommate assignments. More
appropriate alternatives to binary boxes are simple ﬁll-in-the-blank
options, “Your gender is: ________,” or the multiple choices of “Male,”
“Female,” “Self-Identify: _______.” Housing forms also often ask students
to indicate any special needs. Some campuses include “transgender” or
“gender different” among these concerns (Transgender Law and Policy
Institute, 2005).


TRANSGENDER ISSUES ON COLLEGE CAMPUSES
53
Regardless of how transgender students notify the institution of
their gender identities, residence-life staff should follow up with stu-
dents who want to live on campus to understand their speciﬁc needs bet-
ter. In such instances, the personal information shared by the students
should be kept conﬁdential, and only information required to establish
the need for a particular accommodation should be requested. Some
transgender students prefer not to reveal the status of their physical
body, which may not be congruent with their gender identity or expres-
sion. Colleges and universities should thus allow students to demon-
strate the need for a particular housing option by providing a letter from
a medical professional.
Residence-life staff who demonstrate their sensitivity to and under-
standing of transgender experiences create a welcoming environment for
students to explore their housing needs and options more honestly and
effectively. However, many colleges and universities have yet to identify the
campus housing options that would provide the safest and most comfort-
able living arrangements for transgender students.
Implementing policies supportive of trans students requires student
affairs staff to assess different housing options in relation to transgender 
student needs. Many campus residence halls were built at a time when hall-
ways, ﬂoors, or buildings were divided by gender and offered only commu-
nal men’s and women’s restrooms and shower rooms. By inventorying the
kinds of facilities available and how students are housed in these facilities,
residence-life staff can successfully address the needs of transgender stu-
dents on a case-by-case basis (Curtis and Tubbs, 2004).
When assessing housing facilities, the ﬁrst consideration is whether
rooms are co-ed or same-sex by suite, hallway, ﬂoor, or building. A trans-
gender student’s ability to “pass” may be more difﬁcult in a same-sex living
environment, where residents are expected to conform to a particular set of
gender expressions.
Residence-life staff should document the existence and location of
rooms that have their own bathrooms and showers. As discussed later in
this chapter, many transgender students prefer private restrooms and
shower facilities for safety reasons. In residence halls that do not have a
bathroom in each room, residence-life staff should note whether the build-
ings have any gender-neutral restrooms and whether any of the shower
facilities have lockable stalls, rather than just shower curtains. They should
also examine cost differences between residence halls to determine whether
transgender students are forced to incur a greater ﬁnancial burden in order
to live in a safer environment.
Another important consideration is which buildings or ﬂoors include
theme housing, and whether transgender students would likely gain accep-
tance and feel a part of these communities. Even an LGBT and Allies theme
hall may not be a comfortable environment for transgender students if they
identify as heterosexual or are not open about their gender identity.


A campus housing assessment should also examine the demographics
of the residents of each building. Returning students who have already
lived on campus may be more accepting of gender difference, and thus a
largely upper-class-student residence hall might be a safer location for
transgender students.
Recognizing that existing facilities are often unable to meet the needs
of students with diverse gender identities, some colleges and universities
are beginning to offer a gender-neutral housing option, either to all students
or just to upper-class students. In gender-neutral housing, room assign-
ments are made without regard to the individuals’ biological gender, so res-
idents may request a roommate of any gender. Among the institutions that
provide this opportunity are Sarah Lawrence College, the University of Cali-
fornia, Riverside, the University of Pennsylvania, the University of Southern
Maine, and Wesleyan University (Curtis and Tubbs, 2004; Transgender Law
and Policy Institute, 2005).
Because transgender students have unique concerns that are often
poorly understood by housing staff, regular training workshops for profes-
sionals and paraprofessionals in residence life are essential for meeting the
needs of transgender students. In addition to providing basic information
about transgender people, these sessions should address how to make room
assignments for transgender students, how to assist a student who comes out
as transgender during the academic year, how to create trans-inclusive hall
programs, and how to create a safe, conﬁdential space so that transgender
students feel comfortable approaching staff with questions and concerns.
To inform current and prospective students about how the campus
addresses the housing needs of transgender people, colleges and universi-
ties should include such information, along with the contact information of
a housing staff person who can respond to transgender-related questions
and concerns, on residence-life Web sites and brochures and in any mate-
rial targeted to LGBT communities. Housing staff should also seek to reach
prospective students through sharing the information with student affairs
colleagues, particularly the staffs in admissions, orientation, and student
activities. Returning students might be reached through outreach to cam-
pus groups or ofﬁces that provide support to LGBT students.
Student affairs professionals should recognize transgender students’
needs, just as they would try to understand and address the concerns of
members of other underrepresented communities. By acknowledging and
accommodating the speciﬁc housing needs of transgender students and fos-
tering a residential environment where all forms of diversity are celebrated
and appreciated, residence-life staff can help transgender students beneﬁt
both academically and socially from living on campus.
Bathrooms and Locker Rooms. Whether through cross-dressing,
transitioning from one gender to another, or blending traditionally female
and male elements, transgender students violate society’s expectation 
that someone is either female or male, which makes them vulnerable to
54
GENDER IDENTITY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION


TRANSGENDER ISSUES ON COLLEGE CAMPUSES
55
harassment and violence. Some of the most dangerous places on many
campuses for transgender students are restrooms and locker rooms des-
ignated for “women” and “men.” Anecdotal and research evidence sug-
gest that transgender people often face verbal and physical assault and
risk being questioned or even arrested by the police when they use
gender-speciﬁc facilities (Coalition for Queer Action, 2001; San Francisco
Human Rights Commission, 2001).
Given these dangers, it is not surprising that using bathrooms and
locker rooms presents a major source of anxiety for many transgender stu-
dents. Some travel far out of their way to use restrooms that are safer and
more private, or avoid using campus bathrooms altogether, to the detriment
of their comfort and health (Coalition for Queer Action, 2001). It is easier
for transgender people to avoid using locker rooms, where having to
undress and shower in front of others may “out” them as transgender. But
transgender students are thus prevented from being able to participate in
athletic programs and physical education courses and from having complete
access to campus recreational facilities.
To aid transgender people in being able to use bathrooms without fear
or concern, students, staff, and faculty at some colleges are advocating for
the creation of gender-neutral restrooms (single-stall, lockable, unisex rest-
rooms) in existing and newly constructed buildings. For example, the stu-
dent association at San Diego State University passed a resolution in 2003
calling for the implementation of safe restrooms across campus for trans-
gender students. As a ﬁrst step, the group approved funds to change door
signs and install door locks to convert a set of women’s and men’s bath-
rooms in the student union into gender-neutral facilities. The locations of
all gender-neutral restrooms are also listed in the university’s general cata-
log. At the University of Chicago and at Beloit College (Wisconsin), stu-
dents successfully lobbied their institutions to create gender-neutral
bathrooms in the most frequented campus buildings (Transgender Law and
Policy Institute, 2005).
To make locker rooms safe for transgender students, colleges and uni-
versities can create individual showers with curtains or private changing
rooms. Although these changes require more extensive renovations than
converting men’s and women’s restrooms into gender-neutral bathrooms,
institutions should have facilities that are accessible to all members of the
campus community. Moreover, private changing rooms beneﬁt not only
transgender people, but also families with children (such as mothers bring-
ing sons or fathers bringing daughters to a facility) and people with dis-
abilities who require the assistance of an attendant of a different gender.
Counseling and Health Care. As transgender students become
increasingly visible on college campuses, counseling and health care ser-
vices are struggling to address the unique needs of this population (Beemyn,
2003; Carter, 2000). For example, a 2002 survey of University of Michigan
student affairs professionals, including counselors and health care providers,


found that more than half of the respondents reported challenges in
addressing the concerns of transgender students (Gender Identity Working
Group, 2003). A related survey of more than four hundred University of
Michigan students (Matney, 2003) found that transgender students there
face multiple barriers, including perceptions that campus health care and
counseling professionals are unable to provide support to transgender stu-
dents or adequately address their needs.
Other colleges and universities likewise lack supportive health care ser-
vices for transgender students. In a national qualitative study of seventy-ﬁve
transgender undergraduate and graduate students, McKinney (2005) found
that only four of the respondents indicated positive interactions with cam-
pus counselors. Many of the graduate students in the study also reported
that campus health center staff failed to provide adequate services for trans-
gender students.
Counseling. Culturally appropriate counseling can provide a safe,
nonjudgmental place for students to explore their developing identities
and address college-related challenges (Gould, 2004). While sharing many
of the same developmental concerns as their peers, transgender students
may also face culturally speciﬁc issues related to their gender-identity
development, including coming out to themselves and to family and
friends, negotiating gendered environments (such as residence halls and
restrooms), deciding whether or not to transition physically to the “oppo-
site” sex, negotiating intimate relationships outside of traditional male and
female identities, accessing health care services supportive of transgender
people, adjusting to a new social identity, and surviving discrimination
and harassment (Ettner and Brown, 1999; Gould, 2004; Israel and Tarver,
1997). Counselors working with students who are seeking to transition
should refer to the Standards of Care developed by the Harry Benjamin
International Gender Dysphoria Association (2001) for recommended
treatment guidelines.
The scant research that has been published on transgender students ﬁnds
that they are subject to higher rates of marginalization, discrimination, and
harassment than nontransgender students (Rankin, 2003). The social 
and economic stresses that many transgender students experience as a result
of family rejection, harassment, violence, and isolation can, in turn, lead to
adjustment disorders, depression, posttraumatic stress, anxiety, depression,
substance abuse, suicide ideation, and self-harm (Dean, 2000). These mental
health issues may affect the academic success of transgender students, mak-
ing access to supportive counseling even more important for this population.
Although counseling may be encouraged for transgender people, especially
for those who plan to undergo gender reassignment processes, being trans-
gender should not be considered a mental illness (Dean, 2000). A diagnosis
of a gender-related mental disorder should be limited to individuals with evi-
dence of distress or impairment of functioning beyond that caused by social
stigma or prejudice (American Psychiatric Association, 1994).
56
GENDER IDENTITY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION


Health Care. All students need and deserve culturally competent primary
health care to maintain healthy, productive lives. Although research on
campus-based health services for transgender people is sparse, studies of gen-
eral health care access for this population ﬁnd that professionals typically lack
accurate information about transgender people, severely limiting their ability
to provide quality care (Dean, 2000). For example, a survey of transgender
men in Los Angeles (FTM Alliance of Los Angeles, 2004) found that slightly
more than half of the respondents had been denied medical services because
of their transgender status. When they did receive care, more than two-thirds
were dissatisﬁed with the provider’s knowledge of transgender issues. A
Washington, D.C., transgender needs assessment (Xavier, 2000) reported that
nearly one-third of the 263 transgender people surveyed believed that the
transphobia of health care providers and a fear that caregivers would disclose
their transgender status were barriers to medical care. In one of the few
college-based studies, McKinney (2005) found that transgender graduate stu-
dents were more concerned than their undergraduate peers about health
issues. The graduate student participants did not feel that campus health care
systems met their needs—they often had to educate the providers about trans-
gender health issues—and their limited health insurance coverage made it dif-
ﬁcult for them to seek off-campus health care.
In order to provide more competent and supportive health care, cam-
pus health center staff should educate themselves on transgender health
issues and the speciﬁc needs of transgender people. For example, health care
providers should recognize that the external appearance of a transgender stu-
dent may differ signiﬁcantly from the person’s internal anatomy. Thus a
transsexual man may need a pap smear if he has not had a hysterectomy, and
a transsexual woman may need a prostate exam (Feldman and Bockting,
2003). In addition to informed and sensitive primary health care, transgen-
der students need access to gender-speciﬁc services, including safe, afford-
able hormones and gender-related surgeries. If campus health insurance
plans exclude transition-related services, student health personnel should
advocate for expanded coverage and help students ﬁnd alternate, off-campus
care. The absence of appropriate health care may have a negative affect on
the retention, academic success, and physical and mental well-being of trans-
gender students (DeBerard, Spielmans, and Julka, 2004; Lombardi and Davis,
forthcoming).
Campuses across the country are beginning to improve the quality of
health services for transgender students (McKinney, 2005). For example, the
University of Michigan and the University of Minnesota have health care and
counseling programs speciﬁc to transgender people, and the University of
California, Berkeley, has developed a Transgender Student Health Web site
to create a welcoming climate and increase health access for transgender stu-
dents (University of California, Berkeley, Health Services, 2004; University
of Michigan Health System Comprehensive Gender Services Program, 2004;
University of Minnesota Transgender Health Services, 2004). Some colleges
TRANSGENDER ISSUES ON COLLEGE CAMPUSES
57


and universities are also implementing mandatory transgender education
training sessions for health center staff, revising intake forms to be inclusive
of transgender students and developing policies and procedures to help
ensure that transgender students receive appropriate and supportive health
services (Transgender Law and Policy Institute, 2005).
Institutions that are unable to meet the health care needs of transgen-
der students should develop a resource guide and referral system for off-
campus, transgender-friendly counselors and health providers. In the
absence of local resources, students may be referred to relevant national orga-
nizations, publications, and Web sites, such as Trans-Health (http://www.
trans-health.com) and TransGenderCare (http://www.transgendercare.com).
College Records and Documents. Transsexual students who decide
to transition from one gender to another typically seek to change their gen-
der and often their names on ofﬁcial records and documents. Students who
self-identify as genderqueer may also change their given names to match
their gender identity. The process for making these changes varies from
state to state and institution to institution. At some colleges and universi-
ties, the process is difﬁcult or no means exist to make such changes.
Being able to alter their records and documents, though, is personally
and legally important for many transgender students. Not only does having
the appropriate name and gender reﬂect and validate their identities, but it
may also prevent transgender students from being placed into uncomfort-
able and dangerous situations where they would have to explain why they
use a name different from their birth name and why their appearance does
not match a photo or gender designation on an identiﬁcation card. Moreover,
updated records and documents ensure that transgender students will not
be forced to disclose their gender identities and thus be subject to discrimi-
nation when they apply for jobs, seek admission to graduate and professional
schools, or at any other time when they must show a college document.
Colleges can address this issue by establishing a simple procedure for
transgender students to change the name or gender designation on all of
their campus records, including ID cards, listings in electronic and print
directories, and ﬁles in admissions, ﬁnancial aid, the registrar’s ofﬁce, and
the health center. For example, at Ohio State University, transgender stu-
dents who legally change their names can complete a form with the regis-
trar to change the name as well as the gender designation on their main
college record. At the University of Maryland, transgender students can
change the name and gender listed on their records by obtaining a letter of
support from a mental health professional. Through these processes, stu-
dents at both institutions effectively change the information on all of their
campus records. No one outside of the registrar’s ofﬁces knows that stu-
dents’ records have been changed. At the University of Vermont, transgen-
der students who are not in a position to change their names legally can still
request an ID card with a name other than their birth name (Transgender
Law and Policy Institute, 2005).
58
GENDER IDENTITY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION


An institution should never insist that individuals have genital surger-
ies before changing their records. More and more transsexual students are
identifying and living as a gender different from their birth gender without
pursuing or completing gender reassignment, and even people who desire
surgeries often cannot afford the procedures or are limited by pre-existing
medical conditions. Moreover, some transmen feel that the results of geni-
toplasty (genital reconstruction) are less than adequate. Given these factors,
it is inappropriate and unethical for institutions to pressure students to have
surgery before aligning their records with their identities.
References
American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders.
(4th ed.) Washington, D.C.: American Psychiatric Association, 1994.
Astin, A. W. “Student Involvement: A Developmental Theory for Higher Education.”
Journal of College Student Personnel, 1984, 25, 297–308.
Beemyn, B. “Serving the Needs of Transgender College Students.” Journal of Gay and
Lesbian Issues in Education, 2003, 1(1), 33–50.
Bilodeau, B. “Beyond the Gender Binary: New Perspectives on Transgender Student
Identity Development.” Journal of Gay and Lesbian Issues in Education, 2005, 3(1).
Carter, K. A. “Transgenderism and College Students: Issues of Gender Identity and Its
Role on Our Campuses.” In V. A. Wall and N. J. Evans (eds.), Toward Acceptance:
Sexual Orientation Issues on Campus. Washington, D.C.: American College Personnel
Association, 2000.
Coalition for Queer Action. “Queer Action Campaign: Gender-Neutral Bathrooms.”
2001. http://www.pissr.org/research.html. Accessed Oct. 15, 2004.
Curtis, B., and Tubbs, N. J. “Housing and Residential Life.” In L. Strimpel, K. Mayeda,
and R. Sanlo (eds.), Transactions: Transgender Issues in Student Affairs. Unpublished
manuscript, 2004.
Dean, L. “Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Health: Findings and Concerns.”
Journal of the Gay and Lesbian Medical Association, 2000, 4(3), 102–151.
DeBerard, M. S., Spielmans, G., and Julka, D. “Predictors of Academic Achievement and
Retention Among College Freshmen: A Longitudinal Study.” College Student Journal,
2004, 38(1), 66.
Ettner, R., and Brown, G. Gender Loving Care: A Guide to Counseling Gender Variant
Clients. New York: Norton, 1999.
Feldman, J., and Bockting, W. “Transgender Health.” Minnesota Medicine, 2003, 86,
25–32. http://www.mnmed.org/publications/MNMed2003/July/Feldman.html. Ac-
cessed Oct. 15, 2004.
FTM Alliance of Los Angeles. Results of the 2003 Health Access Survey: The Female-to-
Male Transgender Community Experiences Multiple Barriers to Healthcare in Southern
California. Los Angeles: FTM Alliance, 2004.
Gender Identity Working Group. Final Report of the Gender Identity Working Group,
6/23/03. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, 2003.
Gould, D. “Counseling Services: Counseling Issues with Transgender and Gender
Variant Students.” In L. Strimpel, K. Mayeda, and R. Sanlo (eds.), Transactions:
Transgender Issues in Student Affairs. Unpublished manuscript, 2004.
Harry Benjamin International Gender Dysphoria Association. “The HBIGDA Standards
of Care for Gender Identity Disorders, Sixth Version.” 2001. http://www.hbigda.org/
soc.cfm. Accessed Oct. 15, 2004.
Israel, G., and Tarver, D. E., II. Transgender Care: Recommended Guidelines, Practical
Information, and Personal Accounts. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1997.
TRANSGENDER ISSUES ON COLLEGE CAMPUSES
59


Lees, L. J. “Transgender Students on Our Campuses.” In R. L. Sanlo (ed.), Working with
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender College Students: A Handbook for Faculty and
Administrators. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1998.
Lombardi, E., and Davis, S. “Transgender Health Issues.” In D. F. Morrow and L.
Messinger (eds.), Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity in Social Work Practice. New
York: Columbia University Press, forthcoming.
Matney, M. Gender Identity Group Student Survey Results. Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan, 2003.
McKinney, J. “On the Margins: A Study of the Experiences of Transgender College
Students.” Journal of Gay and Lesbian Issues in Education, 2005, 3(1).
Nakamura, K. “Transitioning on Campus: A Case Studies Approach.” In R. L. Sanlo
(ed.), Working with Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender College Students: A
Handbook for Faculty and Administrators. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1998.
Ohio State University. “OSU Transgender Guide and Resources.” 2005. http://multicul-
turalcenter.osu.edu/glbtss. Accessed Mar. 28, 2005.
Pusch, R. “Objects of Curiosity: Transgender College Students’ Perception of the
Reactions of Others.” Journal of Gay and Lesbian Issues in Education, 2005, 3(1).
Rankin, S. R. Campus Climate for Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual, and Transgender People: A
National Perspective. New York: National Gay and Lesbian Task Force Policy Institute,
2003.
San Francisco Human Rights Commission. “Gender Neutral Bathroom Survey.” 2001.
http://www.pissr.org/research.html. Accessed Oct. 15, 2004.
Sausa, L. A. “Updating College and University Campus Policies: Meeting the Needs of
Trans Students, Staff, and Faculty.” In E. P. Cramer (ed.), Addressing Homophobia and
Heterosexism on College Campuses. Binghamton, N.Y.: Harrington Park Press, 2002.
Transgender Law and Policy Institute. “Ways that Colleges and Universities Meet the
Needs of Transgender Students.” http://www.transgenderlaw.org/college/index.htm.
Accessed Mar. 15, 2005.
University of California, Berkeley, Health Services. “Services for Transgender Students.”
2004. http://www.uhs.berkeley.edu/students/medical/transgender.shtml. Accessed Oct.
15, 2004.
University of California, Riverside. “UCR Housing Policies Related to Gender
Identity/Expression.” 2005. http://www.out.ucr.edu/transpolicy.html. Accessed March
28, 2005.
University of Michigan Health System Comprehensive Gender Services Program. 2004.
http://www.med.umich.edu/transgender. Accessed Oct. 15, 2004.
University of Minnesota Transgender Health Services. 2004. http://www.med.umn.edu/
fp/phs/tgs.htm. Accessed Oct. 15, 2004.
Xavier, J. The Washington Transgender Needs Assessment Survey. 2000. http://www.glaa.
org/archive/2000/tgneedsassessment1112.shtml. Accessed Oct. 15, 2004.
BRETT BEEMYN is director of the LGBT Center at Ohio State University.
BILLY CURTIS is director of the LGBT Center at the University of California,
Berkeley.
MASEN DAVIS is a social worker and founder and director of the FTM Alliance
of Los Angeles.
NANCY JEAN TUBBS is director of the LGBT Center at the University of
California, Riverside.
60
GENDER IDENTITY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION