Choosing Employment:  
Factors that Impact Employment Decisions for Individuals with Intellectual Disabilities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jaimie Ciulla Timmons 
Allison Cohen Hall 
Jennifer Bose 
Ashley Wolfe 
Jean Winsor 
 
 
 


 
Abstract 
Little is known about the factors that shape the employment-related decisions of individuals with 
Intellectual and/or Developmental Disabilities (ID/DD). This article presents findings from 
qualitative interviews with individuals with ID/DD, their family members and employment-support 
professionals from four Community Rehabilitation Providers (CRPs) throughout Massachusetts. 
Recognizing the value of participatory action research, this study also included a co-researcher with 
ID/DD who participated in all facets of the research process. Findings revealed a collection of people 
and factors considered influential in employment-related decision-making. The family in the 
formative years, school-based staff and early employment experiences, the culture of the CRP, the job 
developer, and personal preferences all played a role in the decisions participants made. Through an 
understanding of these persuasive elements, and the parts of the employment process at which they 
occur, critical intervention points surfaced. Recommendations are offered to those in the ID/DD field 
to optimize employment choices and outcomes. 
 
Key words: individuals with ID/DD, employment, decision-making 


Policy shifts over the past 20 years have signaled a commitment to integrated employment for 
individuals with disabilities yet unemployment of this group continues as a pressing public policy 
concern. Recent analysis suggests that 28 percent of working-age adults with disabilities are employed, 
compared with 70 percent of people without disabilities (Current Population Survey, 2009). For people 
with intellectual and developmental disabilities (ID/DD) the disparity in labor market participation 
increases. In FY2003, only 26 percent of individuals with ID/DD supported by community rehabilitation 
providers (CRPs) worked in integrated jobs (Metzel, Boeltzig, Butterworth, Sulewski, & Gilmore, 
2007). At the same time, participation in sheltered or facility-based employment and non-work services 
has grown steadily for this group (Winsor & Butterworth, 2008; Mank, 2003).  
As CRPs continue to offer options from supported employment to sheltered employment, a 
significant critique of the service system is that it provides either no choice, or no meaningful choices 
(Storey, 2006).  Informed choice involves education about available resources and the opportunity to 
choose a preferred option. Wehmeyer (2005), suggests that the goal of self-determination is to enable 
individuals to “act volitionally, and to become causal agents in their lives, to make things happen” (p. 
120, emphasis added).  
In recent years, research has begun to focus on the decision-making capacities of people with 
intellectual disabilities, although research on self-determined behavior remains limited (Shogren, 
Wehmeyer, Buchanan, & Lopez, 2006). Much of the literature has shown that individuals often have 
restricted opportunities for expressing self-determination as they are limited by communication and 
congregate work settings that curtail opportunities for choice and decision-making (Powers, 2005; 
Storey, 2006; Wehmeyer & Bolding, 2001).  
As researchers consider choice-making among individuals with ID/DD, the interaction with a host of 
critical players throughout their employment journeys must be considered. Research highlights the roles 
of family members, who often introduce the idea of employment and are sought out for advice (Ankeny, 
Wilkins & Spain, 2009). Other family contributions include intentional career-related guidance and 
modeling of work values, especially during the transition years (Way & Rossman, 1996). Families of 
individuals with ID/DD also provide significant practical and moral support in maintaining competitive 
employment, compared to families in other disability groups (Dixon & Reddacliff, 2001).  
 
Along with families, school-based experiences are critical during the development of 
employment goals, although the support provided varies widely. For example, Trainor, Carter, Owens, 
and Swedeen (2008) found that special-education teachers reported no designated responsibility for 


helping transition-age students work toward their goals beyond academics. Employment-preparation for 
students with disabilities also appear limited to classroom settings rather than real-world work 
experiences (Guy, Sitlington, Larsen & Frank, 2006). Finally, well-established transition-planning 
programs also appear to be rare (Rutkowski, Daston, Van Kuiken, & Riehle, 2006). 
As clear differences exist in school-based employment-related supports, considerable industry-wide 
variation exists in the quality of CRP service provision as well (Surdick, Pierson, Menz, Hagen-Foley, & 
Ussif, n.d.). As individuals with ID/DD receive services from CRPs, they come to rely on the job-search 
and job-placement skills of direct-support professionals. Although research has investigated the 
competencies in residential settings (Larson & Hewitt, 2005), very little has been done to examine the 
same for professionals who assist job seekers with ID/DD. This is surprising, as direct-support staff face 
complex responsibilities, ranging from navigating a business world driven by profit to addressing the 
personal needs of people with disabilities (Test, Flowers, Hewitt, 2004; Wehman & Targett, 2001).  
While family, school, and employment-support systems and staff are critical players during the 
employment journey, other factors, such as positive previous work experiences, supportive work 
environments, and social integration with coworkers, likely play a role as well (Carter & Ditchman, 
2010; Novack & Rogan, 2010). These factors often come up against barriers such as inaccessible 
transportation and perceived family concerns about safety and long-term placement of the individual 
(Migliore, Grossi, Mank & Rigan, 2008). 
This literature review suggests that individuals with ID/DD continue to experience employment-
related underachievement and limited opportunities to exercise choice about work-related concerns. 
While family members, school-based staff, and adult-employment staff represent critical players in the 
employment journeys of individuals with ID/DD, the quality and quantity of supports provided varies 
widely. Less evident is exactly how such critical players influence employment-related decision-making 
for individuals with ID/DD, to what extent those individuals’ preferences correspond to existing 
employment options, and how this influences their decision-making. This study intends to address these 
issues by answering the following research questions: 
•   What factors influence the employment-related decision-making of individuals with ID/DD? 
•   To what extent do their preferences correspond to existing employment options and choices? 
Methods  
The following methods section will review a) recruitment procedures and b) the data collection 
process, and will describe the (c) sample, and d) data-analysis process. A methodological goal of this 


project was to fully involve an individual with ID/DD as a researcher, and the role of this team member 
will be described. Co-researcher is the term that the team used to describe the individual with ID/DD 
who was hired to work as a researcher on the project. 
Recruitment Procedures 
Recruitment for this project occurred in three phases: a) recruiting the co-researcher, b) recruiting 
community-rehabilitation providers, and c) recruiting individuals, their families, and staff members. 
Each phase is described in more detail below. 
Recruiting the co-researcher. Participatory Action Research (PAR) has been of increasing use to 
researchers and members of marginalized populations (Wallerstein & Duran, 2003). The research team 
in this study hired a co-researcher as a way of breaking down barriers between the researcher and 
participant and developing collaborative solutions to problems. Researchers have advocated that PAR be 
used to include individuals with IDD who are often otherwise excluded from the research process 
(Walmsley, 2001; Prilleltensky & Nelson, 2002). Several studies have illustrated the involvement of 
people with intellectual disabilities in many facets of research including collecting data (Knox et al. 
2000), conducting member checks, or making sure that the researchers “got it right” (Mactavish et al. 
2000).  Individuals with IDD have also co-authored research articles (Townson et al. 2004) and self-
advocacy resources (Ward & Townsley 2005). Consideration of such literature clarified the team’s 
rationale for the creation of a co-researcher position. Furthermore, an additional manuscript dedicated 
specifically to the involvement, importance, and impact of the co-researcher on this research project is 
forth coming. 
Recruiting the co-researcher was done first so that she could participate in each subsequent step of 
the research process. The team created a job description, which was advertised through professional 
networking at the research organization. Applicants for the job were not required to have previous 
research experience, only an interest in working with a research mentor to learn about the research 
process. It was recommended that applicants: (1) have an interest in learning about how people find 
jobs, (2) have the desire to participate as a member of a research team, (3) self-identify as someone with 
ID/DD, and (4) have the capability to work with team members. There were twenty-three inquiries to the 
job description and thirteen candidates were considered. The group selected one finalist and two 
alternates. An orientation, training, and support plan was developed to ensure that this staff member was 
a fully integrated and successful member of the research team.  


Recruiting Community Rehabilitation Providers. As a first step, the research team compiled a list 
of twelve CRPs in Massachusetts based on nominations from field-based trainers. When requesting 
nominations, researchers required a range of CRP sizes, regions, and cultures. From this list of twelve, 
the team selected four agencies to participate in the study, based upon agency size, geographic location, 
and diversity in mission and philosophy. The co-researcher was fully involved in the team’s consensus.  
Potential CRPs were first contacted over the phone. Researchers provided an overview of the project 
and requested the CRP’s participation. Each CRP was given a fact sheet summarizing the purpose of the 
project and the data-collection process. In these initial phone calls, CRPs were asked to identify 
participants served by the CRP, and to collaborate with research staff to coordinate recruitment. A staff 
member at each CRP was offered a $100 stipend in exchange for identifying individuals and facilitating 
the team’s visit to their location to conduct interviews.  
 
Recruiting individuals and their contacts. The process for recruiting individuals with ID/DD 
began with recommendations made by key contacts at each CRP. Each CRP contact was asked to select 
four individuals working in a range of employment settings (explained in more detail below). Staff from 
the CRP initially approached each individual and inquired about his/her interest. Additional eligibility 
criteria included: (1) an understanding of one’s own employment process; (2) the cognitive capacity to 
understand the study and to consent to participate; (3) the desire to be interviewed; and (4) employment 
in the current setting for at least six months.  
Upon each individual’s interest in participating, one team member contacted the individual to 
explain the purpose and expected duration, as well as the potential risks and benefits. Individuals were 
also told that they would be asked to identify a family member as well as an employment-support 
professional to be interviewed about the individual’s employment process. If a family member or CRP 
staff person chose not to participate in the study, the individual could still participate. 
Since individuals in the study have ID/DD, researchers used a fact sheet to ensure clear 
communication and full participant understanding. Researchers also emphasized that at any time during 
the study, respondents had the option to end their participation. After individuals understood the nature 
of the study and agreed to participate, research staff scheduled an in-person interview.  
Data Collection 
Data collection began with an accessible consent process, continued with an in-person interview 
with each participant with ID/DD, and ended with follow-up interviews with family members and 
employment-support professionals identified by the individual.  


Consent process. As people with ID/DD are considered a vulnerable population when participating 
in research, care was taken to develop a consent process that used concrete terms and jargon-free 
language. This adapted consent procedure was created under the guidance of the co-researcher with 
support from her project mentor. This process was conversational in nature; the researchers stopped after 
each piece of information and requested that the individual verify her/his understanding. Furthermore, 
the written and verbal explanations were accompanied by pictures of each concept. To scrutinize the 
accessibility of the consent procedure prior to actual data collection, researchers piloted the consent 
forms. The pilot also provided an opportunity for the co-researcher and the other primary interviewer to 
practice the consent process.  
Interviews with individuals with ID/DD. An in-person visit to each CRP occurred and included a 
series of face-to-face individual interviews that lasted approximately one hour each. A semi-structured 
protocol guided each interview, but researchers encouraged a free-flowing discussion. The protocols 
were piloted using the same process as the consent forms. Each individual was asked about a) personal 
background, including living situation, work history, and employment goals and preferences; b) 
circumstances or factors that influenced the search for their current job; c) challenges and how they were 
overcome; and d) level of satisfaction with their employment situation. The co-researcher and primary 
interviewer conducted all face-to-face interviews. The co-researcher’s project mentor also participated in 
the first two site visits.  
Researchers then asked the individual with ID/DD to identify one family member and one 
employment-support provider who could give additional information about the individual’s employment 
process. These people were then contacted by phone and asked for their consent to participate in an 
interview. Upon verbal consent, the research team scheduled interviews. They were asked about a) their 
role in identifying the employment preferences of the individual with ID/DD, b) the individual’s work 
history and employment options, c) their role in the individual’s decision-making process around 
employment, and d) their level of satisfaction with the current employment situation. All interviews with 
family members and with employment-support staff were digitally recorded and sent to an independent 
transcription agency.  
Sample Description 
 The sample for this study consisted of 16 adults with ID/DD, 7 of whom worked in a sheltered-
employment setting and 9 of whom were employed in competitive employment. Researchers also 


conducted a total of 13 interviews with family members and 15 interviews with employment-support 
staff. Please see Table One for more details on the sample description. 
<insert table one about here > 
Data Analysis 
Interview data was analyzed using a qualitative approach. The following steps were employed 
during data analysis: a) coding, and b) memo writing. 
Coding. Coding is an early and ongoing way of labeling data to sort it and assign meaning (Miles & 
Huberman, 1994). Operational definitions for each code were developed in order to ensure that all 
members of the research team had a shared understanding of the code. The definitions described the 
code as the cases emerged. As the coding list was developed, the co-researcher periodically reviewed it 
and provided feedback on its clarity. Through the provision of routine feedback, the co-researcher 
became acquainted with the code list prior to actually participating in the coding of transcripts.  
A qualitative software program (Atlas.ti for the PC) was used to conceptualize themes, store coded 
transcripts, and sort data. Initially the researchers met on a regular basis to reconcile codes and reach 
consensus on code usage. Once the coding process was established, team members were assigned 
documents to code in Atlas.ti, and then these documents were secondarily coded by another team 
member. The co-researcher independently coded and reconciled these transcripts with various team 
members. The researchers simultaneously coded and analyzed the data, often meeting as a team to 
compare specific passages, improve the team’s understanding of the data, and explore the similarities 
and differences between people’s employment experiences (Charmaz, 2000).  
Memo writing. Once all transcripts were primary- and secondary-coded, Atlas.ti was used to 
generate “query reports.” The data from the reports was used to write memos. Memo-writing helped to 
organize themes from the data. The memos allowed the research team to further develop, interpret, and 
analyze the data (Creswell, 1998). The researchers met regularly to discuss the memos generated. The 
team’s co-researcher created memos collaboratively with other team members and reviewed memos 
written by other team members to provide feedback, and in order to remain abreast of key themes 
emerging in various coding reports. Overall, data analysis focused on notable trends that warranted 
investigation while building cumulatively upon findings.  
Findings 
Findings showed a collection of people and factors considered influential in employment-related 
decision-making for individuals with ID/DD. These distinct groups of people and circumstances 


appeared consequential at different points in time over the course of the employment journey. The 
following findings section will review the impact of the following on decision making: a) family in the 
formative years, b) school-based staff and early employment experiences, c) the culture of the CRP, d) 
the job developer, and e) personal preferences.  
The Role of Family in the Formative Years 
When individuals were asked who had been the most influential person in their life regarding work, 
they typically identified a family member. Families were influential because they a) role-modeled 
employment and b) instilled the belief that work was an expectation of adulthood.  
Role-modeling. Family members served as role models for employment throughout the individual’s 
childhood and adolescent years. Through role-modeling, family instilled the belief that work was an 
expectation for adulthood. One individual’s family set the expectation that he was to become a 
hardworking adult just like the other adults in his family. His mother and sister role-modeled that 
employment can start during the adolescent years by discussing their first employment experiences with 
him.  
Family members were often the first to talk about work as a means to achieve independence. 
Through role-modeling, family members showed that employment is the typical means of earning 
income, and that work allows for independence and personal satisfaction. One family member explained 
this idea in more detail: 
He knew I’ve always worked. He grew up knowing that I was at work every day. Never 
missed work. Always had to do it. And I always told him I have to work so I can support 
you. I have to work so you have a roof over your head. I said, “You’re going to have to 
do the same.” And it’s just how I brought him up. 
 
This individual shared similar thoughts of his family member: 
 
…my father always said to me that I could have a good life if I try and get a job and I 
could have money to spend, like my own money to spend…he also said to me that 
working will give you a great opportunity if you want to get another job. 
 
Lastly, another individual talked about following his older brothers’ lead. Watching his brothers grow up 
and get jobs was influential for the individual as he observed that earning money let his brothers be 
independent and move out of the house. The individual said of his siblings, “… neither of them sits in 
front of the TV and [watches] all day.” 
Instilling the value and expectation of work. Through years of role modeling, expectations 
about employment became deeply rooted and ingrained. One family member said, “[working] is what he 


sees around him, and he thinks that’s the normal way to grow up.” Other families also provided 
examples of how they instilled the value of work. A staff person explained that one individual’s mother 
had long-established aspirations that her daughter would work, and as a result the individual had strong 
employment-related goals. The parents and siblings of another person in the study held high 
expectations that the individual would be successful in employment, which paved the way for the 
development of robust career goals.   
The Role of School-Based Staff and Early Employment Experiences 
Teachers and other high-school staff provided the first exposure to work that often set the individual 
in a particular employment-related direction. These early employment experiences shaped the way 
individuals thought about employment, influencing preferences, career planning, and self-confidence 
related to work.  
School-based staff provides first exposure to work. Several of the staff interviewed mentioned 
teachers as being influential when it came to initial work experiences. As one individual’s staff person 
said, “I think in high school—[it was] his teachers in high school…who first started giving him work 
experience. I think they were obviously an influence.” Another individual’s staff member explained that 
his Special Education teacher was likely important in the individual’s decision to go to work in the 
community, as he taught all of his students about what it was like to work.  
In the case of another individual, teachers were crucial in providing encouragement. While 
realistically reminding her that she would need to work hard, the individual’s high school teachers also 
told her she was capable of doing anything she wanted in life. This individual started planning for 
employment in her last year of school, talking with one of her teachers about what it might be like to 
work in the community. 
Shaping work preferences. All of the individuals had at least one previous work experience (either 
paid, internship, or volunteer) that shaped their employment preferences. The data showed that most of 
the individuals had a previous work history of a fairly limited range of jobs, including housecleaning, 
dishwashing, bagging groceries, and retrieving shopping carts. This may be because in the past the focus 
was on helping individuals to obtain work experience, as opposed to finding a job match. A staff person 
explained why he felt that these jobs were sometimes necessary: “You just can’t put anyone anywhere. 
You know? We were just trying to get him that first-time job.”  
Although most participants had held such jobs, these early experiences led individuals to refine their 
employment interests and preferences. One individual who worked in a park in high school continued 


searching for job that was active, outdoors, and with a variety of responsibilities. About the individual’s 
early experiences, his father noted, “he had some jobs and some responsibilities that he enjoyed. He did 
some lawn work and grass mowing and maybe directed the visitors around the area. He was very proud 
of his work there.” At the time of the interview this individual was working in a sheltered workshop and 
in enclave work on yard clean-up crews, but was anxious to find a permanent job in the community that 
measured up to his first employment experience working in a park.  
Shaping career goals. Other individuals had early experiences that helped them determine not only 
the type of job they wished to obtain, but a specific career they wished to pursue. One individual began 
his career planning early when he expressed interest in working at his high school’s bakery. Through 
this work, he determined that he wanted to pursue culinary arts. Another individual had early 
experiences caring for small children and decided she would like to pursue a career in childcare. These 
career goals were shaped while the individuals where still in school and led them on a path towards 
pursuing community employment in these industries.  
Shaping self-confidence. Early employment experiences also impacted individuals’ confidence in 
their ability to work in the community, and left some hesitant to pursue future jobs. For several 
individuals, the difficulty occurred because they were placed in positions where they could not complete 
the required responsibilities; their first employers did not know how to train a person with a disability, 
and they were quickly asked to leave. The impact of poor initial work experiences led some individuals 
later to choose sheltered employment. However, other individuals were able to move past negative 
experiences because they were strongly self-motivated, or supported by family members or 
professionals to understand that the previous positions were not failures but just poor job matches.   
The Role of the CRP’s Culture When Offering Options 
The CRP’s culture affects the way staff perceives and offers employment options. The CRP’s culture 
is comprised of its a) mix of services and b) philosophy about job readiness.   
Mix of services provided. Three of the four CRPs in this study offered a mix of employment 
settings, including sheltered workshops, enclaves and work crews, and community employment. Only 
one of the CRPs exclusively offered community employment. At the three CRPs that provided a mix of 
services, individuals often revolved through community employment, enclaves, and sheltered 
employment depending on the availability of community jobs. In addition, individuals who were in 
community jobs at these three CRPs often simultaneously worked in enclaves and/or sheltered 
workshops. This was a clear difference compared to the CRP that only offered community employment, 


whose staff described its business as “…a vocational program…we find employment and then we 
support them in their choice of careers.” 
The services provided by the CRP affect the way staff perceive and offer options. For example, staff 
from one CRP that offers a mix of services noted that they direct job-development resources only to 
individuals who want to work in the community. While they encourage community employment for all 
individuals they support, there is no expectation for someone to leave the sheltered workshop. A staff 
member noted: “I see it as important to get more and more jobs in the community and make the 
distinction of who is going to work and who is not, and putting 100% of the job development resources 
into those people.”  
In the CRPs with sheltered workshops, participants talked about the workshop as a safety net that 
individuals can return to if they lose their jobs. This can lead to gaps in employment history and affect 
the development of good employment skills. In the CRP that only provides community employment, 
individuals are encouraged to stay at a job that is not a perfect fit until a new job can be found, because 
the alternative is unemployment. A family member said “they worked with her to stick it out until they 
could find something else, to help her transition into [a new job].” Staff at this CRP explained that job 
changes are planned carefully. Staff supports individuals to not simply quit their present job before 
finding another, encouraging them to develop skills to responsibly transition between the two. 
Philosophy about job readiness. Three of the four CRPs believed that individuals needed to meet 
prerequisites to be considered job-ready. These were the CRPs that offered a mix of employment 
services. Therefore, the existence of multiple workplace settings facilitated assumptions about 
prerequisites needed for community employment. For example, individuals at one CRP shared that the 
piecework in the workshop kept them working until they were ready for jobs in the community. 
One CRP in particular appeared to be very concerned with determining whether individuals were 
ready to work in the community. A staff member noted that the sheltered workshop may be the best 
employment placement for people who have challenging behaviors: “We have clients who behaviorally, 
you know, they’ve been in a sheltered workshop, and it’s worked for them because they don’t have the 
capability to be out in the community.“ One family member commented that an individual had to be 
determined by the CRP to be ready to “work outside” before seeking community employment. In 
discussing one individual who wanted to work in the community, the staff noted, “Up until recently, he 
really wasn’t ready for working competitively. He did the work crews. He did the internship, and this 
has all kind of helped him become ready for a job.” Another quote demonstrates how an individual’s 


career goals can be hampered by staff perceptions: “[There are a lot of] examples of what she would like 
to do that are out of reach right at this point.”  
The beliefs of the three CRPs regarding the need to learn and practice skills in the workshop 
before pursuing community employment contrast greatly with the employment-only CRP. Staff from 
this CRP commented, “We look at all people with disabilities [believing] that [they] can enter the 
workforce. Everyone basically is job-ready.” Another staff member at the same CRP noted, 
“Everyone is pretty much job-ready as far as if you have a mind, body and spirit, you can work. We 
feel that it’s gainful employment for all, everyone.” At this employment-only CRP, the process of 
identifying career goals and opportunities begins quickly. Their focus is to support the individual to 
participate directly and immediately in the employment-planning process.  
The three other CRPs provided opportunities for individuals to learn tasks in a sheltered 
environment as preparation for community employment. Work-preparation courses are offered that 
included training on computers, cash-registers, remedial reading and writing, customer-service, and 
stocking shelves. Some of these skills were practiced in the CRP’s cafeteria, bathroom, or mailroom. 
Staff felt this curriculum was valuable because it would allow individuals to obtain skills that would 
make the transition to the workforce easier. 
Another CRP included internal short-term training opportunities and internships in the community 
to increase job-readiness, addressing issues such as distractibility and social skills. Additionally, 
individuals could work on a crew doing grounds-keeping. One individual who was participating in 
these activities noted that this model led him to be “sitting around waiting for work.” However, staff 
felt that these activities prior to the job search was necessary as one said, “We have a lot of 
assessments that we do on people…social and behavioral assessments. With this individual, you 
wouldn’t even need to do one to realize he wasn’t ready.” Overall, staff members understood that 
some individuals wanted other jobs, but a “progression” to community employment was necessary. 
The Role of the Job Developer in Decision-Making 
The job developer emerged as the most influential person during the job search often directing 
decision-making about employment choices. Individuals and family members often viewed their job 
developer as responsible for finding employment, and thus were only minimally engaged. 
Employment staff influences decision-making about job choices. Staff explained that when they 
presented a job opportunity using positive language, the individual typically responded positively and 
wanted to accept the offer. Additionally, when individuals were apprehensive about employment, some 


staff noted that they had a very strong influence on whether the individual would accept or reject a job 
offer. In other cases, staff made an effort to serve as an advisor rather than a decision-maker, helping the 
individual to weigh the pros and cons of a potential job match.   
One individual who described making her own decision about work shared that it was the job 
developer who convinced her to apply. This job developer noted the balance she tried to strike between 
supporting the individual to make a good decision and allowing the person to assert independence. The 
job developer said that often, individuals “are looking for you to make the decision for them. I think 
that’s a learned behavior. So that when you give people more options or when you talk to people about 
what they like to do--I think there’s a certain amount of decision-making that’s a 50-50 type thing.”  
Another example of shared decision-making involved the desire of an individual to take on a second 
job. This individual sought out the position on his own (a rare occurrence in the sample); he then 
brought the opportunity to his job developer and they discussed the impact of having two jobs on his 
schedule. Another job developer described her influence: 
If he needs my help, I give him advice. I advocate for him. I also help him--if he has to 
make a decision, I kind of help him do the pros and cons. We sit down together. We talk 
about it. And I ask him what his main goals are, you know, what he really wants. And 
usually he already knows what he wants; he just needed to hear it out loud. 
 
 
 
In certain instances, however, individuals felt they had either no choice or limited choice in their 
job placement. One individual explicitly reported that he had no choice in the decision to accept his job 
in the workshop, while waiting for a job in the community. When asked why he chose the job, the 
individual explained, “Because it’s …the only paying job they could offer me right now until they could 
start looking for me for a real job. So basically this job I’m working at now was put onto me for now 
until I get a new job.” The individual went on to express his dissatisfaction with this outcome:  
I was actually kind of planning to get a job at maybe a convenience store, but then they 
stuck me into the sheltered workshop job. And at the beginning, I was kind of bummed 
out, because I didn’t want to work at a place where you sit down; I wanted to work at a 
place where you could walk around.” He went on to say, “I had to complain a lot...After a 
couple of complaints saying that, they finally started looking for me [for] a new job.  
 
The feeling that the individual lacked any choice when accepting a job also occurred for community-
employment placements. One family noted that the individual did not have a lot of input in choosing his 
job. Another family noted that they had strongly influenced an individual to accept a job while waiting 
for a job that better matched her employment goals. 


Limited engagement of the individual and family. Individuals and family members often 
viewed their job developer as responsible for finding employment and preparing to start work. Family 
members in particular perceived employment staff as more knowledgeable and skilled than the family 
could be in helping the individual find employment. While family members appear to be influential in 
instilling the value of work, they are less engaged in the process of job searching.  
In some cases, family members were only minimally engaged; although clearly interested in and 
supportive of the job search, they were not aware of the details. In other cases, family members were 
not involved in career planning at all. Several of these families expressed an interest in being more 
involved, though they cited barriers including not wanting to be viewed as a hovering parent, 
receiving limited communication from employment staff, and feeling as though employment staff 
were the experts in career planning. One parent noted how she balanced her desire to be involved 
with the need to respect her daughter’s independence and the job developer’s expertise:  
I liked the fact that they prepared her and taught her how to interview, because she 
respected what they said a lot more than what we said because, of course, we’re Mom 
and Dad. We don’t know anything about interviewing, and what we would say is not the 
right way to say it. So sometimes input from an outside source on certain issues like that, 
these people are trained. They know better; you don’t. They work much better. So 
coming from them, they were the job people so she thought that they had all the answers. 
 
 
When asked about their involvement in the individual’s decision to accept a job offer, most 
family members said that they were minimally involved. This parallels the finding that family impacts 
whether or not the individual pursues employment, but are less involved in the specific aspects of the job 
search and placement.  
The Role of Personal Preferences 
Individuals’ personal reasons for work also influenced employment-related decision-making. These 
were a) earnings, b) productivity, c) the admiration of others, and d) the quality of social relationships.  
Earning money. Individuals in this study said that their primary reason for working was to earn 
money to pay bills, contribute to their households, pay for hobbies or interests, and save so that in the 
future they could live independently. Of one individual, it was noted that earning money would give him 
the independence to make his own decisions: 
…he wants to be as independent as possible. He wants to have an apartment. He wants to 
have a car. He wants to have all the things that his brothers and sisters have and his 
family has. And he wants his independence and wants to make decisions in his life. 
 


 
Several individuals also reported that the realization that one could earn more money working in 
the community was a motivator for leaving the workshop. Individuals reported being dissatisfied with 
the low wages of the workshop. One individual noted that they were at the CRP from 9 a.m. to1:30 p.m. 
and only earned about $3 per day.  Another individual preferred working on a work crew to the 
workshop because the work crew offered better wages. 
Productivity. Individuals noted that they wanted to work so that they could be productive members 
of the community. Many individuals reported accepting a job because if they did not work they would 
feel bored, and would spend their time sitting at home and watching TV. Individuals wanted to feel 
useful and valued and to feel as if they have a reason to get up and a place to go. As noted by one 
individual, “I needed to keep busy. I like to keep busy. I used to help [my mom] around the house and 
stuff like that, but I needed more of an outlet in my life.”  
Individuals who felt productive at work reported that they were more likely to remain at their jobs. 
Individuals cited having tasks they enjoyed, always having enough work to do, being able to be 
physically active on the job, being able to work at their own pace, and feeling confident in their job 
responsibilities as reasons to remain employed. One individual said, “I felt like a ‘somebody’ working in 
higher enterprise and going to work and then coming back. I felt like a person, like someone normal 
would feel like in a job and everything. And I’m helping the community, helping people with their 
groceries. I felt good about that.” Along with the opportunity for greater earnings, individuals in 
sheltered work were motivated to try community employment because of the increased productivity and 
the greater variety of responsibilities it would entail.  
Individuals and their families in particular noted the desire for an increase in work hours, another 
indicator of the preference for productivity. CRP Staff was aware of this concern, but noted that they felt 
uncomfortable approaching employers about expanding work hours because such an increase could 
require individuals to take on more complex responsibilities or earn special certifications.  
Admiration from others. How friends, family members, coworkers, and customers perceived the 
quality of an individual’s job and performance impacted choices. Having a high-quality, community-
based job that was worthy of bragging about resulted in a sense of pride. In fact, several individuals who 
transitioned from the workshop to jobs in the community received praise on their accomplishment from 
individuals and staff at their CRP, influencing others to consider integrated jobs as well.  
Being identified as a valuable part of a team by coworkers was another factor that led individuals to 
either choose or to remain in community employment. One individual shared praise he had received 


from the employer: “You’re a real good worker and you’re helping all of us. We appreciate you, and we 
really trust you to do everything.” Another said that even though he worked a busy Saturday at one 
retailer, he loved the job because he was a part of a team that gave 100%.  
Being respected by customers also influenced the choice to remain in community employment. One 
individual’s employment staff noted, “The clients know her name and have brought her gifts. The 
business owners have also shared that their clients like the individual and would miss her if she wasn’t 
there.” Another individual who works in retail was recognized for providing outstanding customer 
service: “I’ve seen him at his absolute best at Christmas time when people are searching around for 
something to buy for their child. And he will give them a suggestion or give them advice on something, 
and they’re just amazed.”  
On-the-job social relationships. Positive relationships with coworkers were critical to choice-
making. Friendships in the workshop between employees with disabilities were found to provide a sense 
of camaraderie and social connection. Friendships in the community between individuals and their 
coworkers without disabilities were also found to provide these benefits.  
Perceived social acceptance, especially from coworkers without disabilities, appeared important. 
One individual’s coworker made her mix CDs of music that they both enjoyed listening to. Staff noted 
that another individual not only chooses to eat lunch with her coworkers instead of returning to the CRP 
to eat, but that together they joined a craft committee. One individual employed in a community job 
noted that she teases her boss and coworkers because “I love my boss. And I love my coworkers. They 
love me. And I love the way we all get along good with one another.”  Another individual shared that he 
was satisfied with his job because his coworkers treated him with respect.  
Staff also acknowledged the importance of taking the time to determine opportunities for social 
connectedness. They reported the importance of a supportive job environment and a workplace culture 
where coworkers are accepting, employers are flexible, and there is a willingness to provide natural 
supports. For one person, a job that provides opportunities to be with peers without disabilities can 
provide expansion of social networks. For another, a good match might be a community job that helps to 
retain the friends developed in the workshop, such as having the proximity to return for lunch. 
Interestingly, when social connectedness was perceived in community-based jobs, it was described 
as hard to find and requiring the right fit. Although individuals in our study were described as well-
liked, given a lot of attention, and fully included in holiday parties and gift-giving, the depth of the 
relationships appeared superficial or limited at times. One staff member noted,  


“…he has some relationships at work. I think work is a strong base for his sort of feeling of 
belonging and feeling of value. And he has some people there that he has a relationship in that 
sort of way. I’m not sure he has any strong, really social relationships at work of, ‘Hey, the 
weekend’s coming up. You want to get together and go do something?’ kind of level.”  
 
In certain cases, strong social connections made in the sheltered workshop influenced choices about 
community employment. Individuals who were considered to be “higher-functioning” in the sheltered 
workshop often chose to stay there because it offered the individual the opportunity to feel like an 
expert, achieve a certain status, and be revered among peers. For example, one staff member commented 
that an individual “gets his self-esteem” in the workshop, and that he “is so popular…he would prefer to 
stay.” Another staff member at another CRP noted that one individual feels a sense of exclusion and 
difference when he is out in the community because of his intellectual disability. However, when the 
individual is in the workshop, “he may as well be staff. He helps everybody out; he helps people who 
are lower-functioning. People look up to him. You know? And when he would go out into the 
community, he had some issues with that, because his disability was apparent.”  
Friendships with peers in the sheltered workshop can become a barrier to choosing community 
employment. Staff noted that individuals miss their friends in the workshop and that they work hard to 
support individuals to believe that they can make friends in the community. Not only can the fear of 
missing one’s friends inhibit individuals from pursuing work in the community, it can lead individuals to 
thwart their own success in community-employment placements. One staff member said,  
They look for that camaraderie [in the community] and they’re afraid they’re 
not going to get it on the outside. And you know what? Some of them probably 
don’t, and that’s why they come back. They sabotage the job. They miss their 
friends here. 
 
Recommendations 
 
Findings showed a collection of people and factors considered influential in employment-related 
decision-making for individuals with ID/DD. Furthermore, distinct groups of people and diverse 
circumstances appeared consequential at different points in time over the course of the employment 
journey. Families emerged dominant in the formative years, because they role-modeled employment and 
instilled the belief that work was an expectation of adulthood. School-based staff provided the first 
exposure to work that shaped preferences, career planning, and self-confidence. The CRP’s culture, 
comprised of its service mix and philosophy about job readiness, affected the way staff perceived and 
offered employment options. The job developer became especially persuasive during the job-search, 


perceived by individuals and family members as responsible for job-finding and resulting in decreased 
engagement. Finally, personal reasons for work, such as increased earnings, productivity, the admiration 
of others, and the quality of social relationships swayed individuals’ decisions about staying in a current 
position and about whether to pursue community or sheltered work.   
Each of these factors impact the ways in which the individual thinks about and makes choices along 
the employment path. Through an understanding of these persuasive elements, critical decision-making 
points surface. These are the pivotal areas in which the most effective interventions can occur. How do 
we seize these opportunities as they come forward, maximizing the chances for the best employment 
outcomes? The following recommendations are offered to those who provide employment support in the 
ID/DD field.  
Engaging Families: Start Early, and Support the Family So They Stay Involved 
Participants in our study often reflected on the impact that family members had during their early 
years, and on their family’s influence in shaping employment expectations. The experience of 
employment expectations being “taught” by family members and becoming deeply ingrained in one’s 
upbringing is consistent with previous research (Way & Rossman, 1996). As our participants began 
searching for employment, families, individuals, and job developers agreed that the practicalities of the 
job search be left to the professionals. Family members often expressed the desire to become more fully 
involved but felt unqualified to do so.  
One must question what is lost if families are only peripherally engaged at the time of job-search and 
placement. Other authors have found the family, as part of an individual’s social network, to be a critical 
piece in the job-search (Gould, Hasnain, Bose & Butterworth; 2005). Hoff, Gandolfo, Gold & Jordan 
(2000) also point out the important role of families in job-development, both for networking and to help 
the job developer get to know the individual and his/her interests. Moreover, the very nature of the 
career-planning process described by these authors places the individual at the center of a process that 
encompasses family, friends, and community resources to achieve meaningful employment. 
Ensuring that families be connected to and participate in the job-search process is sometimes no easy 
task. A stronger emphasis on personal networking strategies during the job search help this to occur 
naturally. Furthermore, strategies such as the “30-Day Placement Plan” (Condon, Gelb & Gould, 2005) 
make certain that core family members are actively engaged in the job-search and planning process, at 
the specific time at which our research shows the potential for family disengagement. 
Creating Stronger and Earlier Links Between Schools and Employment Systems 


Findings showed that school-based staff becomes the conduit to early employment experiences that 
shape the individual’s choices and confidence about employment. Other research does indicate that 
strong teacher advocacy for work experience does correlate positively with successful integrated-
employment outcomes for transition-age students White & Weiner, 2004). As teachers and others can be 
pivotal in providing such employment opportunities to their transitioning students, providing education 
about the value of integrated employment and the importance of job matching is critical.  
Education personnel also need not only an increased knowledge of providers and the local service 
system, but also to understand how to connect their students to the CRPs that will best support goals for 
employment. Ensuring that the optimal connection is made will require that teachers are aware of the 
differences in philosophies among local CRPs and employment outcomes.  
Building relationships between service coordinators from the state’s ID/DD agency and local schools 
will open the lines of communication about employment opportunities and supports available. 
Engagement between both parties in activities such as CRP tours before graduation or jointly sponsored 
transition fairs would both increase exposure to the range of service options and philosophies and 
broaden expectations about the employment choices available. 
Providing Technical Assistance to CRPs to Enhance Knowledge and Skills 
Three of the four CRPs in our study appeared to be only partially committed to the idea of 
employment for all, holding preconceived notions about whether an individual was “ready” for 
community work. Beliefs like this are often rooted in the culture of the CRP. Butterworth, Fesko, and 
Ma (2000) found that a catalyst for the changeover from facility- to community-based employment was 
to change organizational values to include the belief that all individuals are ready to work.  
Shifting notions about job readiness requires a critical review of the paradigms that have shaped 
employment service delivery for this population. The principle of least restrictive environment (LRE) 
has been operationalized as a continuum model in human services (including employment service 
delivery), which has linked severity of disability with segregation (Taylor, 2004). The flawed nature of 
such as paradigm is that it lacks reference to concepts such as self-determination, consumer-directedness 
and community integration among other things (Taylor, 2004).  
Replacing this is the concept of supported employment, which assumes job training can take place 
on the job; there are no prerequisite skills for employment, and workplace support can occur over the 
life of the job (Hill & Wehman, 1983). Furthermore, concepts such as the 30-day placement plan 
(Condon, Gelb & Gould, 2005) combine the tenets of rapid placement, team based job finding, and job 


seeker directedness, and apply it to all disability types, regardless of severity. Shifting negative 
assumptions about an individual’s readiness to work in the community can only enhance the search for a 
creative job match. Beliefs about job-readiness affected how CRP staff described their employment-
planning strategies, and focused the individuals on “skill-building” activities before beginning the job 
search. This mindset also influences how job developers interact with and present job opportunities to 
individuals with whom they work, based on their notions about what type of employment experiences 
may or may not be successful.  
Training on the most promising job-creation and job-search strategies for individuals with ID/DD, 
such as customized employment, job carving and creation, resource ownership, and micro-enterprise, are 
especially constructive (NCWD/A, 2006). Migliore, Winsor, Butterworth & Hall (2010) found a 
disconnect between the job-development activities recommended and those implemented by 
employment specialists, indicating a need for more targeted training. CRP administrators also need to be 
aware of these techniques and to support their employment staff to use them more widely than was 
found in this study.  
Supporting Informed Choice 
Findings showed that job developers are perceived as the ones responsible for leading the job search, 
which led family members and individuals to rely on them. Job developers are also perceived as 
directing choices, especially concerning the decision to accept a job. Finally, they are seen as the expert, 
which can negatively influence individual and family engagement in the job-search process.  
Ideally, individuals should be offered more than one job to choose from, although this is not always 
possible to do even for people without disabilities. Individuals need to have multiple opportunities to try 
out non-stereotypical jobs to determine what roles and responsibilities they enjoy, and should have the 
opportunity to try out a potential job for a short period of time before formally accepting it. This is a 
different mindset from encouraging job trials solely for the benefit of the business; it allows the 
individual to gain experiential knowledge and to use this knowledge to make informed decisions. 
Individuals who feel confident making their own choices will be better prepared to participate in the job-
development process and to decide for themselves whether or not they want to accept a job.  
Professionals providing employment supports must consider core self-determination principles in 
their work, and use their perceived influence wisely. Principles include the freedom to choose 
employment options, authority over resources, the ability to select support systems, the responsibility to 
spend public resources wisely, and confirmation about the quality of their experiences (Neirney & 


Shumway, 1996). Professionals need to see self-determination as a fundamental ingredient of 
employment support. They must know that, for some job seekers, understanding that choices are 
available, making decisions, and owning the responsibility for decisions are skills that need to be 
learned. Self-determination can be taught by clarifying expectations and consequences, remaining in a 
facilitator role (even if it makes the process slower), allowing and respecting job-seeker decisions even 
if they seem counterproductive, and using the assessment phase as a platform to gauge the job seeker’s 
comfort level with self-determination (Brugnaro & Timmons, 2007).  
Create Opportunities to Build Social Connections Outside of the Workshop 
Findings from individuals clearly showed social connections as being a central reason for work. 
The camaraderie and acceptance experienced at the workshop was reported as a disincentive to 
community employment, remaining consistent with other literature (Cohen, 2005). The inability to 
maintain these connections upon entering community employment could lead individuals back into the 
workshop. The difficulty individuals had keeping their friends after leaving the workshop or making 
new friends with coworkers in community jobs limited their work choices.  
Literature on integrated employment indicates that one of the most important outcomes of 
community-based work is the level of social integration of the worker (Yan et al, no date). Furthermore, 
social networks are positively related to labor force participation and groups who are unemployed and 
underemployed can use their social networks to increase opportunities for employment (Acquilera, 
2002).  Relationships with co-workers contribute to enhanced quality of life and higher levels of 
satisfaction for employees with intellectual disabilities (Mank, Cioffi, & Yovanoff, 1999). 
However, research indicates that it is often the case that workers with intellectual disabilities 
have limited interactions with coworkers, and when they do interact, the quality of these interactions are 
substantively different than interactions among non-disabled workers. For example, Ohtake and 
Chadsey (1999) found that nearly all of the participating non-disabled employees reported work 
acquaintances, work friends, and friends in their employment setting, but none identified coworkers with 
disabilities as social friends. Findings from our study mirrored such barriers. 
Limited connectedness beyond the workshop, therefore, is more related to the problem of social 
isolation experienced by many with disabilities than to a true need or desire to be in the workshop. 
Individuals need to be supported to make friendships in community employment, as well as to maintain 
their friendships from the workshop. People with disabilities need opportunities to form relationships 
with individuals who share common interests and hobbies rather than just a disability. Employment 


planning must include efforts to sustain relationships, offering systematic strategies for people to 
connect as they move to community employment. Professionals can alleviate the fear of losing contact 
with friends from the workshop by supporting individuals to maintain phone or email communication 
and to engage in social activities outside of workshop hours. Other concrete options for building social 
connections outside of the workshop include volunteering, joining a self-advocacy group, or serving 
one’s community through programs such as AmeriCorps (Sotnik, 1995). 
Conclusion 
Individuals with ID/DD still remain underemployed compared to other disability groups. Those 
working with them need to consider the people, circumstances, and experiences that become 
consequential and persuasive at different times over the course of their employment journeys. As the 
employment agenda for this population pushes forward, targeted interventions at well-thought-out 
decision-making points will maximize the chances for the most meaningful employment options and 
outcomes for individuals with ID/DD in the years to come.  
 
 
 


References 
 
 
 
 
 
Acquilera, M. B. (2002). The impact of social capital on labor force participation: Evidence from the 
2000 social capital benchmark survey. Social Science Quarterly, 83 (3), 853-875. 
 
Ankeny, E. M., Wilkins, J. & Spain, J. (2009). Mothers’ Experiences of Transition Planning for Their 
Children with Disabilities. Teaching Exceptional Children, 41(6), 28-36. 
 
Brugnaro, L. & Timmons, J.C. (2007). Tools for Inclusion: Self-Determination: A Fundamental 
Ingredient of Employment Support. Boston: Institute for Community Inclusion (UAP), University of 
Massachusetts. 
 
Butterworth, J. Fesko, S. & Ma, V. (2000). Because It Was The Right Thing To Do: Changeover from 
Facility Based Service to Community Employment. Journal of Vocational Rehabilitation, 14(1). 23-
35. 
 
Carter, E. W. & Ditchman, N. (2010). Summer Employment and Community Experiences of Transition-
Age Youth With Severe Disabilities. Teaching Exceptional Children, 76(2), 194-212.  
 
Charmaz, K. (2000). Grounded theory: Objectivist and constructivist methods. In Denzin & Lincoln, 
Handbook of qualitative research (2nd ed., pp. 435-454). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 
 
Cohen, A. (2005). Social capital in the workplace: Opportunities for workers with intellectual disabilities. 
Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Brandeis University. 
 
Condon, C. Gelb, A., & Gould, J. (2005). Institute Brief: The 30-Day Placement Plan: A Road Map to 
Employment. Boston: Institute for Community Inclusion (UAP), University of Massachusetts. 
 
Creswell, J.W. (1998). Qualitative Inquiry and Research Design: Choosing Among Five Traditions. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 
 
Dixon, R. & Reddacliff, C. (2001). Family Contribution to the Vocational Lives of Vocationally 
Competent Young Adults with Intellectual Disabilities. International Journal of Disability, 
Development & Education, 4(2), 193-206. 
 
Gould, J., Hasnain, R., Bose, J. & Butterworth, J. (2005). Institute Brief: Making Networking Easier for 
Job Seekers: A Guide. Boston: Institute for Community Inclusion (UAP), University of 
Massachusetts. 
 
Guy, B., Sitlington, P., Larsen, M. & Frank, A. (2009). What Are High Schools Offering as Preparation 
for Employment? Career Development for Exceptional Individuals, 32(1), 30-41. 
 


Hill, M., & Wehman, P.  (1983). Cost benefit analysis of placing moderately and severely handicapped 
individuals into competitive employment.  Journal of the Association for the Persons with Severe 
Handicaps, 8, 30-38. 
 
Hoff, D., Gandolfo, C., Gold, M., & Jordan, M. (2000). Demystifying Job Development: Field-based 
Approaches to Job Development for People with Disabilities. St. Augustine, FL: Training Resource 
Network, Inc.  
 
Knox, M., Mok, M., & Parmenter, T. (2000). Working with the Experts: collaborative research with 
people with an intellectual disability. Disability & Society, 15(1), 49-61. 
 
Larson, S.A. & Hewitt, A.S. (2005). Staff Recruitment, Retention, & Training Strategies For Community 
Human Service Organizations. Baltimore: Paul H. Brooks Publishing Co. 
 
Mactavish, J., Lutfiyya, Z., & Mahon, M. (2000). "I can speak for myself": involving individuals with 
intellectual disabilities as research participants. Mental Retardation, 38, 216-27. 
 
Mank, D. (2003). Supported employment outcomes across a decade: is there evidence of improvement 
in the quality of implementation? Mental Retardation, 41(3), 188-197. 
 
Mank, D. Cioffi, A., & Yovanoff, P. (1999). Impact of coworker involvement with supported employees 
on wage and integration outcomes. Mental Retardation, 37, 383-394. 
 
Metzel, D.S., Boeltzig, H., Butterworth, J., Sulewski, S., & Gilmore, D.S. (2007). Achieving community 
membership through community rehabilitation provider services: are we there yet? Intellectual and 
Developmental Disabilities, 45(3), 149-160. 
 
Migliore, A., Grossi, T., Mank, D. & Rogan, P. (2008). Why Do Adults with Intellectual Disabilities 
Work in Sheltered Workshops? Journal of Vocational Rehabilitation, 28, 29-40. 
 
Miles, M.B., & Huberman, A.M. (1994). Qualitative Data Analysis, 2nd Ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage 
Publications. 
 
National Center on Workforce and Disability/Adult. (2006). Customized Employment: Applying 
Practical Solutions for Employment Success.  Retrieved from 
http://www.onestops.info/article.php?article_id=420 
Nierney, T., & Shumway, D. (1996). Principles of Self-Determination. Beyond Managed Care. 1. 
Retrieved from http://www.centerforself-determination.com/. 
Novack, D. & Rogan, P. (2010). Social Integration in Employment Settings: Application of Intergroup 
Contact Theory. Journal of Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities, 48(1), 31–51.   
 
Ohtake, Y., & Chadsey, J. (1999). Social disclosure among coworkers without disabilities in supported 
employment settings. Mental Retardation, 37(1), 25-35. 
 


Powers, L. (2005). Self-Determination by Individuals with Severe Disabilities: Limitations or Excuses? 
Research & Practice for Persons with Severe Disabilities, 30 (3) 168-172. 
 
Prilleltensky, I., & Nelson, G. (2002). Doing Psychology Critically/ Making a Difference in Diverse 
Settings. New York, NY.: Palgrave MacMillan. 
 
Rutkowski, S., Daston, M., Van Kuiken, D. & Riehle, E.: (2006). Project SEARCH: A Demand-side 
Model of High School Transition. Journal of Vocational Rehabilitation, 25, 85-96.  
 
Shogren, K., Wehmeyer, M., Buchanan, C., & Lopez, S. (2006). The Application of Positive Psychology 
and Self-Determination to Research in Intellectual Disability: A Content Analysis of 30 Years of 
Literature. Research & Practice for Persons with Severe Disabilities, 31 (4), 338-345.  
 
Sotnik, P. (1995). Utilizing All Your Resources: Individuals With and Without Disabilities Volunteering 
Together. Retrieved from 
http://www.communityinclusion.org/article.php?article_id=116&type=topic&id=8. 
 
Storey, K. (2006). Informed Choice: The Catch-22 of Self-Determination. Research & Practice for 
Persons with Severe Disabilities, 30 (4), 232-234. 
 
Surdick, R.S., Pierson, A., Menz, F.E., Hagen-Folwy, D.L. & Ussif, A. (n.d.). Rehabilitation Industry 
Benchmarks and New Approaches for the Future. Retrieved from http: 
//rlr.uwstout.edu/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=36&Itemid=78 
 
Taylor, Steven J. (2004). Caught in the Continuum: A Critical Analysis of the Principle of the Least 
Restrictive Environment. Research and Practice for Persons with Severe Disabilities (RPSD), 29(4) 
218-230.  
 
Test, D.W. Flowers, C., & Hewitt, A. (2001). Training Needs of Direct Support Staff. Mental 
Retardation, 42(5), 327-337. 
 
Trainor, A. A., Carter, E., Owens, L. & Swedeen, B. (2008). Special Educators’ Perceptions of Summer 
Employment and Community Participation Opportunities for Youth With Disabilities. Career 
Development for Exceptional Individuals; 31:3, 144-153.  
 
Townson L., Macauley S., Harkness E., Chapman R., Docherty A., Dias J., Eardley M. & McNulty N. 
(2004) We are all in the same boat: doing ‘people-led research’. British Journal of Learning 
Disabilities 32, 72–76. 
 
Wallerstein, N., & Duran, B. (2003). The Conceptual, Historical, and Practice Roots of Community 
Based Participatory Research and Related Participatory Traditions. In M. Minkler & N. 
Wallerstein (Eds.), Community-Based Participatory Research for Health (pp. 27-52). San 
Francisco, CA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
 
Walmsley, J. (2001). Normalisation, Emancipatory Research and Inclusive Research In Learning 
Disability. Disability & Society, 16(2), 187-205. 


 
Ward L. & Townsley R. (2005) ‘It’s about a dialogue…’ working with people with learning difficulties 
to develop accessible information. British Journal of Learning Disabilities 33,59–64. 
 
Way, W. & Rossmann, M. (1996). Lessons From Life’s First Teacher: The Role of the Family in 
Adolescent and Adult Readiness for School-to-Work Transition. National Center for Research in 
Vocational Education, University of California at Berkeley. 
 
Wehman, P. & Targett, P. (2001). Supported Employment: The Challenges of New Staff Recruitment, 
Selection and Retention. Education and Training in Mental Retardation and Developmental 
Disabilities, 37(4), 434-446. 
 
Wehmeyer, M. (2005). Self-Determination and Individuals with Severe Disabilities: Re-examining  
Meanings and Misinterpretations. Research & Practice for Persons with Severe Disabilities, 30 (3), 113-
120.  
 
Wehmeyer, M., & Bolding, N. (2001). Enhanced self-determination of adults with mental retardation as 
an outcome of moving to community-based work or living environments. Journal of Intellectual 
Disability Research, 45, 371-383. 
 
White, J. & Weiner,J. S. (2004). Influence of least restrictive environment and community based 
training on integrated employment outcomes for transitioning students with severe disabilities. 
Journal of Vocational Rehabilitation, 21, 149-156. 
 
Winsor, J. & Butterworth, J. (2008). Trends & Milestones: participation in integrated employment and 
community-based non-work services for individuals supported by state intellectual/developmental 
disabilities agencies. Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities, 46(2), 166-168. 
 
Yan, X., Mank, D., Sandow, D., Olson, D., Rhodes, L. (no date). The network image of social 
competence: Social cliques at supported employment work settings. 
 
 
 


Table 1 
 
Sample Description 
 
CRP location 
Individuals 
in 
community 
employment 
Individuals 
in sheltered 
employment 
Family 
members  
Employment 
support staff 
Total 
interviewed 
Metro Boston 
2 
2 
4 
2 
10 
Suburban 
Boston 
0 
4 
3 
2 
9 
Western 
Massachusetts 
4 
0 
3 
3 
10 
Southeastern 
Massachusetts 
3 
1 
3 
2 
9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total 
9 
7 
13 
91 
38 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                               
1 Several individuals identified the same employment-support staff member to be interviewed. For this reason, 9 staff 
members were interviewed about the employment processes of 15 individuals.