Alternative Data: Expanding Access to Credit
This article explores the types and usage of alternative data in financial services and the recent
technological developments and innovative practices that make alternative data more accessible.
It then discusses two customer categories who could benefit most from these advances: “credit
invisibles” (adults who lack an existing credit score or have a very limited credit history) and “invis-
ible primes” (borrowers with low credit scores and short credit histories, but with a low propensity
to default). It concludes by highlighting the uses of one type of alternative data, cash-flow data, in
underwriting small-dollar credit as a promising area for innovation, recognizing that using any alter-
native data comes with measured risk but also opportunities to expand access to credit safely
and fairly.1
What is alternative data, and how can it be used?
For decades, traditional data—basic information on an individual’s current and historical credit
accounts—has served as the basis for consumers’ credit scores.2 However, alternative data—
information from non-traditional sources—could bolster or sometimes substitute for that tradi-
tional data, with subsequent benefits for and risks to consumers. There are two primary catego-
ries of alternative data: financial data and non-financial data (see table 1). Financial alternative
data generally involves some measures related to deposit-account information or household
income and expenses. Non-financial alternative data may incorporate a range of consumer charac-
teristics (e.g., educational and professional information) or information related to a consumer’s
“digital footprint.” Both types of alternative data have merits and challenges, but financial alterna-
tive data has shown the most promise for responsible use in consumer finance.
As practical applications for alternative data expanded and evolved, federal prudential regulators
responded with guidance for financial institutions. The 2019 Interagency Statement on the Use of
Alternative Data in Credit Underwriting (the 2019 Use of Alternative Data statement) was issued to
provide risk mitigation strategies to financial institutions that were interested in utilizing alterna-
1 The staff contacts for this issue are Sean Creehan, Dan Gorin, and Kirsten Noland, and the contact for the Consumer &
Community Context series is John Rodier. Evan LeFlore and Kim Wilson provided research and analysis on this topic.
Lincy Chacko and David Coffey provided editorial support.
2 Consumers with credit scores fall into three general categories: subprime (credit scores below 620), near prime (credit
scores of 620 to 659), and prime (credit scores above 660).
Consumer & Community Context
Vol. 6 ■No. 2 ■October 2025
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
www.federalreserve.gov


tive data.3 This statement describes alternative data as “information not typically found in the
consumer’s credit files of the nationwide consumer reporting agencies or customarily provided by
consumers as part of applications for credit.”
Table 1. Categories of alternative data
Financial data: summary
cash-flow data
Financial data: transaction-level
cash-flow data
Non-financial data
Description
Summary account inflow and
outflow data (i.e., not individual
transactions).
Detailed, transaction-level account
data categorized and used to assess
applicants’ financial position.
Information that is not directly
related to an applicant’s finances.
Examples
• Average monthly deposit/spot
balance
• Age of account
• Average size of direct deposits
• Overdraft history
• Monthly net cash flow for small
business
• Monthly net cash flow for
small business
• Monthly rent and utility payments
• Small business sales and
expenditures
• Discretionary expenditures
• Education/professional information
(e.g., school, field of study,
certifications)
• Digital footprints such as social
media posts, the type of smartphone
used, geographic location, and online
behavioral patterns
• Business licenses as a measure of
stability
Potential sources
• Monthly bank account statements
• Digital payment processors
• Bank accounts
• Utility companies
• Landlord-reported rent payments
• Data brokers
• Mobile phone permissions
• Social media accounts
Banking regulators have encouraged the responsible use of alternative data.4 Among the types of
alternative data, financial data (see the first two columns of table 1) are generally directly related
to consumers’ finances and how consumers manage their financial commitments. The 2019 Use
of Alternative Data statement notes that use of such data may present lower risks than use of
other types of alternative data.5 In favor of financial alternative data, regulators noted the
following:
The evaluation of a borrower’s income and expenses to help determine repayment
capacity is a well-established part of the underwriting process. Improving the measure-
ment of income and expenses through cash flow evaluation may be particularly beneficial
for consumers.6
In 2020, regulators also singled out the use of cash-flow financial alternative data as a reliable
source for small-dollar loan underwriting.7 Cash-flow alternative data, as reflected in the consum-
3 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Interagency Statement on the Use of Alternative Data in Credit
Underwriting,” CA letter 19-11 (December 12, 2019), https://www.federalreserve.gov/supervisionreg/caletters/
caltr1911.htm.
4 See Board of Governors, “Use of Alternative Data.”
5 As noted in the alternative data statement, firms may choose to consult with appropriate regulators when planning for
the use of alternative data.
6 See Board of Governors, “Use of Alternative Data.”
7 See joint statement by Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,
National Credit Union Administration, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, “Interagency Lending Principles for
2
Consumer & Community Context


er’s deposit account in particular, enables financial institutions to underwrite customers while
remaining consistent with safe, sound, fair, and transparent practices, as the data is generally
accurate and its use can be explained and disclosed to consumers as may be required by law.
In contrast to financial alternative data sources, traditional credit files include information on the
number and age of existing credit accounts, the use of these accounts, and their repayment his-
tory. These credit files also contain information on derogatory marks, particularly negative informa-
tion such as collections, charge-offs, repossessions, foreclosures, and bankruptcies. All this infor-
mation, both positive and negative, goes into the calculation of a credit score: a single number
meant to provide lenders with a measure of a consumer’s creditworthiness. This approach to ana-
lyzing a consumer’s creditworthiness has been in place for decades and is considered effective for
predicting both the absolute and relative risk of a consumer becoming delinquent or going
into default.
There are some limitations with traditional credit scores, especially in the context of underwriting
credit. First, a meaningful share of the population has limited experience with debt, and some
have no credit lines with traditional lenders, making them ineligible for a credit score.8 Second,
low credit scores may automatically preclude some consumers from accessing credit from tradi-
tional lenders, even though they may be more creditworthy than their score suggests. The use of
financial alternative data can provide additional insights into the creditworthiness of consumers
with no credit score or a low credit score.
Improvements in data availability and computing power have expanded the potential uses for alter-
native data over the past decade. Complex models can leverage thousands of data points to
assess a consumer’s likelihood of repayment. However, simpler models based on a smaller set of
financial alternative data, sourced from deposit account information, can be used to model a con-
sumer’s ability to repay while also having a clear, logical connection to creditworthiness. These
variables tend to have analogues to components used to develop a traditional credit score as illus-
trated in table 2. By contrast, complex models that leverage non-financial alternative data may
contain variables with a mathematical relationship to a consumer’s likelihood to repay but no
obvious nexus to creditworthiness.
Offering Responsible Small-Dollar Loans,” May 20, 2020, https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/
files/bcreg20200520a1.pdf.
8 According to Oliver Wyman, nearly one in five adults in the U.S. fall into one of these two categories. See Mike Hepin-
stall, Chaitra Chandrasekhar, Peter Carroll, Nick Dykstra, and Yigit Ulucay, Financial Inclusion and Access to Credit
(Oliver Wyman, 2022), https://images.go.experian.com/Web/ExperianInformationSolutionsInc/%7B63ec9888-37ea-
405c-b39d-7492de9143ce%7D_FINALExperian_report_14_01.pdf.
Alternative Data: Expanding Access to Credit
3


Table 2. Comparing traditional credit scoring components with comparable cash-flow financial
alternative data
Traditional credit scoring components (weight)1
Comparable cash-flow financial alternative data
Payment History (delinquencies) (35%)
Overdraft history
Amounts Owed (utilization rate) (30%)
Size of regular deposits and average balance
Length of Credit History (15%)
Tenure of account
New credit (10%)
Change in average balance
Credit Mix (10%)
—
1 Credit Score weights from MyFICO.com; see https://www.myfico.com/credit-education/whats-in-your-credit-score.
Who can benefit from the use of alternative data?
Most creditors require a sufficient credit his-
tory and score as a condition for lending, so
people without a credit score generally lack
access to credit. Roughly 32 million American
adults are estimated to be “unscoreable” in
regards to a credit score, including “credit
invisible” that have no credit history (7 million,
or 2.7 percent of all adults) or adults with a
“thin file” (25 million, or 9.8 percent) (see
figure 1).9 This classification prevents credit
reporting agencies from generating a tradi-
tional credit score for these consumers and
can effectively preclude these individuals from
accessing credit from traditional banks.10
Financial alternative data can expand credit
access for “credit invisible” populations, and
it may also improve the precision and accuracy of credit scores for borrowers with thin credit files
and certain borrowers with low credit scores. Specifically, financial alternative data can identify
consumers within these populations that have a low propensity to default, what some researchers
now refer to as “invisible primes.” Importantly, this has the potential to improve credit access and
affordability for borrowers who otherwise might not have access to traditional financial products.11
9 Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, Technical Correction and Update to the CFPB’s Credit Invisibles Estimate (CFPB,
June 2025), https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb_update-credit-invisibles-estimate_2025-06.pdf.
10 Hepinstall, et al., Financial Inclusion and Access to Credit. The minimum scoring criteria for a credit score from FICO, the
pioneer of scoring to measure credit risk, includes one trade line (a line of credit) reported within the past six months
and one trade line that is at least six months old. As a counterpoint, the FDIC estimates that “only” 15.7 percent of
adults had no access to mainstream credit in 2023, down from 20 percent in 2017. See Federal Deposit Insurance Cor-
poration, “2023 FDIC National Survey of Unbanked and Underbanked Households” (FDIC, November 2024), https://
www.fdic.gov/household-survey.
11 See, for example, Marco Di Maggio and Di Muthu Ratnadiwakara, “Invisible Primes: Fintech Lending with Alternative
Data” (SSRN, May 2022), https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3937438.
Figure 1. Current state of access to credit
Number of people in millions
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Prime
Near
prime
Subprime
Thin
ﬁle
Credit
invisible
Consumers without credit 
scores (unscoreable)
Consumers with credit 
scores (scoreable)
7
25
63
38
125
Note: Credit invisible, thin file, subprime, and near
prime are most likely to benefit from alternative data.
Current U.S. adult population is 258.3 million.
Source: Staff calculations.
4
Consumer & Community Context


Why has financial alternative data only recently begun to benefit these populations? Lenders have
long used financial forms of alternative data when evaluating requests for commercial loans and
mortgages. However, when performed manually, incorporating this information can be labor-
intensive and expensive. This burden may be offset by the return on large-scale loans, but until
recently, it was considered too costly for small-dollar consumer loans of $1,000 or less, in which
the maximum revenue potential could be under $30.12 The economics against such small-dollar
lending become even more unbalanced when adding costs related to loan origination and loan pro-
cessing without even considering nonpayment and collections. However, since the release of the
2019 Use of Alternative Data statement, banks have begun utilizing automated underwriting
models, especially for small-dollar loans, to more efficiently review a consumer’s financial data
and make an immediate lending decision. That speed, accuracy, and reduced cost can be crucial
for consumers.
Why is there a need for small-dollar lending?
Small-dollar loans can provide needed liquidity (funds) to consumers facing income shocks or
unanticipated expenses. Results from the Federal Reserve’s annual Survey of Household Eco-
nomics and Decisionmaking (SHED) consistently demonstrate the consumer need for small-dollar
credit. Nineteen percent of the respondents to the 2024 SHED survey reported that their spending
exceeded their income in the month they answered the survey.13 Eleven percent reported strug-
gling to pay their bills because of varying income, including nearly 20 percent of those with income
under $50,000. From 2022 to 2024, the SHED reported that 37 percent of adults would not cover
a small emergency expense using cash, savings, or a credit card paid off at the next statement.14
Small-dollar loans could also improve the financial health of consumers that utilize costly alterna-
tive financial products. According to a 2022 survey from the Financial Health Network, while only
4 percent of financially healthy households reported paying an overdraft or nonsufficient funds fee
in 2022, nearly half (46 percent) of financially vulnerable households with a checking account
reported paying these fees in 2022, and nearly two-thirds (65 percent) did so at least three times
during the year. Forty-five percent of study respondents who overdrafted reported that the most
recent instance was on a transaction of $50 or less.15 Rapid access to low-cost, small-dollar
loans could benefit this population, as well as the 6 percent of adults who reported using a
payday, pawn, auto title, or tax refund anticipation loan—all costly alternative liquidity products
identified in the 2024 SHED survey. The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) has noted
12 The revenue on a $500 small-dollar installment loan payable in three periods with a 36 percent APR is $30.30 and
$20.13 with an APR of 24 percent.
13 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2024 (Board of Gover-
nors, May 2025), https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/2024-report-economic-well-being-us-households-
202505.pdf.
14 Board of Governors, Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2024.
15 Meghan Greene, MK Falgout, and Necati Celik, “Overdraft Trends Amid Historic Policy Shifts” (Financial Health Network,
June 1, 2023), https://finhealthnetwork.org/research/overdraft-trends-amid-historic-policy-shifts/.
Alternative Data: Expanding Access to Credit
5


that the finance charge for a payday loan, for example, works out to an annual percentage rate
(APR) of nearly 400 percent for a two-week loan.16
Across the board, these indicators paint a picture of a large number of American consumers that
need and seek out small-dollar funds on a regular basis, particularly in financially vulnerable
households. Further, their needs are relatively small but may persist for more than a few days, and
the current usage of overdraft and other alternative liquidity products is relatively expensive in
comparison to a small-dollar installment loan offered by a depository institution and enabled by
alternative data.17 Alternative data can be particularly beneficial in underwriting safe and afford-
able loans for consumers who have an ability to repay but otherwise would not qualify based on
credit score alone.
What are some of the long-term benefits of innovations in alternative data?
Cash-flow data can enhance access to financial services for underserved borrowers while
remaining consistent with safe and sound risk management and consumer protection require-
ments in two complementary ways. First, the use of alternative data, particularly cash-flow data,
increases the scoreable population.18 Second, cash-flow data can uncover so-called “invisible
prime” borrowers, increasing the credit access of customers that would otherwise be categorized
as subprime with only traditional credit reporting agency.19 Moreover, the use of alternative data
can also increase the convenience, speed, accuracy, and efficiency of credit underwriting for bor-
rowers and lenders.
Finally, while this article highlights the benefits of cash-flow data to expand small-dollar credit
access, alternative data offers many additional benefits. Alternative data can assist in fraud
detection when the fraud detection model involves direct access to an employee’s payroll system
or bank account. Moreover, cash-flow data may also provide reliable measures of financial health
that can support tailored financial products and services (beyond credit).
What are potential concerns and risks?
Despite the benefits of alternative data usage, potential concerns and risks remain. Many alterna-
tive data models have not been tested through an entire business cycle, raising questions as to
16 See “What Are the Costs and Fees for a Payday Loan?,” Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, last reviewed
November 25, 2024, https://www.consumerfinance.gov/ask-cfpb/what-are-the-costs-and-fees-for-a-payday-
loan-en-1589/.
17 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Meeting Small-Dollar Consumer Credit Needs: Old and New
Choices,” Consumer & Community Context, July 2023, https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/consumer-
community-context-20230728.pdf.
18 Finnegan, The Use of Cash-Flow Data in Underwriting Credit: Empirical Research Findings (FinRegLab.org), https://
finreglab.org/research/the-use-of-cash-flow-data-in-underwriting-credit-empirical-research-findings/. Hepinstall, et al.,
Financial Inclusion and Access to Credit.
19 Marco Di Maggio and Dimuthu Ratnadiwakara, “Invisible Primes.”
6
Consumer & Community Context


how models using alternative data might perform during economic downturns. Over time, the
expanding use of alternative data in underwriting will increase the representativeness of cash-flow
data across credit cycles.
Data challenges, including unreliable access to transaction data, inconsistent data quality, and
improperly structured data, could reduce the effectiveness of new technologies and practices.
These issues may limit the ability of alternative data to expand credit access. Additionally, relevant
data may be expensive to acquire from third parties, and even data held at the lending bank may
require vendor support to organize. Further, current practices may face challenges in terms of
economies of scale and profitability, particularly regarding small-dollar credit.
While many cash-flow metrics are straightforward for consumers used to managing their income
and expenses, some consumers may not fully understand how their income and spending
behavior affects credit models and decisions to offer a loan or other services.20 The extent to
which the data permissioning process and use of alternative data is transparent to consumers is
ripe for further research as innovation in this space continues.
Conclusion
Innovative uses of alternative data to promote financial inclusion have evolved significantly since
the issuance of the 2019 Use of Alternative Data statement. Emerging uses of cash-flow data in
small-dollar lending by financial institutions of all sizes show promise in safely and fairly expanding
access to credit. This is especially relevant for consumers with a thin credit file or no credit history
and a willingness to permission the use of their transaction data. These innovations could scale
to other financial products over time. As the use of alternative data develops, it will be vital for
consumers, regulators, and market participants to monitor how this data is being used and how it
affects both access to credit and consumer financial health and ensures that the resulting prod-
ucts are viable, fair, and safe.
20 See Board of Governors, “Use of Alternative Data” for a discussion of consumer protection implications of the use of
alternative data in underwriting, including with respect to benefits and potential risks. The statement notes that the
ability for consumers to expressly permission access to their cash flow data enhances transparency and control over
the data.
Alternative Data: Expanding Access to Credit
7
www.federalreserve.gov
1025