Empower: Sexual Harassment Training for Women
Male-dominated workplaces pose challenges to inclusion and a sense of belonging and community for cisgender women, trans women, and non-binary employees. The EEOC lists gender dominated workplaces as a major risk factor in having occurrences of sexual harassment. Despite making progress towards equality in the workplace in recent times, sex and gender-based harassment remains pervasive. Women and non-binary employees often face heightened incidents of sexual harassment in male-dominated industries and jobs. Research shows that a stunning 90% of women in some industries have experienced harassment.1 For gender non-confirming or trans individuals, one study has shown that 45% have been harassed by a coworker or supervisor while 15% have been fired because of their identity.2 Hostile environments serve to drive underrepresented employees out of workplaces and fields as well as discouraging others from joining them, further perpetuating the issue. Moreover, many employees are reluctant to be one of the first of their demographic in an organization out of concerns that they will be isolated, ignored, or even threatened.3 The responsibility of single-handedly changing an antagonistic work culture to pave the way for others can be daunting and demoralizing.
Examples of traditionally male-dominated workplaces by industry
- Construction
- Oil and gas (oilrigs and other sites)
- Mining
- Banking and financial services
- Firefighting
- Technology
What is workplace consent?
Consent in the workplace consists of an enthusiastic “yes.” It is never assumed that one is consenting and silence does not mean consent has been granted.
Benefits of a Culture of Consent
A culture of consent helps team members:
►Hold each other accountable.
►Elevate psychological safety.
►Ensure voices are heard and respected.
►Support bringing whole selves to work.
Consent is essential for fostering a respectful and safe workplace environment.
A culture of consent promotes inclusivity, psychological safety, and collaboration.
Recognizing and addressing harassment is crucial for maintaining a thriving team-based work community.
Risk Factors of Harassment in Male-Dominated Workplaces
Ask about Sexual Harassment Training in your Workplace
Much research has been done on the experiences of women and more recently non-binary team members in traditionally male-dominated workplaces. The U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) recognizes the the challenges faced by employees who are not cisgender men in male-dominated industries. The EEOC reports heightened risk of harassment, hostile work environment, inappropriate conduct, and bullying. Risk factors for harassment include a historic lack of workplace diversity. This factor can relate to gender, race, age, or other characteristic. For this class, we are focusing on sexual harassment and the inordinate occurrences for trans and cisgender women and non-binary employees.
A second risk factor is having a workplace where some employees’ or managers’ gender identity or expression differs from the majority. This includes both their gender, which may be trans, non-binary, and gender fluid, for example, and gender expression, which can include the way they dress, hairstyle, make-up, body language, and the pitch or tone of their voice, as examples. These and other risk factors are identified within the training and strategies to reduce these risks and the harassing behaviors that often accompany these workplaces.
What is a male-dominant culture?
A male-dominated workplace culture is one in which the men hold the power within both teams and the organization. It is a culture centered around men that does not regularly invite other perspectives or voices.
Harassment Targets: Women and Non-Binary Workers
How can women and non-binary employees face such challenges while protecting themselves and growing in their careers in jobs which are historically male-dominated? This training is intended to empower women and non-binary individuals, giving them actionable tools and strategies to respond to harassment that they might experience or witness. After taking this class, students will develop confidence in dealing with issues of sexual harassment and microaggressions, understand legal protections against harassment and retaliation, and gain ideas for building supportive networks in male-dominated fields.
Workplace Harassment Training Learning Objectives List
After this training, participants will be able to:
- Recognize different types of harassment
- Address harassment aimed towards oneself or others
- Effectively document and report incidents of harassment
- Understand protections against retaliation
- Foster a supportive workplace
- Advocate for oneself and others in male-dominated workplaces
What Is and What Is Not Harassment
Many employees are unclear on what harassment looks like or are unsure about the difference between teasing or inappropriate conduct and harassment. According to the EEOC, “harassment is unwelcome conduct that is based on race, color, religion, sex (including sexual orientation, gender identity, or pregnancy), national origin, older age (beginning at age 40), disability, or genetic information (including family medical history).” If employees are required to endure this treatment as a condition of employment or the treatment is severe enough to create a hostile, abusive, or intimidating work environment, it is considered illegal behavior.4
Sexual harassment is a more specific category in which an individual is targeted based on their sex. This can take many forms, including physical acts or behaviors and communication. Sexual harassment might look like:
Examples of Sexual Harassment at Work
● Unwelcome romantic or sexual advances
● Requests for sexual acts
● Refusing to use a person’s name or correct pronouns
● Verbal or physical harassment of a sexual nature
● Derogatory comments about a person’s sex
● Explicit jokes or stories
● Explicit texts, emails, or photos5
Men, women and non-binary employees can both be the targets and the perpetrators of sexual harassment, and it can take place between members of the same gender.6 Sexual harassment is considered illegal when it creates a hostile work environment or when it results in an adverse employment decision such as demotion or firing.7
The training will include detailed, real-world scenarios to help participants recognize different kinds of harassment. Group discussions will explore the difference between general inappropriate behavior and harassment, positioning participants to leverage these skills in the workplace and to protect themselves and others.
Toolkit of Sexual Harassment Interventions
While sexual harassment can leave targets and witnesses feeling demoralized and sometimes helpless, there are specific bystander intervention techniques and tools to put an end to these behaviors and empower employees. This training guides learners through assessing a situation, de-escalation approaches, and proactive ways to address and document incidents of harassment.
The trainer offers a set of tools and strategies to address and stop the harm being caused and move toward psychological safety and empowerment.
For individuals being harassed, there are specific proactive steps to address the situation and safeguard themselves. Nonverbal communication, such as facial expressions or behavior to express disapproval or surprise, can indicate that harassment isn’t welcome or acceptable without explicitly saying so. However, employees who feel safe with a more direct approach should feel empowered to ask the other party to stop, to interrupt them or to explain that their actions aren’t acceptable. While it can be difficult to be mindful in a situation like this, it’s helpful to remain calm and to repeat requests as necessary to avoid misunderstandings. Explaining exactly how the harassment is having a negative impact and offering specific examples (“when you did X, it had Y consequence for me”) help ensure understanding. These measures will de-escalate the situation as well as making it very clear to the other party that their behavior won’t be tolerated.
Diversity Builder offers specific state content in California, Illinois, Maine, Delaware, Connecticut, and New York.
In terms of specific scripts, a person being harassed can adapt the following words:
Verbal Responses to Harassment Examples
● I don’t want to be touched/hugged.
● That’s a very personal question and does not align with our organizational values.
● I didn’t see the humor in that joke/I don’t like that joke.
● Your comments on my body/appearance are making me uncomfortable. Please stop.
● All the jokes/questions about being a woman/non-binary person are making me feel like I don’t belong. Please stop.8
Bystanders, or those witnessing harassment, can play an important role in protecting targeted employees by becoming upstanders. By intervening, they become upstanders. If an individual sees harassment taking place and it’s safe to intervene, they can create a distraction by talking to the target or pulling them away for a work task. It can also be helpful to talk directly to the target and ask them how they would like to be helped (in the case of ongoing harassment). Because harassment is such a sensitive issue, it is best to take cues from targets regarding how they would like to proceed to avoid making the problem worse. Bystanders can also reach out to organizational leadership or HR to report the issue.9 Finally, bystanders should take notes, including the date, time, and observations of what they heard or saw. Documentation like this can be helpful to support the target in an investigation.10 All of these actions signal to employees acting inappropriately that their behavior won’t be overlooked.
Reporting Harassment with Risk of Retaliation
One of the alarming symptoms…is the low rate at which employees report incidents of assault, harassment, and discrimination. Too many people don’t feel safe at work, and, fearing repercussions, aren’t willing or able to speak up about it. This vicious cycle keeps systemic inequity deeply entrenched within many workplaces.11
Those facing workplace harassment are often reluctant to report what is happening. Targets are sometimes worried about being blamed or not believed, damaging their reputations, getting the other party in trouble, or retaliation.12 Reporting rates remain low, with only 30% of employees experiencing harassment based on gender, race, and other protected classes reporting such treatment, and even fewer filing legal charges.13
Benefits of Reporting Harassment
However, there are many benefits to making a report. Because ongoing harassment can affect an individual’s well-being, sometimes causing issues like anxiety, depression, and physical symptoms, it is better to resolve these issues instead of trying to endure or ignore them. Furthermore, other employees who see that issues of gender and/or sex-based harassment are permitted might believe that such behavior is condoned. Reporting through the proper channels will create a healthier work environment, defend other vulnerable individuals or groups at an organization, and enable those facing harassment to feel safe and productive at work.
When someone reports harassment, most organizations will want to investigate the issue promptly. The CHRO, Human Resources Department, or another appropriate department will gather as much information as possible from all parties. Employees should know that there’s no guarantee of anonymity for those giving information. Furthermore, except for the individual accused of harassment, other parties might not be informed of the outcome of the investigation.
Even though retaliation is illegal, it’s unfortunately common, with 68% of those who report sexual harassment facing retaliation.14 Retaliation (in which those who report harassment are punished, lose professional opportunities, or are even demoted or fired) can take many forms, from unreasonably negative reviews, exclusion, micromanagement, and more. Participants will discuss how to overcome potential barriers to reporting as well as assessing realistic scenarios of workplace harassment, empowering them to face and report these situations with confidence.
Creating a Supportive Environment in a Male-Dominated Workplace
You may be the only woman on your team. You bring something really powerful to the table.15
One of the most powerful steps that women and non-binary individuals can take is to build and foster supportive professional networks. Consider setting up a women and non-binary networking group in your organization, or seek out a similar group in your community or industry.16 These groups provide advice, guidance, and general support as well as a break from the scrutiny of being in the minority at an organization. Additionally, employees who take part in high-profile projects, building their connections and visibility within a company, are less likely to be targeted.17
Benefits of Workplace Allyship from Men
Additionally, men who are potential allies or supporters can be invaluable assets in a male-dominated workplace. Male colleagues who call out issues with gender disparities or microaggressions, support women’s ideas and opinions, and advocate for women would be potential candidates to provide advice and mentorship.18
In addition to learning community-building techniques, participants will learn skills to bolster themselves and others when faced with mistreatment. They will discuss the importance of learning to trust one’s instincts, listening to feelings of discomfort or fear, and having the confidence to speak up against mistreatment. They will learn to spot the signs that someone is being harassed – for example, if someone seems disengaged, unusually tardy or absent, anxious, or angry. The training covers tangible ways to support these individuals, including checking in with them, providing a welcoming and supportive ear, validating their feelings, and asking what kind of solutions or outcomes they are seeking.
While sex- and gender-based exclusion remains a serious issue in the workplace, this training arms participants with knowledge of their rights along with strategies to proactively address harassment. With techniques for women and non-binary individuals to protect themselves and others, attendees will be positioned to thrive in their organizations and heal inequitable workplaces.
Further Reading
Interested in learning more? Take a look at the following resources cited in this article on strategies for spotting and addressing workplace harassment, reporting and retaliation, and supporting women and non-binary individuals in male-dominated industries.
Aftermetoo. (2022, December 18). How Can I Talk with the Harasser to Get Them to Stop?
Forbes. How to Survive and Thrive in a Male-Dominated Workplace. (2021, March 15).
Hines, Michael. (2020, October 6). How To Navigate Being the Only Woman on Your Team. Built In.
Office of Congressional Workplace Rights. (n.d.). YourRights@Work: A Bystander’s Response to Workplace Harassment.
RAINN. Sexual Harassment. (n.d.).
Salcedo, Bamby. (2018). Transforming the Workplace: Los Angeles Trans and Gender Nonconforming Workplace Assessment Report. TransLatin@ Coalition.
State of Vermont: Workplaces for All. (n.d.). Supporting Workers Facing Harassment. https://workplacesforall.vermont.gov/employers/preventing-harassment/supporting-workers-facing-harassment
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. (n.d.). Chart of Risk Factors for Harassment and Responsive Strategies. https://www.eeoc.gov/chart-risk-factors-harassment-and-responsive-strategies#
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. (n.d.) Harassment.
Zheng, Lily. (2020, October 8). Do Your Employees Feel Safe Reporting Abuse and Discrimination? Harvard Business Review. https://hbr.org/2020/10/do-your-employees-feel-safe-reporting-abuse-and-discrimination
[1] Zheng, Lily. (2020, October 8). Do Your Employees Feel Safe Reporting Abuse and Discrimination? Harvard Business Review.
[2] Salcedo, Bamby. (2018). Transforming the Workplace: Los Angeles Trans and Gender Nonconforming Workplace Assessment Report. TransLatin@ Coalition.
[3] Hines, Michael. (2020, October 6). How To Navigate Being the Only Woman on Your Team. Built In.
[4] U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. (n.d.) Harassment. https://www.eeoc.gov/harassment
[5] RAINN. Sexual Harassment. (n.d.).
[6] Office of Congressional Workplace Rights. (n.d.). YourRights@Work: A Bystander’s Response to Workplace Harassment. https://www.ocwr.gov/publications/your-rights-at-work/your-rights-at-work-a-bystanders-response-to-workplace-harassments/
[7] U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.  (n.d.). Sexual Harassment. https://www.eeoc.gov/sexual-harassment
[8] Aftermetoo. (2022, December 18). How Can I Talk with the Harasser to Get Them to Stop?
[9] RAINN. Sexual Harassment.(n.d.).
[10] Office of Congressional Workplace Rights. (n.d.). YourRights@Work: A Bystander’s Response to Workplace Harassment. https://www.ocwr.gov/publications/your-rights-at-work/your-rights-at-work-a-bystanders-response-to-workplace-harassments/
[11] Zheng, Lily. (2020, October 8). Do Your Employees Feel Safe Reporting Abuse and Discrimination? Harvard Business Review.
[12] State of Vermont: Workplaces for All. (n.d.). Supporting Workers Facing Harassment. https://workplacesforall.vermont.gov/employers/preventing-harassment/supporting-workers-facing-harassment
[13] Zheng, Lily. (2020, October 8). Do Your Employees Feel Safe Reporting Abuse and Discrimination? Harvard Business Review.
[14] Zheng, Lily. (2020, October 8). Do Your Employees Feel Safe Reporting Abuse and Discrimination? Harvard Business Review.
[15] Hines, Michael. (2020, October 6). How To Navigate Being the Only Woman on Your Team. Built In.
[16] Forbes. How to Survive and Thrive in a Male-Dominated Workplace. (2021, March 15).
[17] Hines, Michael. (2020, October 6). How To Navigate Being the Only Woman on Your Team. Built In.
[18] Forbes. How to Survive and Thrive in a Male-Dominated Workplace. (2021, March 15).