People of Color and Low-Income Communities Are Disproportionately 
Harmed by Banking and Financial Exclusion 
Access to banking and financial services is essential to economic mobility and opportunity for all 
Americans. While most American adults are fully banked, barriers to inclusion in banking and 
financial services disproportionally harm underrepresented and low-income communities:  
• Black and Hispanic Americans are more than twice as likely as white Americans to be 
unbanked or underbanked. Similarly, families at the bottom of the income distribution are 
more than six times as likely as families at the top of the distribution to be among the 
unbanked or underbanked. 
• Underrepresented and low-income Americans are more likely than their white and more 
affluent counterparts to have no usable credit score or to be credit invisible. 
• The unbanked, underbanked and those with no credit record are forced to rely on costly 
alternatives that widen existing income and wealth disparities. 
• These disparities not only limit the economic participation and financial integration of 
these underserved Americans, but also limit economic opportunity for all. 
• While innovations in financial technology have led to improved equity in some areas, 
more data and novel algorithms have failed to eliminate discrimination in lending. 
• New digital assets in the decentralized finance sector pose serious risks to consumers 
who need more protection from regulators.  
Breaking these barriers to inclusion in the banking industry will require structural policies that 
directly improve access to banking services and credit, like public banking models. Alternative 
credit assessment models for the credit invisible are also vital to help these individuals achieve 
more economic security and build wealth. Yet, persistent racial disparities in wealth will also 
require new pathways to asset purchase, like helping historically disadvantaged families buy 
their first home. Lastly, to reward the faith of investors and consumers in key innovations in 
finance, Congress will have to establish rules to govern digital assets.  


People of Color and Low-Income Communities Are Disproportionately Harmed by Banking and 
Financial Exclusion 
Page 2 
 
INTRODUCTION 
More than 80% of adults in the United States are fully banked. These individuals are able to 
obtain access to banking and credit services to meet their financial needs and build wealth. But 
the nearly one in five adults that are either unbanked or underbanked are disproportionately low-
income and underrepresented Americans who lack access to a bank account or rely on alternative 
financial services. An estimated 40% of Black Americans, 29% of Hispanic Americans and more 
than one-third of families earning less than $25,000 annually are either unbanked or 
underbanked. These underserved communities pay a high price for this exclusion by having to 
rely on costly alternatives.  
People of color and low-income Americans are also more likely than their white and more 
affluent counterparts to have no usable credit score or to be labelled as “credit invisible” with no 
credit record. These individuals struggle to obtain mainstream forms of lending, such as credit 
cards or mortgages. Having little to no credit record can also discourage financially underserved 
Americans from applying for credit. Underrepresented Americans are on average about twice as 
likely as white households to not apply for credits cards or personal loans out of fear of being 
denied. This sense of apprehension may be informed by their experiences in credit markets. In 
2021, 46% of Black Americans and 37% of Hispanic Americans reported that they had been 
denied credit or were approved for less credit than requested, compared to less than 25% of 
white Americans.  
While some innovations in financial technology (fintech) have led to improved equity, continued 
disparities in lending show that discrimination and exclusion are not just technological failures. 
Evidence shows that while fintech algorithms exercise less bias than face-to-face lenders, they 
fail to eliminate discrimination. 
Early evidence from the growing decentralized finance sector also shows that cryptocurrencies 
and digital assets replicate some of the existing disparities in traditional finance and pose 
legitimate risks to consumers. Yet, Black and Hispanic Americans are more than twice as likely 
as white Americans to report that cryptocurrencies present no risk. Providing alternative 
financial services to these historically disadvantaged communities is essential, as this trust may 
fail to be met given that the lack of comprehensive regulation in this space exposes investors and 
consumers to fraud and illicit practices.    
Narrowing these disparities in banking and financial access will require bold policies that 
address long-standing barriers and strengthen investor and consumer protection. For example, a 
public banking option can bring basic financial services like low-cost savings and checking 
accounts to post offices. Alternative credit assessment models, can also help banks develop the 
capacity to issue credit cards to consumers with no credit scores under the current system.  


People of Color and Low-Income Communities Are Disproportionately Harmed by Banking and 
Financial Exclusion 
Page 3 
 
Addressing persistent wealth disparities will also require Baby Bonds and a down payment 
assistance fund to help historically disadvantaged families purchase their first home. The 
confidence of underrepresented Americans in financial innovation and dynamism can also be 
rewarded by improving access to novel platforms and safeguarding their transactions from fraud. 
These efforts would help underrepresented and low-income Americans save money and achieve 
more economic security with clear pathways to sustained prosperity.  
BANKING AND FINANCIAL EXCLUSION DISPROPORTIONATELY HARMS 
UNDERREPRESENTED AND LOW-INCOME COMMUNITIES 
 Black, Hispanic and low-income communities are generally more likely to be unbanked and 
underbanked 
Underrepresented and low-income Americans are more likely than their counterparts to face gaps 
in accessing basic financial services. For example, Black and Hispanic Americans are more than 
twice as likely as white Americans to be unbanked or underbanked, which forces Black and 
Hispanic Americans to rely on alternative, and costly, financial services for everyday 
transactions (see figure below).  
Disparities in access to basic financial and banking services are also observed across the income 
distribution (see figure below). Families earning less than $25,000 annually are more than six 
times as likely as wealthier ones to be unbanked or underbanked.  


People of Color and Low-Income Communities Are Disproportionately Harmed by Banking and 
Financial Exclusion 
Page 4 
 
 
 


People of Color and Low-Income Communities Are Disproportionately Harmed by Banking and 
Financial Exclusion 
Page 5 
 
The unbanked and underbanked face barriers to access and pay a high cost for financial 
exclusion  
People of color and low-income communities face pervasive barriers to accessing banking and 
financial services. For example, banks frequently close branches located in lower-income 
communities and often have minimum balance requirements and charge account fees. This keeps 
low-income families on the margins of the financial system. Nearly 40% of unbanked 
households identify not having enough money to meet minimum balance requirements, 
inconvenient banking locations or high account fees as a key barrier to financial inclusion.  
Unbanked and underbanked individuals and families incur steep economic costs for living on the 
margins of the financial system, which includes relying on predatory lending schemes that 
charge costly penalties and trap people in cycles of debt. In many Black and Hispanic 
communities, check cashers and payday lenders are more common than bank branches and offer 
more accessible hours. Before the pandemic, more than one-quarter of unbanked households 
relied on prepaid debit cards compared to just 7% of banked households, and over half of 
unbanked households used a money order, check cashing or bill payment service, compared to 
just 15% of banked households (see figure below). These alternative financial services are 
accompanied by high upfront fees which trap people in cycles of debt and take large percentages 
of their paychecks. Prior to the coronavirus pandemic, financially underserved, unbanked and 
underbanked Americans spent an estimated $189 billion in fees and interest on financial 
products. These predatory practices only exacerbate existing racial and wealth disparities. 
 


People of Color and Low-Income Communities Are Disproportionately Harmed by Banking and 
Financial Exclusion 
Page 6 
 
For the unbanked and the underbanked, any form of financial activity, such as accessing the 
funds from a check received, is more arduous and costly. Banked individuals can often pay their 
bills online and enjoy access to automatic transfers, direct deposit and mobile check deposit, all 
of which enable them to economize and simplify their financial management. Individuals relying 
on alternative financial services often do not have access to these same tools. This financial 
divide was on full display at the height of the coronavirus pandemic. Americans with bank 
accounts received their Economic Impact Payments through direct deposit, enabling them to 
address pressing expenses more swiftly and efficiently. In contrast, unbanked individuals had to 
wait weeks for paper checks to arrive by mail and were also forced to pay a fee to access the 
money at a check-cashing store.  
People of color and low-income Americans are also more likely to have no usable credit score 
or to be credit invisible  
Access to affordable credit helps individuals and families to weather economic shocks and 
provides pathways to wealth-building investments that facilitate enduring financial stability. But 
the current credit scoring system presents barriers to financial inclusion for underrepresented and 
low-income communities. As many as 50 million consumers do not have a usable credit score or 
are credit invisible, and they are disproportionately people of color and low-income Americans 
that are held back from participating in our economy.   
Consumers with little to no credit history can be grouped into two camps, the “credit invisible” 
and the “unscorable.” The first is comprised of consumers without a credit record in any of the 
three nationwide credit reporting agencies (NCRAs): Equifax, Experian, and TransUnion. These 
individuals are described as being “credit invisible,” since lenders often use credit scores derived 
from NCRA records when deciding whether or not to approve a loan and in setting its interest 
rate. The second group includes consumers whose NCRA records are considered “unscorable” 
because they do not have sufficient credit histories to generate a score. Like the credit invisible, 
these consumers are less likely to obtain credit from lenders.  
Low-income and underrepresented Americans are more likely than their counterparts to be 
counted among the credit invisible and those with no usable credit score. Nearly half of 
consumers in low-income census tracts appear to either lack a credit record entirely or have an 
unscored credit record. Black and Hispanic Americans are also more likely to be credit invisible 
or to have unscored records than white Americans. About 15% percent of Black and Hispanic 
Americans are credit invisible, compared to less than 10% of white Americans. An additional 
13% of Black Americans and 12% of Hispanic Americans have unscored records, relative to less 
than 7% of white Americans.  


People of Color and Low-Income Communities Are Disproportionately Harmed by Banking and 
Financial Exclusion 
Page 7 
 
Challenges in accessing the credit scoring system impede financial integration and wealth 
creation in marginalized communities  
Individuals at the margins of the financial system are often unable to obtain mainstream forms of 
lending, such as credit cards or mortgages and face an uphill struggle in obtaining short-term 
liquidity and building wealth. These consumers are often forced to turn to predatory forms of 
lending such as payday loans. These lending vehicles typically come with steep financial costs. 
A large share of payday loan users conduct transactions on a long-term basis, as they are unable 
to pay back the initial loan in full and meet their credit and financial needs without subsequently 
taking out a new loan. 
Black and Hispanic Americans are more likely than white Americans to rely on high-cost, single 
payment credit products and other alternative financial services. Black households are 2.7 times 
more likely than white households to use pawn loans. Similarly, Hispanic households are 3.1 
times as likely as white households to use payday loans. In 2020, Black and Hispanic households 
spent $127 billion in interest and fees for everyday financial services.  
Having little to no credit record can also discourage underrepresented Americans from applying 
for credit. Black, Hispanic and American Indian and Alaskan Native (AIAN) households are 
nearly twice as likely as white households to not apply for credits cards or personal loans out of 
fear of being denied (see figure below). Households in the bottom of the income distribution are 
also more likely to share this concern relative to their more affluent counterparts. 
 


People of Color and Low-Income Communities Are Disproportionately Harmed by Banking and 
Financial Exclusion 
Page 8 
 
The apprehension that underrepresented communities report in being turned down for credit card 
or personal loans may be informed by their experience with credit markets. Black and Hispanic 
households are more likely than white households to be denied or not receive as much credit as 
requested when applying. In 2021, 46% of Black Americans and 37% of Hispanic Americans 
reported that they had been denied credit or were approved for less credit than requested, 
compared to 22% of white Americans. This racial gap in credit access widens for consumers 
with family income greater than $100,000. 
NARROWING GAPS IN BANKING AND FINANCIAL EQUITY WILL REQUIRE 
POLICIES THAT ADDRESS STRUCTURAL INEQUALITIES AND ENHANCE 
CONSUMER PROTECTION  
New lending rules and public banking options can expand access to banking for all   
Disparities in access to credit and banking and wealth reflect persistent structural inequities that 
require policy attention, not just technological innovation. 
The Biden administration, the Federal Reserve, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency 
and the Federal Insurance Deposit Corporation recently announced plans to reform rules under 
the 1977 Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) in an effort to promote financial inclusion in low-
income communities. The CRA intended to end banking and lending practices aimed at 
excluding low- and moderate-income areas that are often predominantly composed of people of 
color. These rules were last reformed in 1995 and face increasing need for re-examination as the 
rise of online banking and financial services have yet to close pervasive gaps in lending. 
Mehrsa Baradaran and others have also proposed a postal banking model that could provide low-
income and underrepresented Americans with affordable access to a broader array of financial 
products and services. Wider access to bank accounts, small loans and check cashing would 
facilitate the disbursement of policy interventions, like stimulus-related checks or payments from 
the federal government, disbursements of earned income tax credit and/or child credit payments.  
The Postal Banking Act can serve as a road map for bringing basic financial services like low-
cost savings and checking accounts to post offices. Additionally, the bill would allow the Postal 
Service to offer small-dollar loans that could eliminate the market for payday loans. Similar 
proposals have called for the creation of Fed Accounts, which would be free bank accounts for 
every American set up by the Federal Reserve and run through post offices. A different proposal, 
the Public Banking Act, would enable establishment of public banks that could interact with 
postal banking infrastructure and be part of the Federal Reserve system. 


People of Color and Low-Income Communities Are Disproportionately Harmed by Banking and 
Financial Exclusion 
Page 9 
 
Private bank initiatives, with federal support, can help expand access to credit for the credit 
invisible  
Expanding financial inclusion for low-income and undeserved communities will require 
identifying alternative credit assessment models. This is one of the main objectives of the Office 
of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC)’s Roundtable for Economic Access and Change 
(REACh).  
The OCC’s Project REACh convenes leaders from banking, business, technology and national 
civil rights organizations to reduce barriers to credit for the credit invisible. In an effort to 
identify alternative credit scoring methods, Project REACh has generated a framework for a pilot 
program in which some banks and financial institutions will share data on customers’ deposit 
accounts to extend credit to people who have previously lacked opportunities to borrow. While 
some financial institutions have attempted different scoring systems before with varying degrees 
of success, this one pilot initiative is designed to be significantly broader. Project REACh and its 
Alternative Credit Assessment Utility Workstream bring together a wide array of technology and 
financial entities with the capacity to assess many alternative data sources, including rent and  
utility bill payments and other direct debit authorizations that can help prove payment history 
and enhance the creditworthiness of underserved consumers.  
Among other initiatives, the OCC’s Project REACh is focused on revitalizing minority 
depository institutions (MDIs). MDIs are a vital source of credit and financial services, helping 
to drive financial integration. While the number of MDIs have been in decline, and were 
negatively impacted by the coronavirus pandemic, they serve economically challenged and 
largely underrepresented communities that have been traditionally underserved by the banking 
industry.   
FINANCIAL TECHNOLOGY AND DECENTRALIZED FINANCE POSE RISKS TO 
CONSUMERS AND HAVE YET TO SIGNIFICANTLY IMPROVE FINANCIAL 
INCLUSION 
The promise of inclusion by financial technology has not fully materialized yet  
Financial technology, also known as fintech, promised improved financial inclusion by relying 
on new data sources, novel algorithmic techniques and direct consumer relations via mobile 
applications. While some innovations have led to improved equity in finance, continued 
disparate outcomes in lending reflect the reality that discrimination and exclusion do not just 
come from technological challenges.   
In some areas of finance, technological innovations have led to measured improvements for 
underserved businesses and communities. For example, some fintech entities were instrumental 


People of Color and Low-Income Communities Are Disproportionately Harmed by Banking and 
Financial Exclusion 
Page 10 
 
during the pandemic in connecting small businesses to desperately needed capital from the Small 
Business Administration’s Paycheck Protection Program. Other financial technology start-ups 
and groups have built intuitive platforms and mobile applications that help low-income 
Americans access and manage their Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program and other 
benefits. But financial technology companies have yet to fully address the exclusionary practices 
and outright discrimination that prevent marginalized communities from accessing capital and 
building wealth.  
Studies of discrimination in the mortgage market have consistently found that minority loan 
applicants are more likely than white applicants to be rejected, even after accounting for income 
and credit history. Similarly, Black and Hispanic borrowers are more likely to face higher cost 
mortgages than white borrowers. Lending discrimination in the United States currently costs 
Black and Hispanic borrowers an estimated $765 million in extra interest per year.  
Fintech introduces the possibility that novel methods, like machine learning, can leverage newly 
available financial data to improve inclusion, but this promise has yet fully to materialize. These 
new and expanded data may include alternative information that is not included in an 
individual’s credit report, such as cash-flow data, which provides information on inflows and 
outflows from the bank account of consumers. Yet, more data and new techniques have not 
eliminated existing biases and disparities. Empirical evidence shows that while fintech 
algorithms exercise less bias than face-to-face lenders, they fail to eliminate impermissible 
discrimination; Black and Hispanic Americans still pay more in interest for purchase mortgages 
and for refinance mortgages originated on fintech platforms.    
Researchers at the Federal Reserve Board find that expanded data sources used in fintech and 
other new algorithmic techniques can amplify existing inequities in financial services, arguing 
that the algorithms were “effectively moving analog discrimination—such as underwriting 
discrimination, redlining, and steering—to the digital world and compounding the legacies of 
structural inequity.”  
Decentralized finance has yet to improve financial inclusion and can expose consumers to 
costly risks if left unchecked  
Proponents of decentralized finance and the blockchain industry claim the distributive ledger 
technology that powers cryptocurrencies facilitates financial inclusion among the unbanked, but 
there is little evidence to support this claim.   
Early evidence shows that cryptocurrency replicates some of the existing disparities in traditional 
finance. Men and individuals with higher levels of both income and education are more likely to 
know of at least one cryptocurrency than their counterparts who are female or possess less 
income and education. The gender gap in ownership also mirrors the persistent gender gap in the 


People of Color and Low-Income Communities Are Disproportionately Harmed by Banking and 
Financial Exclusion 
Page 11 
 
wider finance and decentralized finance industries; men are more likely than women to own at 
least one cryptocurrency. The ability of the ecosystem to reach the unbanked is also constrained 
by the magnitude of the digital divide in the United States because 66% of the unbanked do not 
have internet access at home and more than one-third of unbanked households do not have 
access to a smartphone.  
People of color may be more exposed to the risks of digital assets. Survey evidence shows that 
Black and Hispanic Americans are more likely than their white counterparts to be invested in 
unconventional assets, like non-fungible tokens. People of color are also more likely to identify 
cryptocurrencies as part of their investment status and strategy. However, cryptocurrencies suffer 
from significant price swings, rendering them unreliable sources of savings or wealth creation. 
These price swings also explain why digital assets are primarily used as a tool for financial 
speculation. Large and small investors buy digital assets hoping that the value will go up and 
they can cash out their earnings back into the traditional banking system. But this hope can be 
met with costly risks.   
Black and Hispanic Americans are more than twice as likely as white Americans to report that 
cryptocurrencies present no risk, but digital assets present a series of consumer risks associated 
with high fees and scam coins.  Cryptocurrency users can be subject to excessive transaction fees 
on payments and transfers. The prevalence of financial scams and damaging hacks can also wipe 
out value in the cryptocurrency market and hurt consumers. The Federal Trade Commission 
(FTC) reported a significant spike in cryptocurrency-related scams since 2018. Since the start of 
2021, more than 46,000 consumers have reported losing over $1 billion due to scams in crypto. 
News outlets regularly report on these new scam tokens, highlighting the increasingly common 
threat they pose to consumers.     
Protecting consumers from risks posed by emerging technologies in decentralized finance will 
require more oversight. One potential solution is the Digital Asset Market Structure and Investor 
Protection Act. This bill would protect consumers and promote ongoing innovation by 
incorporating digital assets into existing financial regulatory structures. This requires creating 
statutory definitions for digital assets and digital asset securities. These are important steps to 
maximize consumer protection and confidence in an evolving and growing market. 
CONCLUSION 
People of color and low-income communities face pervasive barriers to accessing banking and 
financial services. They are more likely than their white and more affluent counterparts to be 
counted among the unbanked, underbanked and credit invisible. This prevents underrepresented 
families from meeting their financial needs and building wealth. While the promise of improved 
financial inclusion via financial innovation and decentralization have yet to fully materialize, 
there is much Congress can do to narrow the existing gaps. Congress can expand access to 
banking and financial services with a public banking option, support families in building 


People of Color and Low-Income Communities Are Disproportionately Harmed by Banking and 
Financial Exclusion 
Page 12 
 
intergenerational wealth by helping them purchase their first home and protect consumers who 
venture into promising innovations in finance that will determine future access and participation. 
Creating pathways for underserved Americans to fully and fairly participate in the economy will 
ultimately expand economic activity and ensure that economic growth is broad-based and 
inclusive.