Illinois Releases New Report Aimed at Addressing Homelessness in the Latine Community
First-of-its-kind report outlines structural factors causing homelessness to inform future policies
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
CONTACT
SPRINGFIELD — On Thursday, May 21, 2026, Governor JB Pritzker, other State officials, and researchers met to discuss the new Latine Homelessness in Illinois: Structural Drivers of Inequality report, which is a collaborative effort of the UIC Institute for Research on Race and Public Policy and the Illinois Office to Prevent and End Homelessness (OPEH) – which is housed in the Illinois Department of Human Services (IDHS). 
The conversation included a panel of experts discussing the structural factors that contribute to racial and ethnic disparities in rates of Latine homelessness, such as a lack of affordable housing, employment, and healthcare access, as well as other insights and findings contained in the report.
“As we work to implement the Home Illinois plan to achieve functional zero homelessness in Illinois, we need to better understand how it impacts specific populations to best meet people where they are,” said Governor JB Pritzker. “This research, and the testimony of people with lived experience, helps us pave the path toward a state where no one faces long-term homelessness."
Among others, the report was informed by the Racial Equity Roundtable on Latine Homelessness, agencies across Illinois that support people experiencing homelessness that helped the research team conduct listening sessions, interviews, and focus groups, as well as Latine individuals who have experienced or currently are experiencing homelessness.
Key findings of the report include:
- Latine homelessness in Illinois is driven by structural not individual factors. The report shows that rent burden, unstable employment, discrimination, incarceration, and immigration barriers are the primary drivers of Latine homelessness, not personal choices.
- Doubled-up homelessness is the most common and most invisible form of homelessness in Latine communities.
- Doubled-up homelessness – living temporarily in the homes of friends or relatives due to lack of housing – is more prevalent among Latine residents than among the non-Latine population. 
- Rent burden is one of the strongest predictors of homelessness.
- About 46% of Latine renters are cost burdened, meaning that they spend more than 30% of gross income on housing costs. A 1% increase in rent burden leads to a 1.2% increase in Latine doubled-up homelessness, and a 1% increase in unsheltered homelessness among limited English households.
“The structural framework of this report points us toward better policy. We must work to increase access to affordable housing, good-paying jobs, and quality healthcare,” said Dulce M. Quintero, IDHS Secretary. “I look forward to how this report will inform a more just future for the Latine community and everyone impacted by homelessness – which is all of us – because we are all connected.”
“Addressing homelessness in Illinois requires that we confront the structural inequities that place disproportionate burdens on Latine communities,” said Illinois Chief Homelessness Officer Christine Haley. “This report helps sharpen our understanding of those forces and provides a roadmap for more just and effective policy. Our goal is to ensure that every person in Illinois has a safe and stable place to call home.”
“Much of the public conversation about homelessness focuses on individual responsibility and personal choice. This report outlines how structural factors, such as a lack of affordable housing, part-time labor without a living wage, access to health insurance, and immigration status, often push Latine residents in Illinois towards homelessness. As such, the data and analysis demonstrate that we cannot understand homelessness without taking seriously the ways that structural racism shapes patterns of housing insecurity,” said Iván Arenas, Senior Associate Director for Community Partnerships at UIC’s Institute for Research on Race and Public Policy.
The full report, titled Latine Homelessness in Illinois: Structural Drivers of Inequality, is available for public review here.
About Home Illinois
Home Illinois is the State’s Plan to Prevent and End Homelessness. Home Illinois sets the foundational vision to end homelessness in Illinois through both established and new innovative strategies. Illinois residents, community agencies, and State government will work together to prevent entries into shelter. When literal homelessness does occur, the experience will be brief and one-time.
###