The Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) provides simplified financial aid formulas in one of three circumstances, including the receipt of certain means-tested federal benefits.
Someone in the household received certain means-test federal benefits in either of the last two years.
If the student is dependent, the parent’s income must satisfy certain income thresholds. If the student is independent, the student’s income and the income of the student’s spouse (if married) must satisfy those income thresholds.
The Simplified Needs Test omits all assets on the FAFSA.
Auto-Zero EFC sets the expected family contribution (EFC) to zero. A zero EFC qualifies the applicant for the maximum Federal Pell Grant.
The eligible means-tested federal benefits include:
Medicaid
Supplemental Security Income (SSI)
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), formerly known as food stamps
Free and Reduced-Price School Lunch
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF)
Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants and Children (WIC)
Mark Kantrowitz is a nationally-recognized expert on student financial aid, scholarships and student loans. His mission is to deliver practical information, advice and tools to students and their families so they can make informed decisions about planning and paying for college.
Mark writes extensively about student financial aid policy. He has testified before Congress and federal/state agencies about student aid on several occasions.
Mark has been quoted in more than 10,000 newspaper and magazine articles. He has written for the New York Times, Wall Street Journal, Washington Post, Reuters, Huffington Post, U.S. News & World Report, Money Magazine, Bottom Line/Personal, Forbes, Newsweek and Time Magazine. He was named a Money Hero by Money Magazine. He is the author of five bestselling books about scholarships and financial aid, including How to Appeal for More College Financial Aid, Twisdoms about Paying for College, Filing the FAFSA and Secrets to Winning a Scholarship.
Mark serves on the editorial board of the Journal of Student Financial Aid and the editorial advisory board of Bottom Line/Personal (a Boardroom, Inc. publication). He is also a member of the board of trustees of the Center for Excellence in Education. Mark previously served as a member of the board of directors of the National Scholarship Providers Association.
Mark is currently Publisher of PrivateStudentLoans.guru, a web site that provides students with smart borrowing tips about private student loans. Mark has served previously as publisher of the Cappex.com, Edvisors, Fastweb and FinAid web sites. He has previously been employed at Just Research, the MIT Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Bitstream Inc. and the Planning Research Corporation.
Mark is President of Cerebly, Inc. (formerly MK Consulting, Inc.), a consulting firm focused on computer science, artificial intelligence, and statistical and policy analysis.
Mark is ABD on a PhD in computer science from Carnegie Mellon University (CMU). He has Bachelor of Science degrees in mathematics and philosophy from MIT and a Master of Science degree in computer science from CMU. He is also an alumnus of the Research Science Institute program established by Admiral H. G. Rickover.
The latest articles and tips to help parents stay on track with saving and paying for college, delivered to your inbox every week.
Thank you! You have been successfully subscribed to our email list.
Frequently featured in:
Saving For College is an unbiased, independent resource for parents and financial professionals, providing them with information and tools to understand the benefits of 529 college savings plans and how to meet the challenge of increasing college costs.