The Wren's Nest
11
“Understanding what matters the most to students
can lead to improved services and higher levels of
student retention and success in college” (Burleson,
2010)
Executive Summary
Higher Education is meant to be a
transformative experience. For decades, student
affairs professionals have worked to meet the
personal, academic, and social needs for students to
ensure professional development and growth. It was
not long before administrators realized that several
student populations needs were not being met and
action was taken to spearhead both affirmative
action and diversity on college campuses today.
According to the College Equality Index, 100
colleges and universities have a LGBTQ (Lesbian,
Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, and Questioning) center
on campus, and 38 colleges and universities provide
gender-neutral housing. While steps have been taken
to provide support and a voice for LGBTQ students
on campus, a further refinement of policies is
needed to ensure equality across campus. This brief
will examine ways to advocate, support, and provide
programming that is inclusive for lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender, and questioning students in
higher education.
Access & Equity
LGBTQ students face many challenges on a
traditional college campuses. Compared to their
heterosexual classmates, LGBTQ students face
higher risks for mental health concerns, sexual health
concerns, substance abuse, and family issues (Angeli,
2009). Student success for LGBTQ students is most
affected by their ability to feel safe and secure on
campus, feel welcomed by faculty, staff, and students,
and be provided additional support and safe spaces
on campus (Angeli, 2009; Engberg, Hurtado, &
Smith, 2007).
Introduction
“Policies that explicitly welcome LGBTQ employees
and students powerfully express the commitment of
a college or university in building a community of
difference. Individuals will be more likely to be open
about their sexual identity or gender identity
knowing their institution is supportive. When
individuals do not have to expend energy hiding
aspects of their identity, they, in turn, tend to be
more satisfied and productive” ~ Rankin, Weber,
Bumenfeld, & Frazer (2010)
Many college campuses today struggle with
finding what the best practices are for creating a
safe and open campus climate for LGBTQ
students. While some campuses have already
adopted various policies and procedures to affect
campus life (Beemyn, 2005; Burleson, 2010;
Rankin, Weber, Bumenfeld, & Frazer, 2010), this
brief argues for an adoption of policies
standardized across various colleges and
universities to bring equality and various measures
across the board. For LGBTQ students seeking a
college or university that will be welcoming to all
students they look to a variety of factors to be sure
they can feel safe and secure on campus: campus
climate, safety, housing policies, academics, student
support, presence of an LGBTQ center and staff
person, and student involvement/interest groups.
Each affects an individual’s college choice decision.
Additional formalized research should be
completed to help campuses communicate and
share data regarding best practices in order to
better inform future policies and practices in higher
education.
Transgender Students:
Which Box Do You Check?
Beemyn (2005) illustrates several
deficiencies that exist on college campuses for
transgender students. Beemyn also emphasized best
practices currently used at model campuses.
Examples included the use of family locker rooms
as safe and private spaces in recreation facilities;
open response fields instead of checkboxes to
indicate sex or gender; LGBTQ living-learning
communities within residences halls with the
option of gender-neutral housing; and streamlining
and simplifying the process of changing a student’s
name and photo identification while a student
transitions.
LGBTQ in Higher Education
Justine Okerson


12
Supporting LGBTQ Students on Campus
• Health Care – provide counseling services, support
groups, and adequate health care for LGBTQ
students
• Residence Halls – provide gender-neutral housing,
have inclusive policies for residence life, create
living-learning communities, and provide single
residence halls for students
• Bathrooms – provide gender-neutral bathrooms
and private showers across campus, and publicize
information on accessible websites
• Locker Rooms – provide private changing rooms
and single-person showers at recreation facilities on
campus
• Records and Documents – assist transgender
student with the process of changing gender on
college documents and records
• Public Inclusion – provide trainings for students
and gender-specific groups on campus (Greek Life,
Sports, Etc.) regarding common LGBTQ issues and
how to provide support
• Programming/Training/Support – offer events
dedicated to celebrating LGBTQ members on
campus, offer speakers, training, and support for
LGBTQ students and friends
• Orientation – open the dialogue for gender and
sexuality discussions before classes start
• Curriculum – include LGBT current issues and set
the stage for open discussions
• Find a Point Person – ideally this should be a full-
time staff person, but if not locate and post a
faculty/staff resource for students to direct
questions and concerns
• Career Center – post information and discuss
LGBTQ-friendly employers (Beemyn, Dominigue,
Pettit, & Smith, 2005; How to Support LGBTQ
Students on Campus, 2013)
Campus Climate
“Campuses give signals to potential students about
the level of support GLBTQ students can expect”
~Burleson (2010)
The institutional climate at a college or
university has been shown to create a powerful
impact on students’ perceptions and attitudes
regarding diversity on campus (Engberg, Hurtado, &
Smith, 2007). Research also demonstrates that
students in a non-discriminatory environment are
more open to diversity and challenges to their belief
system throughout college (Angeli, 2009; Burleson,
2010; Engberg, Hurtado, & Smith, 2007). College
campuses send signals, intentionally or not, about
their openness to LGBTQ students through the
form of student organizations, resource centers, and
special-interest housing (Burleson, 2010). Most
students consider the campus climate an important
factor when deciding where to attend college. One
method of addressing these issues is to examine
ways in which to focus on marketing and
communication to prospective students and making
it evident that regardless of a student’s individual
sexual orientation, the campus, itself, supports the
LGBTQ community (Burleson, 2010).
LGBTQ & Race
Research also demonstrates the importance
of examining challenges for LGBTQ students who
are also multicultural students, as often-times neither
support system is adequate for multicultural
LGBTQ students (Misawa, 2007). Additional
programming efforts and support are needed for
students, and evaluation of those programs is
required for success in reaching all students.
Policy Recommendations
• LGBTQ Student Data & Research – More student
data is needed to make recommendations and to
assess the quality and progression of an LGBTQ
student’s educational performance
• Enforcing Student Policies – Important to ensure
existing student policies are being applied and that
there are policies in place that forbid discrimination
based on sexual orientation or gender identity
• Inclusion in Diversity Efforts and Non-
Discrimination Clause – Include sex/gender, sexual
orientation, and gender identity in diversity efforts
in addition to non-discrimination clauses
• Provide a Safe and Open Campus Climate –
Demonstrate an institutional commitment to
programming and support of all students and
initiatives on campus
• Provide Student Support – Offer safe spaces on
campuses, and identify faculty/staff as allies on
campus, allow for funding for at least one full-time
staff devoted to LGBTQ programming and
advocacy
• Increase Outreach and Communication – Add
support groups, speakers, classes, and open-ended
discussions on gender and sexuality for all students
• Commit to Professional Development Efforts –
Train faculty, staff, and students on inclusive
practices/curriculum, safe zone trainings, and how
to respond to harassment and hate crimes on
The William & Mary Educational Review


13
campus
Equality in Action
“Several studies in higher education show a clear link
between students’ interactions with diverse peers and
increases across a number of student outcomes;
intellectual and social self-confidence; openness to
diversity and challenge; critical thinking; and
leadership and cultural knowledge”~ Engberg,
Hurtado, & Smith (2007)
Conclusion
As higher education continually seeks to
provide and promote access and inclusion for all
students, it is important to consider our policies and
programs dedicated to LGBTQ students on college
campuses today. By examining previous research
regarding the LGBTQ higher education experience
in addition to the main issues affecting LGBTQ
students today, it is clear that there are a variety of
ways that faculty, staff, and student affairs
administrators can address not only the campus
climate, but also many possible suggestions for
better support of LGBTQ students. Higher
Education should be a transformative experience for
ALL students. Higher Education should also be a
safe place for students to grow by being exposed to
diversity, and learn from one another. The research
demonstrates that support and climate are crucial for
LGBTQ students academic and social success.
Higher Education policy should adopt a requirement
for hiring a full-time staff person committed to
addressing LGBTQ needs on campus.
Implications and Limitations
Limitations of this policy brief are due to
the lack of formalized research regarding LGBTQ
issues in Higher Education. There is a clear need for
additional research regarding best practices and how
to effectively meet the needs academically, socially,
and physically for all students. The implications of
this project indicate that change is needed on most
college campuses. Additional training for faculty,
staff, and students regarding diversity is needed to
help address promoting an open and diverse campus
climate. Colleges and universities want to provide a
safe community that is diverse and innovative; by
committing to supporting LGBTQ issues,
institutions are one step closer to achieving their
goals.
References
Angeli, M. (2009). Access and Equity for All
Students: Meeting the Needs of LGBT
Students. Report 09-14. California
Postsecondary Education Commission.
Beemyn, B., Dominigue, A., Pettit, J., & Smith,
T. (2005). Suggested steps to makes
campuses more trans-inclusive. Journal of
GayandLesbianIssuesinEducation,3(1),89-
94.
Beemyn, B.G. (2005). Making campuses more
inclusive of transgender students. Journal
of Gay & Lesbian Issues in Education, 3(1),
77- 87. doi: 10.1300/J367v03n01_08.
Birnbaum, R. (1988). How colleges work: The
cybernetics of academic organization and
leadership. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Burleson, D.A. (2010). Sexual orientation and
college choice: Considering campus
climate. About Campus, 14(6), 9-14.
College Equality Index. (2013). Retrieved
December 5, 2013 from
http://www.collegeequalityindex.org/.
Engberg, M. E., Hurtado, S., & Smith, G. C.
(2007). Developing attitudes of
acceptance toward lesbian, gay, and
bisexual peers: Enlightenment, contact,
and the college experience. Journal of Gay
& Lesbian Issues in Education, 4(3), 49-77.
Fowler, F. (2012). Policy studies for educational
leaders: An introduction (4th Ed.).
Boston: Prentice Hall.
How to Support LGBTQ Students on Campus
(2013). Retrieved December 5, 2013 from
http://lgbtq.unc.edu/programs-
services/safe-zone/how-to-support-lgbt-
students.
Misawa, M. (2007). Political aspects of the
intersection of sexual orientation and race
in higher education in the United States: A
queer scholar of color's perspective.
Journalof CurriculumandPedagogy,4(2), 78-
83.
Rankin, S., Weber, G., Bumenfeld, W., & Frazer, S.
(2010). The state of higher education for
lesbian, gay, bisexual & transgender people.
Charlotte, NC: Campus Pride.
Weick, K.E. (2000). Educational organizations as
loosely coupled systems. In M.C. Brown,
II (Ed.), Organization & Governance in
The Wren's Nest


14
Higher Education (5th Ed.) (pp. 36-49).
Boston: Pearson Custom Publishing.
About the author
Justine Okerson is a PhD student in the
Educational Policy, Planning, and Leadership
program, focusing on Higher Education.
The William & Mary Educational Review