Executive Summary
As of fall 2019, over 11 million undergraduate and 3 million graduate students were enrolled in four-year or graduate universities. These institutions provide an important stepping stone to higher earnings and greater economic stability; those with higher levels of education are consistently found to have higher rates of employment and higher median earnings. However, LGBTQ undergraduate and graduate students may face unique adversities in university settings relative to their non-LGBTQ counterparts.
This study provides new information about the experiences of LGBTQ people who have attended four-year college or graduate school using data collected for the nationally representative Access to Higher Education Survey. Information about campus climate, experiences of belonging, discrimination, violence, mental health, educational aspirations, and sources of financial support were explored for LGBTQ and non-LGBTQ people ages 18 to 40, including 629 respondents who have attended four-year college and 193 respondents who have attended graduate school.
Four-Year College
Nearly three in five (58.3%) LGBTQ people ages 18-40 reported that they had attended four-year college at some point in their lives. Most (61.8%) attended public four-year institutions. Of LGBTQ people who attended college, 25.8% were current college students and 55.9% had completed their bachelor’s degree. Two in five (44.4%) reported that while in college they aspired to obtain more education (e.g., a graduate degree).
LGBTQ people were four times more likely to report having picked a university in a different city or state to seek a more welcoming climate than non-LGBTQ people (21.5% vs. 4.8%, respectively). Twice as many LGBTQ people picked a college elsewhere to get away from family as did their non-LGBTQ counterparts (32.6% vs. 14.1%, respectively).
Nearly one-third of LGBTQ people (32.6%) experienced bullying, harassment, or assault at college, compared to 18.9% of non-LGBTQ people. Specific forms of adversity were experienced by twice as many or more LGBTQ than non-LGBTQ people. Nearly one in five (19.1%) LGBTQ people experienced in-person bullying or harassment, 12.5% of LGBTQ people experienced online or other indirect bullying or harassment, 17.6% experienced sexual harassment, and 11.8% experienced sexual assault in college. Each of these was reported by fewer non-LGBTQ people, including in-person bullying or harassment (5.4%), online or other indirect bullying or harassment (5.3%), sexual harassment (5.8%), or sexual assault (2.0%). Other students were the most frequently identified perpetrators of bullying, harassment, or assault of LGBTQ and non-LGBTQ people.