Factor effecting recruitment
The internal factors or forces which affecting recruitment and can be controlled by the organization are 1. RECRUITMENT POLICY The recruitment policy of an organization specifies the objectives of recruitment and provides a framework for implementation of recruitment programme. It may involve organizational system to be developed for implementing recruitment programmes and procedures by filling up vacancies with best qualified people. 2. .HUMAN RESOURCE PLANNING ffective human resource planning helps in determining the gaps present in the e!isting manpower of the organization. It also helps in determining the number of employees to be recruited and what qualification they must possess.
2. SIZE OF THE FIRM The size of the firm is an important factor in recruitment process. If the organization is planning to increase its operations and e!pand its business" it will think of hiring more personnel" which will handle its operations.
#. COST $ecruitment incur cost to the employer" therefore" organizations try to employ that source of recruitment which will bear a lower cost of recruitment to the organization for each candidate.
%. GROWTH AND EXPANSION &rganization will employ or think of employing more personnel if it is e!panding it's operations. The external factors which affecting recruitment are the forces which cannot be controlled by the organisation. The major e!ternal forces are( 1. SUPPLY AND DEMAND The availability of manpower both within and outside the organization is an important determinant in the recruitment process. If the company has a demand for more professionals and there is limited supply in the market for the professionals demanded by the company" then the company will have to depend upon internal sources by providing them special training and development programs. 2. LABOUR MARKET mployment conditions in the community where the organization is located will influence the recruiting efforts of the organization. If there is surplus of manpower at the time of recruitment" even informal attempts at the time of recruiting like notice boards display of the requisition or announcement in the meeting etc will attract more than enough applicants. 3. IMAGE / GOODWILL Image of the employer can work as a potential constraint for recruitment. )n organization with positive image and goodwill as an employer finds it easier to attract and retain employees than an organization with negative image. Image of a company is based on what organization does and affected by industry. *or e!ample finance was taken up by fresher +,)'s when many finance companies were coming up.
%. POLITICAL-SOCIAL- LEGAL ENVIRONMENT -arious government regulations prohibiting discrimination in hiring and employment have direct impact on recruitment practices. *or e!ample" .overnment of India has introduced legislation for reservation in employment for scheduled castes" scheduled tribes" physically handicapped etc. )lso" trade unions play important role in recruitment. This restricts management freedom to select those individuals who it believes would be the best performers. If the candidate can't meet criteria stipulated by the union but union regulations can restrict recruitment sources.
/. UNEMPLOYMENT RATE &ne of the factors that influence the availability of applicants is the growth of the economy 0whether economy is growing or not and its rate1. 2hen the company is not creating new jobs" there is often oversupply of qualified labour which in turn leads to unemployment.
3. COMPETITORS The recruitment policies of the competitors also effect the recruitment function of the organisations. To face the competition" many a times the organisations have to change their recruitment policies according to the policies being followed by the competitors.
Both recruitment and selection are the two phases of the employment process. The differences between the two are: 1. The recruitment is the process of searching the candidates for employment and stimulating them to apply for jobs in the organisation WH ! "# selection in$ol$es the series of steps by which the candidates are screened for choosing the most suitable persons for $acant posts. 2. The basic purpose of recruitments is to create a talent pool of candidates to enable the selection of best candidates for the organisation% by attracting more and more employees to apply in the organisation WH ! "# the basic purpose of selection process is to choose the right candidate to sfill the $arious positions in the organisation. 3. !ecruitment is a positi$e process i.e. encouraging more and more employees to apply WH ! "# selection is a negati$e process as it in$ol$es rejection of the unsuitable candidates. 4. !ecruitment is concerned with tapping the sources of human resources WH ! "# selection is concerned with selecting the most suitable candidate through $arious inter$iews and tests. 5. There is no contract of recruitment established in recruitment WH ! "# selection results in a contract of ser$ice between the employer and the selected employee.