1
Bullying of LGBT Youth and Those Perceived  
to Have Different Sexual Orientations
What is Bullying?
Bullying is unwanted, aggressive 
behavior among school aged children. 
It involves a real or perceived power 
imbalance and the behavior is 
repeated, or has the potential to be 
repeated, over time. 
Both kids who are bullied and kids 
who bully others may have serious, 
lasting problems.
Lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender 
(LGBT) youth, or those perceived as LGBT, 
may be teased and bullied by their peers. 
Educators, health professionals, parents, 
and other concerned adults can make 
a difference in the lives of LGBT youth. 
Often, bullying towards LGBT youth targets 
their non-conformity to gender norms. This 
may be sexual harassment covered under 
Title IX of the Education Amendments of 
1972.
Student and  
Teacher Attitudes
According to a 2005 Harris Interactive 
survey:
• A majority of youth know of LGBT 
classmates
• More than one-third of teachers know of 
an LGBT student
• Most teachers surveyed are committed 
to keeping LGBT students safe and 
creating school climates that are safe and 
supportive learning environments (Harris 
Interactive & GLSEN, 2005)
Effects of Anti-LGBT Bullying
Bullied LGBT youth, or youth perceived 
as lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgender, 
are more likely to skip school, smoke, use 
alcohol and drugs, or engage in other risky 
behaviors (Bontempo & D’Augelli, 2002; 
Rivers & D’Augelli, 2001). Lesbian, gay or 
bisexual youth are more than twice as likely 
as their peers to be depressed and think 
about or attempt suicide (Russell & Joyner, 
2001). The risks are the same whether 
youth are LGBT, are heterosexual but are 
wrongly perceived to be LGBT, or choose 
to hide their sexual orientations.


Bullying of LGBT Youth and Those Perceived to Have Different Sexual Orientations
2
What Schools and 
Communities Can Do 
Develop Clear Policies on Bullying
Schools can consider adding sexual 
orientation and gender identity to their 
bullying policies (Office of Civil Rights, 
OCR, 2010). Doing so tells students to treat 
everyone equally, regardless of their sexual 
orientation (Get Busy, Get Equal, 2006).
According to the Harris Interactive survey, 
students from schools with clear policies on 
LGBT-related bullying:
• Are less likely to report a serious 
harassment problem 
• Report higher rates of feeling safe  
at school 
• Are one-third less likely to skip a class 
Schools with anti-bullying policies can 
consider making it clear that bullying based 
on sexual orientation is against school 
policy. (Harris Interactive & GLSEN, 2005)
Train Staff and Volunteers in  
Bullying Prevention and Intervention
Schools, clubs, camps, after school 
programs, summer programs, and other 
youth organizations can train staff and 
volunteers on bullying prevention and 
intervention.
Create Safe Environments for All Children
Schools and communities can create safe, 
non-biased, and supportive environments 
for all children and youth, such as a gay-
straight alliance (GSA). GSAs help create 
safer schools, and reduce the hazards and 
stresses for LGBT youth (Just the Facts 
Coalition, 1999). According to the Equal 
Access Act, schools must allow these 
groups if they have other “non-curricular” 
clubs or groups. 
Discuss Bullying Openly
Adults can consider discussing concerns 
about LGBT-related bullying with youth. 
Parents and other adults may convey 
an attitude of indifference by avoiding 
the subject.  Or worse, their silence may 
convey an unspoken acceptance of the 
bullying (Ponton, 2001). 
These discussions should protect the 
youth’s privacy. Be careful not to disclose 
or discuss issues around being LGBT with 
the youth’s parents or anyone else. 
Provide Additional Support
When youth reveal same-sex attractions 
and relationships, this is an opportunity for 
health, medical, and school professionals 
to better inform and support sexual minority 
youth by linking them with community 
resources and helping to overcome the 
tensions of parents, families, and peers.
Bullied LGBT youth may need additional 
support, such as access to qualified 
healthcare professionals with experience 
working with LGBT youth (AAP, 2004; 
NAPNAP position paper, 2006).


3
Bullying of LGBT Youth and Those Perceived to Have Different Sexual Orientations
Raise Community Awareness
The American Academy of Pediatrics 
encourages pediatricians to discuss 
youth sexuality with community leaders. 
Specifically, pediatricians are  
encouraged to:
• Provide facts about sexual orientation in 
school and community libraries
• Develop support groups for LGBT youth, 
their friends, and their parents (AAP, 
2004)
References and Resources
American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP). (2004). Sexual orientation and adolescents. Pediatrics, 113, 1827-1832.
Bontempo, D.E. & D’Augelli, A.R. (2002). Effects of at-school victimization and sexual orientation on lesbian, gay, or bisexual 
youths’ health risk behavior. Journal of Adolescent Health, 30, 364-374.
Get Busy, Get Equal. (2006). Get a safe schools policy, produced by American Civil Liberties Union, GLSEN and AIDS project at 
www.aclu.org/getequal/.
Harris Interactive & GLSEN. (2005). From teasing to torment: School climate in America, a survey of students and teachers. 
New York: GLSEN. Additional research publications: Institutional heterosexism in our schools: A guide to understanding and undoing 
it; and the biennial, National School Climate Survey, are available at www.glsen.org.
Just the Facts Coalition. (1999). Just the facts about sexual orientation & youth: A primer for principals, educators & school 
personnel, Factsheet developed and endorsed by ten coalition associations; and Partners Against Hate at www.partnersagainsthate. 
org/youth/bullying.html.
Kim, R. (2009). A report on the status of gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender people in education: Stepping out of the closet, into 
the light. National Education Association of the United States, Human and Civil Rights, Washington, D.C., p. 30. 
National Association of Pediatric Nurse Practitioners (NAPNAP) position paper, Health risks and needs of gay, lesbian, bisexual, 
transgender, and questioning adolescents (2006). Journal of Pediatric Health Care, 20, 29A-30A. 
Office of Civil Rights (OCR). Dear Colleague Letter: Harassment and Bullying. (2010). Issued by Russlynn Ali Assistant Secretary 
for Civil Rights, U.S. Department of Education, Washington, D.C. Available at http://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/letters/ 
colleague-201010.html.
Ponton, L. (2001). What does gay mean: How to talk with kids about sexual orientation and prejudice. San Francisco, CA: Horizons 
Foundation. Additional resources are available through the National Mental Health Association at www.nmha.org/whatdoesgaymean.
Rivers, I. & D’Augelli, A.R. (2001). The victimization of lesbian, gay and bisexual youths. In D’Augelli, A.R. & Patterson, C.J. (ed.) 
Lesbian, gay and bisexual identities and youth: Psychological perspectives, New York: Oxford University Press. pp.199-223.
Russell, S.T. & Joyner, K. (2002). Adolescent sexual orientation and suicide risk: Evidence from a national study. American Journal 
Public Health, 91, 1276-1281.