Date of Conferral
2023
Degree
Ph.D.
School
Psychology
Advisor
Jody Dill
Abstract
Much research has been done on LGBT students in relation to campus climate and academic achievement, which suggested that a positive campus climate may positively influence students’ academic success. However, no research has yet been done to understand the value of campus climate, student levels of depression anxiety and stress, and student level of outness for predicting academic success. This quantitative study examined campus climate, depression, anxiety, and stress levels, and student level of outness together in their ability to predict self-reported grade point average of LGBT college students. Basic Psychological Needs Theory, a sub theory of Self-Determination Theory, was used to explain the findings. Data were collected from 120 participants via a participant pool at an online, public university, a Facebook group for LGBT college students in North Carolina, and Amazon MTurk, using the 14-item Depression, Anxiety, and Stress Scale (DASS-14); the Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgendered Climate Inventory (LGBTCI); and the Outness Inventory (OI). The data were analyzed using a hierarchical linear regression analysis. The results of this analysis were not significant, indicating that campus climate, depression, anxiety, and stress levels, did not predict student academic success. The results of this study suggested that further research is necessary to fully understand the factors that predict LGBT student academic success. Such research could include alternative variables such as self-esteem, religiosity, and resiliency as well as a larger sample. This research has the potential to inform schools about factors that affect their LGBT student population in their academic success, which in turn could improve policy and teaching practices leading to positive social change.
Recommended Citation
    McCormick, Jonathan, "Factors for LGBT College Students That Predict Academic Success" (2023). Walden Dissertations and Doctoral Studies.  11774.
    
    
    
        https://scholarworks.waldenu.edu/dissertations/11774