A UW–Madison study explores the ways that elementary and high school administrators disrupt or enable bullying of transgender students.
The study, published in Educational Administration Quarterly, divides harmful actions into four categories: direct action, facilitated support, accommodation of external stakeholders, and resistance to education or external support that would help disrupt bullying.
Mollie McQuillan, lead author of the study and an assistant professor in the School of Education’s Department of Educational Leadership and Policy Analysis, says the study provides a broader definition of administrative bullying than had previously existed. She also says it makes clear how crucial school leaders’ actions are in enabling or dismantling a culture of bullying in their schools.
“Administrators compose a small but mighty part of school systems,” she says. “The need for school administrators who understand their role in perpetuating transphobia has heightened in the midst of well-coordinated, international campaigns targeting transgender people in schools.”
Drawing on data from court cases across the country and dozens of interviews with school administrators and policy consultants, the study also looked at how administrators successfully stop bullying. These leaders proactively collaborate with students, supportive parents, and supportive community organizations when developing and implementing school policies.
“As attacks on transgender youth intensify in legislatures and classrooms alike, district leaders stand on the front line of protecting students from continued bias-based bullying,” McQuillan says. “Students need well-informed and dedicated leaders who will help sustain student education and safety in these difficult times.”
Earlier this year, McQuillan received the Emerging Scholar Award from the division of the American Educational Research Association that focuses on administration, organization, and leadership. She also received the organization’s Outstanding Policy Report award in the division of educational policy and politics.
Published in the Spring 2025 issue