] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The author(s) shown below used Federal funding provided by the U.S. 
Department of Justice to prepare the following resource: 
 
 
Document Title: 
Improving Officer Decision-Making: 
Can Personality Predict Outcomes in 
Use of Force Decisions? 
 
 
Author(s): 
M. Lyn Exum, Ph.D.; Shelley L. 
Johnson, Ph.D.; Joseph B. Kuhns, 
Ph.D.; and Samuel E. DeWitt, Ph.D. 
 
 
Document Number: 310466 
 
 
Date Received: 
April 2025 
 
 
Award Number: 
2017-R2-CX-0030 
 
This resource has not been published by the U.S. Department of 
Justice. This resource is being made publicly available through the 
Office of Justice Programs’ National Criminal Justice Reference Service. 
 
Opinions or points of view expressed are those of the author(s) and 
do not necessarily reflect the official position or policies of the U.S. 
Department of Justice. 


 
1 
 
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF JUSTICE  
FINAL REPORT 
 
FINAL REPORT DATE:   
September 30, 2022 
 
FEDERAL AWARD NUMBER: 
2017-R2-CX-0030 
 
PROJECT TITLE: 
Improving Officer Decision-Making: Can Personality 
Predict Outcomes in Use of Force Decisions? 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS: M. Lyn Exum, Ph.D.1 
Associate Professor 
 
 
CO-INVESTIGATORS:  
 
Shelley L. Johnson, Ph.D.1 
Professor 
 
Joseph B. Kuhns, Ph.D.1 
Professor 
 
Samuel E. DeWitt, Ph.D.1 
Assistant Professor 
 
CONTACT INFORMATION: 
1Department of Criminal Justice & Criminology 
The University of North Carolina at Charlotte 
9201 University City Boulevard 
Charlotte, NC 28223 
lexum@uncc.edu 
704.687.0739 
 
AWARD RECIPIENT:  
 
The University of North Carolina at Charlotte 
9201 University City Blvd 
Charlotte, NC  28223 
 
PROJECT PERIOD: 
 
January 1, 2018 to September 30, 2020 
 
AWARD AMOUNT: 
 
$432,159 
 
 
 
This project was supported by Award No. 2017-R2-CX-0030, awarded by the National Institute 
of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, U.S. Department of Justice. The opinions, findings, and 
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this publication/program/exhibition are those of 
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect those of the Department of Justice. 


 
2 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Acknowledgements………………………………………………………….………. 5 
Executive Summary………………………………………………………………….. 6 
Background……………………………………………………………………….. 6 
Methodology & Measures………………………………………………………… 7 
Analyses & Results……………………………………………………………….. 8 
Conclusions & Implications………………………………………………………. 10 
Introduction……..…..…………………..………………….…………………........... 12 
Literature Review……………………………………………………………………. 15 
Decision Making under Stress: Risk & Protective Factors…………………...…... 17 
Citizen Education Programs & Attitudes Toward Police…………………………. 25 
Research Goals and Questions………………………………………………………. 26 
Research Design and Methods………………………………………………………. 28 
Original Design….…………………..……………………………………………. 28 
Deviations from the Original Design……...……………………………………… 29 
Participants………………………………………………………………………... 33 
Law Enforcement Officers.….………………………………………………… 33 
Civilians………………………………………………………………………... 34 
Materials and Measures………………………………………………......……….. 35 
Training Simulator & Accessories…………………………………………...… 35 
Training Scenarios………………………...…………………………………… 37 
Simulator Experience Feedback...………………………………………...…… 42 
Video Coding Process...………………………………………………………... 42 
Video Coding Measures - Use of Force……………………………………...... 43 
Video Coding Measures - Verbal De-escalation………………………………. 44 
Video Coding Measures - Other De-escalation………………………………... 46 
Personality Traits………………………………………………………………. 46 
Need for Cognition…………………………………………………………….. 47 
Cognitive Reflection…………………………………………………………… 48 
Demographics………………………………………………………………….. 48 
Professional Experience (Law Enforcement Participants Only)......................... 49 
Social Networks (Law Enforcement Participants Only)..................................... 49 
Attitudes toward Police (Civilian Participants Only).......................................... 51 
Control Variables………………………………………………………………. 52 
Procedure………………………………………………………………………….. 53 
Law Enforcement Participants…………………………………………………. 53 


 
3 
 
Civilian Participants…………………………………………………………… 55 
Analytic Plan……………………………………………………………………… 56 
Results……………………………………………………………………………….. 58 
Research Question 1………………………………………………………………. 63 
Research Question 2………………………………………………………………. 69 
Research Question 3………………………………………………………………. 73 
Research Question 4………………………………………………………………. 82 
Discussion..…………………………….………………………………..…………… 85 
Summary of Findings……………………………………………………………... 86 
Implications……………………………………………………………………….. 91 
Limitations & Future Research………………………………………………….... 96 
References…………………………………………………………………………… 99 
Tables 
Table 1. Study Component Completion Groups for Officers, by Law 
Enforcement Agency……………………………………………………………… 34 
Table 2. Study Component Completion Groups for Civilians……………………. 35 
Table 3. Summary Statistics of Participant Characteristics (N=165)…………….. 59 
Table 4. Summary Statistics of Scenario-Related Variables (N=495 participant 
scenarios)………………………………………………………………………….. 62 
Table 5. Logistic Regression Predicting Use of Any Force (N=495 participant 
scenarios) – Abridged Findings………………………………………………….. 64 
Table 6. Logistic Regression Predicting Use of Force (Any Force) - Scenario 
Specific Findings, Abridged………………………………………………………  68 
Table 7. OLS Regression Predicting Time Until Force is Used (N=228) - 
Abridged Findings………………………………………………………………… 70 
Table 8. Multinomial Logistic Regression Predicting Type of Force Used, 
Contrast 1: No Tactic Used Relative to Verbal De-escalation (N=495) -  
Abridged Findings………………………………………………………………… 75 
Table 9. Multinomial Logistic Regression Predicting Type of Force Used, 
Contrast 2: Non-Lethal Force Relative to Verbal De-escalation (N=495) - 
Abridged Findings………………………………………………………………… 77 


 
4 
 
Tables, Continued. 
Table 10. Multinomial Logistic Regression Predicting Type of Force Used, 
Contrast 3: Lethal Force Relative to Verbal De-escalation (N=495) - Abridged 
Findings…………………………………………………………………………. 79 
Table 11. Multinomial Logistic Regression Predicting Type of Force Used, 
Contrast 3: Lethal Force Relative to Non-Lethal Force (N=495) - Abridged 
Findings…………………………………………………………………………. 81 
Table 12. Pre- and Post-Test Attitudes towards Police, Civilian Sample (N=101). 84 
 
Appendices 
A: Recruitment Strategies………………………………………………………… 111 
B: Simulator Experience Feedback Questionnaire………………………………... 120 
C: Video Coding Process & Inter-Rater Reliability Checks……………………… 121 
D: Need for Cognition – Short Form……………………………………………... 124 
E: Cognitive Reflection Test……………………………………………………… 126 
F: Demographic & Professional Experiences Questions…………………………. 127 
G: Social Network Measures……………………………………………………… 131 
H:Attitudes Toward Police Questionnaire………………………………………... 135 
I: Unabridged Tables of Regression Results……………………………………… 139 
J: Dissemination Artifacts………………………………………………………… 154 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
5 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors wish to thank Lieutenant Dexter Wilson for his time, insight, and support of 
this project, and Shannon Messer and Gillian Munoz for their invaluable assistance in data 
coding.  
 


 
6 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
Background 
Although a comprehensive account of police use of force in the US does not currently 
exist, the available research suggests that approximately 2% of official police contacts with 
civilians (and approximately 20% of all arrests) result in an officer’s use of force (Eith & 
Durose, 2011; MacDonald, Kaminiski, & Smith, 2009; Smith, Kaminski, Alpert, Fridell, 
MacDonald, & Kubu, 2010; cf: Garner, Hickman, Malega & Maxwell, 2018). Estimates of 
civilian injury during these events is nearly 40% (Smith et al., 2010), with officers being injured 
during these encounters just as often as civilians (Smith et al., 2010; cf. Federal Bureau of 
Investigation, 2016b). Given the number of civilians and officers injured each year, police use of 
force has been labeled by some as a public health crisis in the US (MacDonald et al., 2009).  
While most injuries stemming from police use of force are relatively minor, high-profile 
events (including officer-involved shootings) and the corresponding media coverage surrounding 
these events has helped to erode the public’s trust in the police (Nix & Wolfe, 2017; Verhaeghen 
& Aikman, 2021). In the wake of the killing of George Floyd in 2020 by a Minneapolis police 
officer, Gallup reported that the percentage of Americans who had confidence in the police fell 
below 50%, a historical low (Brenan, 2020). Thus, policing in America is currently experiencing 
a legitimacy crisis of unprecedented levels (Nix, Campbell, Byers & Alpert, 2017).  
While much is known about the situational factors of a police encounter that contribute 
to escalation and use of force (e.g., Alpert & Dunham, 2004; Kuhns & Knutsson, 2010; Smith & 
Visher, 1981; Kavanagh, 1997; Terrill & Reisig, 2003), far less is known about the individual-
level factors that shape these decisions. Therefore, the current study sought to examine the 


 
7 
 
impact of select psychological, cognitive, professional experience and social network factors on 
police officers’ decisions to use force. Additionally, the study examined the impact of a brief 
citizen education intervention (i.e. the completion of police officer training simulations) on 
citizens’ attitudes toward police and use of force.  
Methodology & Measures 
The analyses in the current study are based on a sample of 64 law enforcement officers 
and 101 civilians. Participants completed a series of questionnaires designed to measure, among 
other things: 
1. The personality traits of Positive Emotionality (contentment), Negative 
Emotionality (irritability) and Constraint (self-control) 
2. Need for Cognition (how much one enjoys and engages in higher-order thinking) 
3. Cognitive Reflection (the tendency to scrutinize one’s own gut reactions) 
4. Professional experiences as a police officer (law enforcement participants only) 
5. The size of friendship networks within the workplace (law enforcement 
participants only) 
6. The participant’s perceptions of how their friendship networks would be impacted 
if the participant were to use excessive force (law enforcement participants only)   
All participants completed three training scenarios inside a firearms training simulator. 
Participants interacted with noncompliant suspects on video screens and could attempt to resolve 
the conflict with de-escalation tactics, non-lethal force options (pepper spray or taser), or lethal 
force (firearm). All participants completed the same three scenarios, each with a separate task for 
the participant to complete.  The tasks were: 


 
8 
 
1. Removing a homeless man with an apparent mental illness from the town park 
after hours (low threat encounter) 
2. Subduing a suspect who is actively avoiding arrest and is about to about to stomp 
on a police officer who was pushed to the ground (medium threat) 
3. Subduing a suspect who has overpowered a police officer and is holding a gun to 
the officer’s head (high threat) 
Data collected from these training exercises included:  
1. Whether or not the participant used any type of force 
2. If force was used, the length of time required to make that decision 
3. The type of response tactic the participant used, be it de-escalation techniques, 
non-lethal force options (pepper spray or taser), or lethal force option 
 
Finally, immediately before and after civilians completed the training scenarios, they 
completed a series of questions designed to measure their attitude toward police and police use 
of force. These questions can be grouped into four broad categories: 
1. Civilians’ impressions of the difficulty and dangerousness of police work 
2. Civilians’ views of police officer professionalism and decision making 
3. Civilians’ views on the appropriate level of force in various confrontational 
situations 
4. Civilians’ global perceptions of the police  
Analyses & Results 
A series of logistic, multinomial and ordinary least squares analyses were conducted to 
explore the effect of the individual-level factors on use of force decision making. Overall, 


 
9 
 
personality traits were largely unrelated to use of force decisions, with the exception of high 
levels of Negative Emotionality being associated with a higher likelihood of using lethal force 
relative to non-lethal force. Similarly, Need for Cognition and Cognitive Reflection were largely 
unrelated to use of force decisions, with the exception of higher Cognitive Reflection scores 
predicting greater use of de-escalation techniques compared to lethal force.  
Professional training as an officer (compared to civilians with no police training) was 
associated with several use of force outcomes. For example, officers were less likely to use force 
in the scenario than civilians, especially in the low- and medium-threat situations. Officers are 
more likely than civilians to use de-escalation tactics than pepper spray/tasers, but more likely to 
than civilians to use lethal force versus non-lethal force. Compared to officers with greater years 
of experience, officers with fewer years of experience are more likely to use force in the low-
threat (Homeless Man) scenario. At the same time, officers who have had more prior complaints 
and/or sanctions for misconduct were more likely to use force than de-escalation techniques, but 
less likely to use lethal force than non-lethal options.  
Officers’ professional friendship networks mattered as well. Officers with larger social 
networks were more likely to use force of any type. Furthermore, officers who felt that the 
strength of their network ties would grow stronger if they were suspended for excessive force (a 
measure of peer support surrounding use of force) were more likely to use force of any type, 
more likely to use force in the low-threat (Homeless Man) scenario, used force more quickly, 
and were more likely to use pepper spray/taser relative to de-escalation techniques. 
Finally, a series of paired sample t-tests were used to compare civilians’ pretest and 
posttest measures of attitudes toward police immediately before and after their simulator 


 
10 
 
exercises. Despite the civilians in the study having highly favorable opinions of the police at 
baseline, their appreciation of the difficulties, stressfulness and dangerousness of police work 
grew even higher following the simulator training. After completing the simulator exercises, 
civilians also were more likely to believe that the police behave professionally, that they are 
treated too harshly by the media, and that they should be paid more for what they do. Civilians 
also were less likely to feel that the police are too quick to use force or are “trigger happy.”  In 
terms of their views on use of force, after the simulator training civilians generally felt that 
higher levels of force were appropriate across a variety of circumstances–but not every 
circumstance. For example, there was no change in use of force acceptance levels in situations 
where there is very little threat to officers or where there is great threat. Civilian use of force 
attitudes appear to be most malleable for circumstances in-between these extremes.  
Conclusions & Implications 
 
While personality traits were largely unrelated to use of force decision making in this 
study, the fact that individuals scoring higher in Need for Cognition were more likely to use de-
escalation techniques compared to lethal force suggests that these individuals are more 
cognitively flexible and are willing to consider additional means for resolving conflict besides 
lethal force. Police departments may benefit from assessing the cognitive flexibility of their 
officers as they conduct de-escalation training in order to determine which officers may be better 
equipped to defuse potentially combative situations without resorting to force (when this can be 
done safely). 
The differences in how police responded to the training scenarios compared to civilians 
(e.g., more frequent de-escalation techniques in low-threat situations) suggest that when it comes 


 
11 
 
to use of force decisions, officer training matters. However, an officer’s past history of citizen 
complaints and/or confirmed acts of misconduct are also important predictors of using force. 
Police departments may benefit from the use of early intervention/warning systems (Alpert & 
Walker, 2000; Walker, 2003) that can capture historical data on officer misconduct, and use that 
as a tool for identifying officers who may need further training.  
 
The social network of police officers (and in particular, the network’s endorsement of 
excessive uses of force) also impacts the decision making process. Law enforcement leaders 
should be mindful of this and pay attention to officers who maintain close friendships with 
officers who accumulate numerous and documented excessive force complaints. Leaders should 
also understand that those attitudes about excessive force can be coached and be contagious, and 
can also migrate across social networks. 
 
Finally, educational opportunities for citizens to experience the complexities and 
challenges of use of force decision making can positively impact their attitudes toward the 
police. Communities and law enforcement agencies that are continually challenged by 
misuse/excessive force complaints, or by recent officer-involved shooting events, may wish to 
consider educational tools such as firearms training simulators or other virtual reality technology 
as one method of improving police-community relationships. 
 
 
 
 


 
12 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Although a comprehensive account of police use of force in the US does not currently 
exist, the available research suggests that approximately 2% of official police contacts with 
civilians (and approximately 20% of all arrests) result in an officer’s use of force (Eith & 
Durose, 2011; MacDonald, Kaminiski, & Smith, 2009; Smith, Kaminski, Alpert, Fridell, 
MacDonald, & Kubu, 2010; cf: Garner, Hickman, Malega & Maxwell, 2018). More than half of 
these incidents (53.5%) involve the officer pushing or grabbing the suspect. Kicking or hitting 
occurs in far fewer cases (12.6%), as does the use of chemical/pepper spray (4.9%) and 
electroshock/stun gun (4.1%). In approximately one-fourth of these use of force incidents, 
officers point their firearm at the suspect. Among all persons experiencing these various types of 
force, 80.6% felt the officer’s actions were excessive (Eith & Durose, 2011). Regardless of their 
veracity, these pervasive perceptions of mistreatment serve to undermine citizens’ trust in law 
enforcement, and ultimately weaken police/community relations (Correll, Park, Judd, 
Wittenbrink, Sadler, & Keese, 2007; Landman, Nieuwenhuys, & Oudejans, 2015; Rosenbaum, 
Schuck, Costello, Hawkins, & Ring, 2005; Verhaeghen & Aikman, 2021; Weitzer & Tuch, 
2005).  
In addition to this social harm, police use of force often leads to physical harm. 
Approximately 20% of civilians who experience force during a police contact report being 
injured as a result (Eith & Durose, 2011), while official agency records suggest the prevalence of 
civilian injury is nearly 40% (Smith et al., 2010). Police officers are also subjected to harm 
during use of force incidents, and are injured at rates comparable to those of civilians (Smith et 
al., 2010; cf. Federal Bureau of Investigation, 2016b). Most of the injuries to civilians (and 


 
13 
 
officers) involve bruises, abrasions, and muscle strains; however, fatal injuries do also occur. 
According to the Federal Bureau of Investigation (2020), approximately 400 cases of justifiable 
homicide by law enforcement officers occur each year in the US; yet, according to The 
Washington Post (n.d.), approximately 1,000 people are fatally shot by police (justified or not) in 
a given year. An additional 73 police officers in the US were feloniously killed in 2021 while 
serving in the line of duty (Federal Bureau of Investigation, 2022).  
Non-lethal weapons such as oleoresin capsicum spray (i.e., OC spray, commonly referred 
to as pepper spray) and conducted energy devices (i.e., CEDs, commonly referred to as tasers) 
afford officers additional means through which to control non-compliant suspects. While these 
weapons may indirectly lead to civilian deaths in certain situations (see Amnesty International, 
2011; National Institute of Justice, 2008), the use of less lethal weapons—especially CEDs—is 
generally associated with a decrease in the likelihood of injury to both officers and civilians, 
reducing the monthly incidence of injury by as much as 62% (MacDonald et al., 2009; see also 
Smith, Kaminski, Rojek, Alpert, & Mathis, 2007; Moribito & Doerner, 1997). Thus, the 
availability of these weapons generates a net savings in harm by altering police officers’ use of 
force decisions—at least, under certain conditions.  
For example, when Las Vegas police officers were randomly assigned to carry a CED (or 
not) and then completed field training scenarios with varying degrees of suspect resistance, the 
availability of the CED did not influence how officers responded to non-aggressive suspects 
(Sousa, Ready, & Ault, 2010). In these situations, officers with and without a CED generally 
used empty hand force even though less lethal weapon use was an approved response. However, 
when suspects displayed aggressive resistance, many officers with a CED made a decisional shift 


 
14 
 
away from using OC spray (34.4 percentage point difference) and batons (28.2 percentage point 
difference), and instead chose to use the CED. Furthermore, when faced with possible lethal 
resistance by the suspect, many officers with a CED made a shift away from using their firearm 
(31.2 percentage point difference). Note that despite being subjected to the same set of training 
scenarios, only certain officers with a CED experienced a decisional shift, suggesting that 
individual differences are influencing officers’ use of force decisions.  
While much is known about the situational factors of a police encounter that contribute 
to escalation and use of force (Alpert & Dunham, 2004; Kuhns & Knutsson, 2010; Smith & 
Visher, 1981; Kavanagh, 1997; Crawford & Burns, 1998; Garner, Maxwell, & Heraux, 2002; 
Terrill & Mastrofski, 2002; Terrill & Reisig, 2003), far less is known about the individual-level 
factors that shape these decisions. Therefore, the current study sought to examine the impact of 
select psychological, cognitive, social and professional factors on police officers’ decisions to 
use force. Given that police use of force is a “public health problem” in the US that injures tens 
of thousands of civilians and officers annually (MacDonald et al., 2009:2273), understanding the 
factors that shape an individual officer’s decision to use force may ultimately enhance outcomes 
in police-citizen interactions. 
As a secondary focus, the current study also sought to examine the impact of first-hand 
experiences with making use of force decisions on citizens’ attitudes toward the police. Despite 
the fact that most US residents have had no face-to-face interactions with police officers (Eith & 
Durose, 2011), the general public holds well-defined opinions about the policing profession. 
These attitudes about policing–and about the criminal justice system more broadly–appear to be 
influenced not on personal experiences, but on portrayals in the media (Dowler, 2002; Dowler & 


 
15 
 
Zawilski, 2007; Intravia, Wolff & Piquero, 2018; Surette, 2007). Therefore, the current study 
provided civilians with an opportunity to assume the role of an officer and make use of force 
decisions inside a video simulator. Pre-post changes in participants’ attitudes toward the police 
were recorded to see if first-hand educational experiences (such as the video simulator) could 
impact pre-existing public perceptions.  
LITERATURE REVIEW 
 
Decision making has been conceptualized as a “dual process model” consisting of two 
interrelated cognitive systems, sometimes referred to as System 1 and System 2 (Chaiken, 1980; 
Kahneman, 2003, 2011; Petty & Cacioppo, 1986; Shiffrin & Schneider, 1977; Stanovich & 
West, 2000). System 1 processing occurs subconsciously and makes decisions quickly and 
instinctively, or based on mastery that comes from repeated training. System 2 processing occurs 
within conscious thought and makes decisions more slowly, thoughtfully, and under the control 
of human agency. While many everyday decisions are made without deliberation (System 1), 
additional cognitive resources (System 2) may be invoked when the decisions are particularly 
complex, involve a high degree of uncertainty, and/or require further evaluation (Kahneman, 
2011). This dual process model can not only help us to understand the mundane decisions we all 
make in our daily lives, but also the potentially injurious decisions that law enforcement officers 
make while on duty (see Mears, Craig, Stewart & Warren, 2017).  
 
Police officers are required to make critical decisions under stress, such as the split-
second decision to use force in situations involving “a rapidly evolving scenario, complex 
environment, a great deal of uncertainty and a high degree of fear” (Saus, Johnsen, Eid, Riisem, 
Andersen, & Thyer, 2006: S4). Heightened emotional/arousal states—such as stress—impact the 


 
16 
 
neurocognitive foundations that underlie decision making (Bechara & Damasio, 2005; Dror, 
2007; Exum, Austin, & Franklin, 2017; Starcke & Brand, 2012), including the decisional 
processes of police officers (Kleider & Parrott; 2009; Kleider, Parrott & King, 2010; 
Nieuwenhuys, Savelsbergh, & Oudejans, 2012). For example, in simulation studies, anxiety has 
been found to alter the “shoot/don’t shoot” decision, prompting officers to shoot suspects more 
frequently, more quickly, and more often in error (i.e., when suspects are surrendering; 
Nieuwenhuys et al., 2012). The process by which heightened emotional states impact decision 
making can be understood through the lens of the dual process model (Dror, 2007; Exum et al., 
2017; Mears et al, 2017).  
By the time an individual becomes consciously aware of a highly charged situation, 
System 1 has already completed a series of quick, pre-attentive cognitions designed to assess the 
level of risk. As the individual becomes increasingly alarmed, the brain focuses its attention 
more heavily on relevant threat-related cues while simultaneously ignoring many other aspects of 
the encounter. This form of tunnel vision (or “attention narrowing;” see Loewenstein, 1996) 
constrains the amount of information being processed at that particular moment (Exum et al., 
2017). Any decision made at this stage could be considered a gut reaction rather than a 
deliberative decision. Given the countless number of actions individuals make each day and the 
increased cognitive effort required to operate System 2, much of the brain’s decision making 
activity resides solely under System 1’s control (Kahneman, 2011). Very often, these gut 
reactions are our best course of action.  
Note that with some additional cognitive effort, gut reactions can be submitted to System 
2 for further evaluation (Exum et al., 2017). System 2 then gathers information from elsewhere 


 
17 
 
in the brain to assess more deliberatively and more thoughtfully the quick, instinctual decision 
submitted by System 1. However, during heightened emotional states, System 2 may experience 
difficulty in accessing and processing this additional information (Exum & Zachowicz, 2014; 
Exum et al., 2017), thereby compromising the individual’s ability to make more fully informed 
decisions. Regardless of these constraints, the interplay between System 1 and 2 yields a decision 
that appears to be the most optimal to that particular individual at that particular time and in that 
particular state of mind. Seemingly in recognition of this, the Supreme Court affirmed in Graham 
v. Connor (1989) that when assessing the reasonableness of a police use of force event, one must 
consider that “police officers are often forced to make split-second judgments in circumstances 
that are tense, uncertain, and rapidly evolving,” and must view the event from the perspective of 
the “officer on the scene, rather than with the 20/20 vision of hindsight.” 
Decision Making under Stress: Risk & Protective Factors 
There are risk and protective factors that can, in theory, impact the influence of stress on 
decision making. These factors include (1) personality traits, (2) cognitive styles, (3) professional 
training/experience, and (4) officer social networks.  
Personality Traits 
Personality refers to the relatively stable pattern of thoughts, attitudes and beliefs that 
shape how we see the world around us. It influences our emotions, our motivations, and our 
behavior (Derlega, Lewis, Harrison, Winstead, & Costanza, 1989; Magnusson, 1990). Although 
there is a large literature examining if there is a “police personality” and how the personality 
traits of officers may be predictive of general job performance (e.g., Barrick & Mount, 1991; 
Detrick & Chinbnall, 2002; Gerber, 2019; Sanders, 2008; Twersky-Glasner, 2005), there is scant 


 
18 
 
research on the relationship between personality traits and use of force decision making. This is 
surprising given that global personality assessments commonly measure a wide variety of 
individual personality traits that are relevant to decision making, including use of force decision 
making.  
One such personality assessment that can be useful in studying police officer decision 
making is the Multidimensional Personality Questionnaire-Brief Form (MPQ-BF; Patrick, 
Curtin, & Tellegen, 2002). The MPQ measures a series of individual personality traits that can be 
grouped into three higher order superfactors known as constraint, negative emotionality, and 
positive emotionality (Patrick et al., 2002). As Caspi and Silva explain (1995:492): 
Constraint is the combination of the traditionalism, harm avoidance, and control 
scales. Individuals high on this factor tend to endorse social norms, act in a 
cautious and restrained manner, and avoid thrills. Negative emotionality is a 
combination of the aggression, alienation, and stress reaction scales. Individuals 
high on this dimension have a low general threshold for the experience of 
negative emotions such as fear, anxiety, and anger and tend to be involved in 
antagonistic relationships. Positive emotionality is a combination of the 
achievement, social potency, well-being, and social closeness scales. Individuals 
high on positive emotionality have a lower threshold for the experience of 
positive emotions and tend to view life as being essentially a pleasurable 
experience.  
 
 


 
19 
 
Positive emotionality, negative emotionality, and constraint are highly correlated with a 
number of other personality measures including Goldberg’s (1990) five factor model1 (see 
Church, 1994; Tellegen & Waller, 2008) and the MMPI (see DiLalla, Gottesman, Carey, & 
Vogler, 1993). The MPQ-BF’s relationship with the MMPI is especially noteworthy given that 
the MMPI (and MMPI-2) has been used extensively by police agencies to screen potential 
recruits (Dantzker & McCoy, 2006) and is associated with various measures of officer 
performance, including professional misconduct (see Cullen, Ones, Drees, Viswesvaran, & 
Langkamp, 2003; Davis, Rostow, Pinkston, Combs, & Dixon, 2004; Sellbom, Fischler, & Ben-
Porath, 2007; Weiss, Davis, Rostow, & Kinsman, 2003). MPQ scores are also predictive of a 
variety of behavioral measures (Tellegen, 1985), including academic performance, health and 
wellness, juvenile delinquency, aggressive behavior, and non-aggressive rule breaking (Burt & 
Donnellan, 2008; Caspi, Moffitt, et al., 1994; Kreuger, Schmutte, et al., 1994; Kreuger, Caspi, 
Moffitt, White, & Stouthamer-Loeber, 1996; Komarraju & Karau, 2005).  
The MPQ-BF is well suited to identify personality factors associated with police use of 
force decisions. For example, negative emotionality—which is correlated with trait anxiety—
refers to a tendency to construe life in a very negative and anxious way, often leading individuals 
to perceive relatively benign situations as threatening (Caspi et al., 1994). This dispositional 
tendency to see threat can trigger System 1’s pre-attentive cognitions to focus on selected cues in 
the environment, which in turn influence the officer’s gut/instinctual decision. Additionally, 
individuals who are weak in constraint tend to engage in risky (and even aggressive) behaviors 
                                                          
1Research suggests negative emotionality is correlated with neuroticism and agreeableness, positive emotionality is 
correlated with extraversion and conscientiousness, and constraint is a controlled aspect of conscientiousness and 
openness to experience.  


 
20 
 
with little concern for the consequences (i.e., with little System 2 oversight). Thus, in much the 
same way that individuals who are high in negative emotionality and weak in constraint are more 
prone to crime and delinquency (including violent behaviors; see Baglivio, Wolff, DeLisi, 
Vaughn & Piquero, 2016; Caspi et al., 1994; DeLisi & Vaughn, 2014; Krueger, Schmutte, Caspi, 
Moffitt, Campbell & Silva, 1994), we would expect that officers with this same clustering of 
superfactors are more prone to reacting to stressful situations with quick, impulsive, and 
potentially unnecessary force rather than deferring to their professional use of force training.  
Cognitive Styles 
Need for Cognition. Need for Cognition (NFC) represents one’s motivation to engage 
in—and the personal enjoyment received from—effortful, higher-order thinking (Cacioppo & 
Petty, 1984; Cacioppo, Petty, Feinstein, & Jarvis, 1996). Individuals who are high in NFC are 
not necessarily more capable of engaging in more challenging cognitive tasks; they are simply 
more intrinsically willing to do so and therefore they scrutinize their environment more closely.  
We are unaware of any research that has examined the role of NFC in police use of force; 
however, there is evidence to suggest that NFC impacts other criminal justice-related judgements 
and decisions. For example, mock jurors who are high in NFC (compared to low NFC) are better 
able to discriminate between a weak versus strong case against a defendant (Leippe, Eisenstadt, 
Rauch, & Seib, 2004), to discriminate between competent versus flawed expert witness 
testimony (McAuliff & Kovera, 2008), to remember jury instructions as provided by a judge 
(Allison & Brimacombe, 2010), and to heed those instructions as they pertain to disregarding 
evidence deemed inadmissible (Sommers & Kassin, 2001). Furthermore, high NFC individuals 
are more likely to attribute an offender’s illegal behavior to a complex set of factors (e.g., lack of 


 
21 
 
wealth and power), are less likely to impose a guilty verdict on a defendant, and are less likely to 
support highly punitive sanctions (Petrocelli & Dowd, 2009; Pope & Meyer, 1999; Sargent, 
2004). Given this body of research, it is reasonable to conclude that when high NFC and low 
NFC police officers encounter a suspect, the two groups scrutinize that suspect’s behavior (and 
culpability) differently. This, in turn, impacts the information available to System 1 and System 
2, and may ultimately result in different use of force decisions.  
Cognitive Reflection. Cognitive Reflection (CR) is conceptually similar to and 
statistically correlated with NFC, but nevertheless constitutes a separate, unique construct 
(Frederick, 2005). CR refers to the mental discipline one must have to look beyond an impulsive 
gut reaction in favor of a more thoughtful, deliberative response (Frederick, 2005; Toplak, West, 
& Stanovich, 2011). For example, consider the following math exercise:  Divide 30 by ½ and 
then add 10. Individuals who are more cognitively reflective will look beyond the intuitive 
answer (25) and, after further thought, correctly state that the answer is 70.  
Individuals who differ in CR make different choices. Illustratively, when faced with a 
choice between an immediate reward now and a larger reward in the near future, high CR 
individuals are more likely to choose the delayed reward whereas low CR individuals prefer 
immediate gratification (Frederick, 2005). When faced with hypothetical moral dilemmas, high 
CR individuals are more likely than low CR individuals to choose the more utilitarian solution, 
thereby selecting the greatest good for the greatest number of people (Paxton, Ungar, & Greene, 
2011; see also Baron, Scott, Fincher, & Metz, 2015). In a test-taking environment, low CR 
students are more likely to cheat in order to earn a financial reward whereas high CR students 
choose to remain honest and forgo any ill-gotten gains (Nagin & Pogarsky, 2003). In gambling 


 
22 
 
tasks, low CR individuals tend to be risk-seeking in the face of a loss but risk-averse to achieve 
gains (Frederick, 2005), just as Prospect Theory would predict (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979). 
However, high CR individuals do not follow this same pattern and instead choose risky options 
for losses and gains at comparable rates (Frederick, 2005; see also Campitelli & Labollita, 2010).  
Whether the high CR preferences in each of the above examples represent “better” or 
“smarter” choices is largely a matter of opinion. However, the point we wish to make is that high 
and low CR individuals think about risk and reward differently, which leads them to make 
different decisions. To our knowledge, there are no studies examining CR and police decision 
making; however, research on a sample of academics, students and professional judges has found 
that high CR individuals (compared to low CR) were more lenient and less likely to convict a 
hypothetical defendant charged with a crime (Rassin, 2015). While we do not know if high CR 
police officers behave in a more lenient fashion when it comes to their use of force decisions, 
given the available research it is reasonable to conclude that high CR officers will be more 
willing to engage in System 2 processing and less likely to rely solely on gut instinct.  
Professional Experience 
Policing is often viewed as a “craft” that cannot be easily taught in the classroom (Bayley 
& Bittner, 1997), and is best learned through repetitive exposure to real world situations. Veteran 
officers—i.e., those with more years of experience—are generally viewed by their colleagues as 
being better able to manage encounters with non-compliant citizens (Bayley & Garofalo, 1989); 
and in fact, empirical evidence suggests they are less likely than rookie officers to use both 
physical and verbal force during encounters with civilians (Paoline & Terrill, 2007). To help 
rookie officers gain more exposure to these types of encounters and in a more timely manner, 


 
23 
 
police departments routinely offer professional use of force training. Training has been shown to 
hone officers’ behavioral skills. For example, compared to rookie officers, police officers trained 
extensively in dealing with firearm incidents are more likely to focus their eye gaze in areas 
where a weapon might be hidden, are better able to anticipate a suspect drawing a weapon, and 
are faster at drawing, aiming and firing their own firearm (Vickers & Lewinski, 2012).  
In theory, training should also hone officers’ decisional skills. Use of force exercises—
especially those involving life-like simulations that induce heightened states of stress/anxiety—
should: (1) acclimate officers to high pressure situations, (2) reduce the detrimental cognitive 
effects officers experience in these situations, and as a result, (3) lead to better decision making 
under stress (Bennell, Jones, & Corey, 2007). In actuality, however, the research on training and 
decision making is mixed. For example, Oudejans (2008) found that officers who first trained in 
a realistic shooting simulation under the threat of physical harm showed greater shooting 
performance (i.e., they correctly shot armed targets and refrained from shooting unarmed 
targets). However, in a more recent study, Nieuwenhuys, Savelsbergh and Oudejans (2015) were 
unable to replicate these initial findings. Training under stressful conditions was unable to 
mitigate the impact of stress on officers’ shooting decisions. Collectively, this line of research 
suggests that more years of professional experience may influence police decision making under 
stress, but additional research is needed.  
Social Networks  
Most law enforcement agencies have a defined organizational culture (Paoline & Terrill, 
2014). These cultures develop, to some degree, around how police officers interact with one 
another, with their supervisors, and with citizens and other external constituents. Organizational 


 
24 
 
cultures are important because they help to define the collective attitudes and values of the 
group. As Louis (1983:25) notes, “culture embodies the identity of the social group. What we, as 
members, stand for and how we deal with one another and with outsiders is carried in and 
through our culture.” The values that a person stands for and the belief system for how to deal 
with one another are ideals that become cognitively entrenched within the individual. As a result, 
they help to influence the cognitions (and pre-attentive cognitions) that underlie System 1 
processing, and when the individual is faced with especially complex moral dilemmas, they may 
be called upon to guide System 2 deliberations. 
Police officers’ perceptions about the limitations and justifications for using force are 
partially informed by the unit’s organizational culture (Weisburd, Greenspan, Hamilton, Bryant, 
& Williams, 2001). This is not a recent discovery. Nearly 50 years ago, Rubinstein (1973:46) 
observed that “…the amount of force a policeman uses does not depend solely on himself, but 
also on the character of the people he polices and on the policies of his department.”  Given that 
social networking processes help to constitute organizational culture and that police culture 
impacts the belief system of the officer (including beliefs about using force), it follows that use 
of force decisions are influenced by police officers’ social networks. 
In spite of the rich history of police subculture research (see Crank, 2004; Paoline & 
Terrill, 2014), social network methods have yet to be widely employed to examine discretionary 
officer behavior. There are various reasons for this that are not limited to barriers between police 
officers and the public in general (i.e., the “blue code of silence”), but recent innovations in 
evidence-based police practices, closer relationships between researchers and the police, and an 
overall movement toward transparency have created an opportunity to reinvigorate research into 


 
25 
 
the influence of police subculture on discretionary officer behaviors. Considering that recent 
research suggests that features of an officer’s social network explain police behavior better than 
individual-level characteristics (e.g., experience, age, race; Gravel, Hashimi, Oullet, & Chi Tong, 
2017), research is needed to explore how officer peer groups and social relationships influence 
the way officers make decisions, including those made under stress.  
Citizen Education Programs & Attitudes Toward Police 
 
The year 2020 was a watershed moment in terms of the public’s perception of the police. 
In the wake of the killing of George Floyd by a Minneapolis police officer, Gallup reported that 
the percentage of Americans who had confidence in the police fell below 50% for the first time 
in the company’s history of tracking these attitudes (Brenan, 2020), and public’s outcry for 
police reform gained enough traction to become a talking point in the 2020 Presidential race 
(Pierce 2020). Much of this loss of confidence can be traced to high-profile use of force events 
like the George Floyd killing, and the corresponding media coverage (Nix & Wolfe, 2017; 
Verhaeghen & Aikman, 2021). As confidence fades, a vast disconnect between the police and 
the public they serve grows. For example, whereas 83% of Americans feel they understand the 
“risks and challenges” of police work, a nearly identical percentage of officers (86%) feel the 
public does not understand these aspects of policing (Pew Research Center, 2017a).  
 
Citizen education and awareness programs are tools commonly used by police 
departments to reconcile the disconnect and distrust between them and the public. One such 
program is the Citizen Police Academy (CPA), which first began in the US in 1985 (Lee, 2016). 
While the format and content of CPAs may vary from department to department, the general 
purpose of the program is to provide citizens with insight into the operations, personnel, and 


 
26 
 
policies/procedures of their local police force. Citizens are able to meet with sworn officers, 
participate in ride-alongs, and learn about local crime trends, patrol/investigation practices, and 
use of force policies (Lee, 2016). Completion of these multi-week programs has been shown to 
grow a more favorable impression of local law enforcement, and of the criminal justice system 
more broadly (Lee, 2016; Perez, Nguyen & Vogel, 2021; 2022). Whether a more acute 
educational experience–such as brief exposure to use of force training exercises–can also impact 
citizen attitudes toward police remains largely untested. Therefore, the current study sought to 
examine the impact citizens’ experiences in a firearm training simulator on their attitudes toward 
use of force decisions.  
RESEARCH GOALS AND QUESTIONS 
The purpose of the current study is to examine the impact of personality traits, cognitive 
styles, professional experience and officer social networks on officers’ use of force decisions 
during stressful situations. As a secondary focus, the current study seeks to examine the impact 
of firearm training exercises on citizens’ attitudes toward the police. The study has four main 
goals, each with a series of objectives. They are: 
Goal 1: To examine factors associated with decision making in stressful officer-citizen 
encounters. 
 
Objective 1: Assess personality and cognitive processing among police officers 
and citizens.  
 
Objective 2: Assess social networks among police officers. 
 
Objective 3: Collect background information including demographics, prior 
training experiences, years of service, prior misconduct, and military experience. 
 
 
 


 
27 
 
Goal 2: To assess outcomes of simulated stressful officer-citizen encounters. 
 
Objective 1: Expose police officers and citizens to stressful officer-citizen 
encounters through the use of a firearms training simulator.  
 
Objective 2: Compare the differences in decisions reached during the simulated 
encounters within officers, and also between police officers and citizens. 
 
Objective 3: Isolate the role of personality in the decisions reached during the 
simulated encounters. 
 
Goal 3: To provide information that can be used by police agencies to enhance positive 
police-citizen interactions. 
 
Objective 1: To enhance citizens’ understanding of the difficulty of making 
decisions in stressful encounters which involve use of force. 
 
Objective 2: Develop recommendations for officer training through the use of the 
simulated use of force training scenarios. 
 
Objective 3: Disseminate findings to police agencies to augment current training 
efforts.  
 
 
Goal 4:  To examine the impact of a brief educational experience on citizens’ attitudes  
toward the police.  
 
Objective 1: Expose citizens to stressful officer-citizen encounters through the use 
of a firearms training simulator. 
 
Objective 2:  Collect and compare pre- and post-test measures of citizens’ 
attitudes toward policing and police use of force.  
 
The specific research questions to be addressed in the current study are:   
 
Question 1: How do personality traits, cognitive styles, professional experience and 
officer social networks influence the decision to use force during an encounter with a 
non-compliant citizen? 
 
Question 2:  How do personality traits, cognitive styles, professional experience and 
officer social networks influence the length of time required to make a force/no force 
decision during the encounter? 
 
 
 


 
28 
 
Question 3:  How do personality traits, cognitive styles, professional experience and 
officer social networks influence the type of tactic employed—either verbal de-
escalation, less-lethal force or lethal force?  
 
Question 4:  Does first-hand experience in a virtual firearms training environment impact 
civilian’s attitudes toward (and perceptions of) police officers and police use of force?    
 
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS 
Original Design 
 
In the original design of this study, a total of 125 sworn law enforcement officers were to 
be recruited across three police departments (referred to here as Agency A, B and C) within a 
single county in the southern piedmont region of North Carolina. These officers would be asked 
to complete two online surveys: the first assessing personality traits, cognitive styles, 
professional training/experience, and demographics, and a second survey assessing officer social 
networks. Officer participants would also be asked to complete a series of use of force exercises 
while being video recorded inside a VirTra® firearms training simulator. Officers would be 
prompted to complete the two online surveys prior to the training exercises, but they were not 
required to complete the study components in that order. For their participation, officers would 
receive a $20 gift card.  
The study also sought to recruit a total of 100 civilians with no prior law enforcement or 
military experience to complete an online survey assessing personality traits, cognitive styles and 
demographics. No social network survey was to be administered to civilians. The civilians would 
also be asked to complete the same set of use of force exercises while being video recorded 
inside the VirTra® simulator. Civilians would be prompted to complete the online survey prior 
to the training exercises, but they were not required to complete the study components in that 


 
29 
 
order. For their participation, civilians would receive $20 in gift cards.  
Deviations from the Original Design 
 
There were three deviations from the original study design and analyses. First, because of 
complications related to officer recruitment at one of the three participating departments, 
recruitment was expanded to include sworn officers at additional departments. Second, 
additional study incentives were offered to officers to encourage participation. Finally, due to a 
smaller sample of officers completing all of the study elements, some of the analyses (especially 
some officer-only analyses) could not be performed. Each of the deviations is summarized 
below.  
Recruitment Deviations. Recruitment at Agency A and B occurred without any 
deviations. However, as recruitment was underway at Agency C (the largest of the three 
departments), the study experienced a series of setbacks that negatively impacted officer 
participation. First, soon after recruitment had begun at Agency C and officers were beginning to 
complete the online surveys, the research team was contacted by NIJ advisors who expressed 
concerns about the use of force training exercises chosen for the study. The advisors were 
concerned that the exercises might not allow the research team to fully achieve the goals of the 
grant. All recruitment efforts and data collection were therefore suspended while this matter was 
being resolved.  
Second, as the research team was in conversation with the NIJ advisors about the 
scenarios, the police department that owned the firearms simulator used in this study received 
external funding to upgrade the simulator from a single-screen VirTra-100® projector to a five-
screen VirTra-300® projector. The research team would therefore need to suspend data 


 
30 
 
collection further so that the simulator upgrade could be completed. During this time, the team 
selected new use of force simulations that addressed the concerns of the NIJ advisors.  
Once the simulator upgrade was completed, the project was re-launched. All use of force 
data previously collected with the VirTra-100® simulator were now deemed unusable for the 
current report, and officers from Agency A and B (who previously completed the study) had to 
be re-enrolled to complete the new exercises on the VirTra-300® simulator. However, not all 
officers could be re-enrolled. Some declined to participate during the re-launch phase, while 
others had left the department in the interim due to retirement or employment elsewhere. Any 
officers who had been newly hired were invited to participate and recruited into the study where 
possible. After all officers at Agency A and B who could be re-enrolled/recruited had completed 
the study, the research team turned its attention to re-launching recruitment efforts at Agency C.  
The re-launch at Agency C was scheduled to take place in the Spring of 2020; however, 
the COVID-19 pandemic led to another suspension in recruitment and data collection. During the 
initial months of the pandemic, police departments in the targeted county closed their doors to all 
non-essential traffic. By the time COVID-19 restrictions were lifted and Agency C was willing 
to re-engage in our research activities, approximately 18 months had passed since recruitment 
first began at that department. During this passage of time, the research team’s point-of-contact 
at the agency retired, and the team had to find a new point-of-contact. Throughout this process, 
the research team’s initial rapport with Agency C—as well as the recruitment momentum that 
was building during the initial phase of recruitment—had noticeably waned. Although attempts 
were made to re-engage and re-connect with the officers in Agency C (e.g., team members 
attended roll call sessions to discuss the project and answer questions), recruitment from this 


 
31 
 
department stalled significantly.  
Only a few officers from Agency C agreed to participate during this second wave of 
recruitment, and most officers who had previously completed the online surveys were now no 
longer interested in completing the VirTra-300® exercises. Anecdotal evidence based on 
conversations with a few officers suggests that the public’s scrutiny of police officers in the 
wake of George Floyd’s death in May of 2020 left many officers leery of having their firearms 
training sessions be video recorded and included in a study of use of force decision making. 
 
In the face of stalled recruitment at Agency C, the research team began to explore 
partnerships with other police/sheriff’s departments in the general area. The recruitment of sworn 
officers from these additional agencies was not part of the study’s original design.  
Incentive Deviations. Recruitment from the additional law enforcement agencies was 
generally sparse. Therefore—and with permission from NIJ—the research team returned to 
Agency C and offered a new incentive for participation (paid for with the research team’s 
discretionary funds and not NIJ grant funds). In addition to the original $20 gift card incentive, 
those who completed the study would now also be entered into one of several random drawings 
for an additional gift card valued at $100. Multiple drawings were offered so that the chance of 
being chosen was always 1-in-20 or better. (For purposes of equity and fairness, participants 
from prior and future participating agencies were also entered into these random drawings). 
These $100 drawings were not part of the study’s original design.  
Unfortunately, this additional incentive did little to change the recruitment results in 
Agency C, so the research team continued to pursue partnerships with other agencies, with 
limited success. In the final months of data collection, the research team contacted officers who 


 
32 
 
had completed one component of the study (e.g., the online surveys) but not all components 
(e.g., not the simulator exercises). This group included approximately two dozen officers from 
Agency C, as well as several additional officers from other partnering agencies. The research 
team invited these officers to complete their remaining study components, and for doing so they 
would receive an additional $30 gift card (paid for with the research team’s discretionary funds 
and not NIJ grant funds). This additional incentive was not part of the study’s original design, 
and would be given in addition to the original $20 gift card and in addition to the random 
drawing for a $100 gift card. This new incentive structure resulted in just one additional 
participant completing the study. 
 
The above interruptions/delays in recruitment at Agency C dramatically hampered the 
research team’s rapport with the officers there. Furthermore, there is reason to believe that the 
aftermath of George Floyd’s death and the subsequent trial of Officer Derek Chauvin hindered 
the research team’s ability to build trust during the re-enrollment period at Agency C, and at 
additional agencies. As a result, the team was able to recruit approximately 50% of its targeted 
number of officer participants. However, there was no noticeable impact on civilian recruitment. 
Specific information on the recruitment strategies used with law enforcement agencies and 
civilian populations are described in Appendix A. 
 
Analytic Deviations. The smaller sample size of officers restricted the research team’s 
ability to conduct certain analyses of interest. For example, the data would not permit an analysis 
of use of force decisions within the officer sample (only) for each scenario. Certain multinomial 
regression models predicting the response tactic participants chose (i.e., either verbal de-
escalation, non-lethal force or lethal force) failed to converge on a single solution. This required 


 
33 
 
us to deviate from some of the study’s original analyses. Also mindful of sample size, we report 
findings that are statistically significant at p<.05, but also note findings that are marginally 
significant (p<.10). 
Participants   
 
Law Enforcement Officers. One hundred twenty-seven officers across seven agencies 
were recruited for this study. The seven agencies are referred to as Agency A, B, C,…G (see 
Appendix A for a description of each agency). Five officers were excluded from the current 
analyses because the only study component they completed was the firearms training exercises 
on the original (single screen) VirTra-100® simulator. An additional five officers were excluded 
because they began the first online survey but never completed it or any other study components.  
Table 1 summarizes the remaining 117 officers who completed at least one of the study’s 
three major components—i.e., the first online survey examining personality traits, cognitive 
styles, professional experience, and demographics, the second online survey examining social 
networks, and/or the VirTra-300® training exercises. The table summarizes the distribution of 
officers by the study components they completed, and across agencies. Check-marks are used to 
denote components that are completed, with cross-marks used to denote components that are 
incomplete or not attempted. Officers are categorized into one of five groups based on the 
components they completed.  
 As seen in Table 1, 50 officers completed all three study components (Group 1) and are 
therefore viable cases for use in addressing the study’s research questions. An additional 14 
officers (Group 2) completed the first online survey and the training exercises. These Group 2 
officers can be combined with Group 1 when examining research questions pertaining to the 


 
34 
 
relationships between use of force decisions and personality traits, cognitive styles and/or 
professional experience. Thus, the final sample of officers included in the analyses is 64 sworn 
officers.  
 
Table 1.  Study Component Completion Groups for Officers, by Law Enforcement Agency 
Study Component 
 
Law Enforcement Agency 
 
Group 
Survey  
1 
Survey  
2 
VirTra 
300® 
 
 
A 
 
B 
 
C 
 
D 
 
E 
 
F 
 
G 
 
Total 
1 
 
 
 
 
13 
15 
4 
3 
9 
4 
2 
50 
2 
 
 
 
 
3 
1 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
14 
3 
 
 
 
 
1 
4 
16 
0 
0 
2 
3 
26 
4 
 
 
 
 
7 
2 
8 
0 
0 
0 
2 
19 
5 
 
 
 
 
3 
2 
0 
1 
2 
0 
0 
8 
Total 
 
27 
24 
28 
5 
13 
9 
11 
117 
 
Civilians. One hundred seventy-one civilian participants were recruited into this study 
(see Appendix A for a description of the study’s civilian recruitment strategies). Of this group, 
18 completed the study when the original (single screen) VirTra-100® was in use and are 
therefore not included in the current analyses. An additional 18 individuals who responded to 
social media posts about the study were also excluded from the analyses, as they were 
determined to be individuals who submitted bogus online survey responses in order to receive 
the gift card incentive.2  Two of the remaining participants were removed from the analyses 
because they disclosed that they had prior law enforcement or military training, which are 
exclusion criteria. Finally, six individuals who began the online survey never completed it or the 
VirTra-300® exercises, and are therefore excluded from all analyses.  
                                                          
2 Whereas most civilian participants completed the online survey in approximately 25 minutes, these 18 individuals 
were submitting survey responses in less than 5 minutes, and from IP addresses that were far outside North 
Carolina—and in some cases, outside the US. 


35 
 
Table 2 summarizes the remaining 127 individuals who completed at least one of the two 
study components for civilians—i.e., the online survey examining personality traits, cognitive 
styles, and demographics, and/or the VirTra-300® training exercises. The table summarizes the 
distribution of civilians by the study components they completed. Check-marks are used to 
denote components that are completed, with cross-marks used to denote components that are 
incomplete or not attempted. Civilians are categorized into one of three groups based on the 
components they completed.  
 
Table 2.  Study Component Completion Groups for Civilians 
 
 
Study Component 
 
 
Group 
Survey 
VirTra 300 ® 
 
Total 
1 
 
 
 
103 
2 
 
 
 
22 
3 
 
 
 
2 
Total 
 
 
 
127 
 
As seen in Table 2, 103 civilians completed both study components (Group 1); however, 
two participants could not be retained in certain analyses because of specific data issues. 
Therefore, the final sample of civilians consists of 101 individuals.  
Materials and Measures 
 
Training Simulator & Accessories. All participants in the final sample completed use of 
force exercises inside a VirTra-300® firearms training simulator. The simulator is housed in a 
private room at Agency A. Five digital light processing projectors are mounted on the ceiling and 
are directed at a set of five screens, each measuring 10 feet long by 7.5 feet high. The five 
screens are configured to form a 300-degree semicircle (VirTra, n.d.). Participants begin each 


 
36 
 
training exercise by standing in the middle of the semicircle directly beneath the projectors. 
Thick foam padding covered the floor of the semicircle to protect participants from injury in the 
event of falling or dropping to the ground during the exercises.  
Participants wore a duty belt while inside the simulator. The belt contained a modified 
Glock-22 service firearm that would “shoot” infrared light at the video screen when fired. The 
gun had the look, feel and weight of an actual service firearm. A carbon dioxide canister inside 
the gun created recoil each time the trigger was pulled. In addition to the firearm, the duty belt 
housed a pepper spray canister that fired infrared light, and a standard issue police taser with the 
probe cartridges removed and replaced with cartridges that fired infrared light. Participants were 
also given an infrared tactical flashlight for use during a nighttime scenario. Finally, worn along 
the back of the belt was a V-Threat-Fire® device, which would deliver a 0.25-second electric 
impulse through the clothing and to the waist of the participant. This impulse was delivered only 
if the participant was shot/attacked by a suspect on the screen. While painful, the shock is not 
debilitating. It is used to simulate a physical threat, making the training scenarios more stressful 
and therefore more realistic.  
A firearms instructor operated the simulator during use in this study. The instructor sat at 
a computer desk immediately outside the semicircle of video screens, but easily in sight of 
participants inside the simulator. Using the simulator’s computer interface, the instructor would 
start each of the three scenarios used in this study. If the scenario did not begin with a pre-
recorded call for service from police dispatch, the instructor would brief the participant about the 
upcoming scenario and why police are being called to the scene. While the scenarios have 
multiple branching points that can change the outcome of each scenario, the instructor allowed 


 
37 
 
each scenario to unfold according to a single, predetermined outcome. During the course of each 
scenario, if the suspect on the screen attacked the participant in some way (e.g., shot the 
participant), then the instructor would activate the V-Threat-Fire® device to deliver an electric 
shock to the participant.  
The research team positioned digital video cameras on tripods at both ends of the 
semicircle of video screens. The two cameras were focused on participants inside the simulator 
(filming them from behind), and provided different points of view in case participants moved 
about inside the simulator. A miniature video camera on a low-profile tripod was positioned at 
the base of one of the video screens inside the simulator and was focused on participants (filming 
from in front). This additional camera typically provided a better audio recording of participants’ 
vocal commands inside the simulator. Additionally, given that the room lights were dimmed 
while the simulator screens were in use, this front-facing camera tended to provide a clearer view 
of what weapon participants pulled during the simulations. The digital video files from each 
camera were then processed and combined into a single file through the synchronization of the 
individual audio files. The perspective of each camera was fit into a single screen in the 
processed videos so that coders could observe the participant’s behavior from multiple angles 
simultaneously.  
Training Scenarios. All participants completed the same three training scenarios (in 
random order) inside the simulator. Each scenario is described below. 
Scenario 1 (Homeless Man) was completed as a nighttime scenario, meaning the display 
on the video screens was darkened to make the scene appear to take place in the evening under 
limited lighting. Participants could use their infrared flashlight to illuminate portions of the video 


 
38 
 
screens further. The firearms instructor prompted participants prior to the start of the scenario by 
describing the service call they were about to complete. In his description, the instructor stated 
that the participant was responding to the town park about trespassers after dark.  
The video begins with a first-person point-of-view of the participant facing a middle-aged 
white male sitting at an outdoor picnic table. His hair and clothing are unkempt as if he has been 
living on the streets for an extended period. The man is audibly talking to himself in a non-
sensible way, giving the impression that he may have mental health issues. After a few moments 
of talking to himself, the man looks up in the direction of the participant. Agitated and swearing, 
he says he is “sick and tired” of being bothered by others. He states “this is my house” and 
“there’s only one of you and three of us” despite the fact that he is the only person that is present. 
The man complains and swears incessantly, offering participants little time to speak. The man 
eventually stands up from the table and challenges the participant by saying “what are you going 
to do about it?”  He then picks up a piece of scrap metal and begins to wave it and slam it to the 
ground as he takes a few steps toward the participant, saying “Come on!  Come on!”  After 
several more seconds of this behavior, the scenario ends. However, if participants were to 
successfully use force against the man, then the scenario would end sooner with the male falling 
to the ground.  
Scenario 1 is regarded here as a low-threat situation. While the homeless man does 
become verbally confrontational and is holding the scrap metal as a potential weapon, 
participants can minimize their risk of harm by maintaining a safe distance from the man, who is 
not making any quick moves toward the participant. However, officers who perceive the man’s 
aggressive posturing as a threat may choose to use some type of force to eliminate the potential 


 
39 
 
threat and to gain control over him.   
Scenario 2 (Domestic Violence) begins with a first-person point-of-view of the 
participant in the passenger seat of a moving police car. A female partner is driving. A recorded 
radio dispatch operator is heard, indicating there is a call for service in response to a domestic 
violence situation. The partner answers the dispatch operator and remarks to the participant that 
she has been to this location before for domestic violence calls. The video continues for a few 
seconds with the car driving down the road, but then transitions to an exterior shot of a house on 
the right side of the video screens, with a detached garage on the left. The partner is standing to 
the participant’s left, and is on the driveway in front of the garage.  
A woman exits the home with wounds on her face. She walks to the driveway holding a 
crowbar in her hand, and frantically explains to the officers that “It’s Chet!”  As she sobs, the 
woman tosses the crowbar to the ground but remains standing in place. A few seconds later, the 
sound of a car engine can be heard as the garage door opens. A car exits the garage and pulls into 
the driveway and stops short of the participant and female officer. The driver (a white male) exits 
the car with his hands raised, explaining he had nothing to do with the assault. He then lays face 
down on the ground beside the car with his hands and legs spread from his body. As he does so, 
the officer (partner) orders the passenger to “get out of the car!”  A tall, muscular white male 
exits the vehicle, cursing and exclaiming “this is bogus!”  The partner orders the man to turn 
around and put his hands on his head. As he does this, the officer tells the participant to “Cover 
me” as she approaches the male to put him in handcuffs. As she approaches, the man turns 
around and pushes the officer to the ground. He then steps toward her and lifts his foot in the air. 
As he begins to extend his leg downward as if to stomp on the officer with his work boot, the 


 
40 
 
video ends. However, if participants were to successfully use force against the man, then the 
scenario would end sooner with the male falling to the ground.  
Scenario 2 is regarded here as a medium-threat situation. The man standing over the 
officer poses a real threat and can inflict harm by stomping on her. While use of force by the 
participant would be warranted in such a situation, the risk of harm from the man’s boot can be 
seen as ambiguous. Some participants may feel there is an imminent threat of death or serious 
bodily harm (e.g., if the man stomps on the officer’s head), which may prompt them to choose to 
respond with lethal force. However, other participants may feel the threat does not rise to that 
level and instead choose to use non-lethal options. The ambiguity of the situation may leave 
some participants unsure what to do, allowing the scenario to end before a decision is made.  
Scenario 3 (Collision Investigation) begins with a first-person point-of-view of the 
participant driving alone in a marked police car. A recorded radio dispatch operator is heard, 
directing the participant to provide backup to a fellow officer who has responded to a traffic 
accident and is conducting an investigation on scene. The participant’s car continues to drive 
down the road and eventually fades to a new scene where the participant is now driving toward 
the scene of the accident. An SUV can be seen on the shoulder on the opposite side of the road. 
The SUV appears to have struck a utility pole. Behind the SUV is a marked police car. Neither 
the officer on scene nor the driver of the SUV is in sight, and there are no other cars driving 
along the road. The participant’s car drives past the accident site in order to make a U-turn to 
park on the shoulder near the SUV.  
The scenario then cuts to a first-person point-of-view of the participant outside the car 
and walking toward the rear passenger’s side of the SUV. From underneath the SUV, some 


 
41 
 
shadows/movement can be seen on the ground on the opposite side of the vehicle. Once the 
participant begins to walk toward the back of the SUV, some grunting and movement can be 
heard. As the participant rounds the back side of the vehicle to the opposite side, a police 
handheld radio can be seen on the ground a few feet from the SUV. Once the participant is fully 
standing alongside the SUV, the participant can see the back of a white man wearing a plaid shirt 
and jeans, who is straddled across the torso of another man lying on his back and wearing 
uniform pants and black police boots. The man in plaid is holding a gun in his left hand and is 
pointing the gun toward the head of the man underneath him. The participant hears one of the 
men say “He’s got a gun” and the two men on screen continue to struggle but the plaid-shirted 
man is able to remain straddled atop the other. Six seconds after the statement “He’s got a gun” 
is made, the plaid-shirted man shoots the man on the ground in the head and immediately turns 
around and opens fire on the participant. He fires several rounds, and then the video ends. 
However, if participants were to successfully use force against the man, then the scenario would 
end sooner with the man falling over to the ground.  
Note that Scenario 3 is the only scenario in which a suspect on the screen may attack the 
participant. If participants do not neutralize the threat from the plaid-shirted man before he opens 
fire on them, or if participants do not immediately move to the side as if they were taking cover 
behind the SUV as the man opens fire, then the participant would receive an electric shock to 
their waist from the V-Threat-Fire® device.  
Scenario 3 is regarded here as a high-threat situation. The suspect is pointing a firearm at 
another person (an officer). There is an imminent threat of death or serious bodily harm to the 
officer on the ground, and potentially to the participant. Use of lethal force would be justified in 


 
42 
 
such a situation, although not everyone may make this decision.  
Simulator Experience Feedback. Immediately after completing the simulator exercises, 
participants were asked a short series of questions designed to capture their familiarity with and 
comfort level within this type of virtual environment. Participants were asked (1) if they had any 
previous experience completing firearms training exercises inside a virtual simulator, (2) to rate 
how realistic the video simulations seemed (0=Not at all; 10=Extremely), and (3) to rate their 
level of comfort interacting with the actors in the video simulations (0=Not at all; 
10=Extremely). Finally, to further gauge participants’ level of familiarity/experience with these 
simulated combat environments, participants were asked if and how frequently they play first-
person shooter video games. See Appendix B for a copy of this questionnaire.  
Video Coding Process. Three independent coders watched each of the participant videos 
and coded a variety of behaviors into a standardized coding sheet. The standardized coding sheet 
was first tested on a randomly selected subset of the videos. The research team then met to 
discuss any issues with the first iteration of the coding sheet, including any coding standards that 
required more clarification, any additional behaviors that needed to be included in the coding 
sheet, and any discrepancies across coders that needed to be resolved. The three coders then 
revised their coding sheets based upon the revised coding standards, and interrater reliability 
checks were estimated again to verify that the issues raised in the first preliminary round of 
coding were resolved. Once the research team verified that these issues were resolved, the three 
coders then began coding the remaining participant videos as they were being collected and 
processed. Upon completing this round of coding, the research team re-ran interrater reliability 
checks to detect any substantial discrepancies across coders after all videos had been processed.  


 
43 
 
Overall, agreement between coders is very strong for both weapon choice and verbal de-
escalation tactics (all inter-class coefficients >=0.95). Agreement on weapon choice/use was 
slightly stronger because those behaviors are more straightforward. That is, pulling a firearm and 
using it are easily seen/heard in the videos, but not all statements made by participants fit clearly 
into the verbal de-escalation categories. Appendix C provides additional details about the video 
process and results from the interrater reliability checks.  
Video Coding Measures - Use of Force. Before providing information about the measures 
created from the coding sheet, a description of the structure of the coding sheet itself is 
warranted. The coding sheet used to record participant behaviors in the simulated scenarios is 
organized around timestamps associated with these behaviors. Each row in the coding sheet 
corresponds to a particular timestamp associated with some variety of participant behavior - e.g., 
the type and number of verbal de-escalation statements, drawing one of the three use of force 
options, or using some type of force. The beginning and ending timestamps for each participant-
scenario series of observations are also recorded so that we can easily identify what type of force 
(or de-escalation technique) is used by the participant, when it is used relative to the beginning of 
the scenario (i.e., how long does it take for force to be used?), and how often is this kind of force 
used at that timestamp (i.e., how many shots of a firearm does the participant fire?).  
Recall that participants had three types of force available to them: pepper spray, a taser, 
and a firearm. Coding for each type of use of force was separated into three dimensions: a 
dummy variable representing if a type of force is drawn (pepper_spray_drawn, taser_drawn, and 
firearm_drawn), a dummy variable indicating if the participant used a type of force 
(pepper_spray_used, taser_used, and firearm_used), and if a firearm is drawn, then a numeric 


 
44 
 
variable representing the number of shots fired (n_shots_fired) was recorded. In earlier rounds of 
coding, we determined that only the firearm needed a separate recording of the number of times 
used because numerous shots could be fired within a single second whereas the pepper spray and 
taser options were generally used just once (in rare occasions twice or more if earlier attempts 
were unsuccessful).  
Using these indicators, we created three measures that serve as the dependent variables 
for the analyses of our first three research questions. The first variable, “use of force,” is a 
dummy variable equal to 1 if a participant uses any type of force during a scenario and 0 if they 
do not use any type of force. The second variable is a multicategory indicator representing the 
type of tactic a participant uses in the scenario: 0 if they use no force/tactic, 1 if they use only 
verbal de-escalation (see description of this tactic below), 2 if they use non-lethal force (pepper 
spray or taser), and 3 if they use a firearm. The third variable is a continuous indicator for the 
amount of time elapsed from the start of the interactive part of each scenario until the participant 
uses some type of force.3 If a participant does not use any type of force in the scenario, this 
variable is missing.  
Video Coding Measures - Verbal De-escalation. An additional tactic available to 
participants - as opposed to using the aforementioned types of physical force - was to use verbal 
de-escalation techniques. We approached the identification and categorization of verbal de-
escalation statements using typologies created by Oliva, Morgan, and Compton (2010). At a 
fundamental level, de-escalation refers to “the act of moving from a state of high tension to a 
                                                          
3 At the beginning of Scenario #2 and #3, the participant is depicted as riding/driving in a car to the location of the 
service call. This time spent riding/driving is not considered to be the interactive part of the scenario, since these 
scenes do not require the participant to make any decisions or respond to what is on the video screens. 


 
45 
 
state of reduced tension” (Richards, 2007, p.161). From this, Oliva, Morgan, and Compton 
(2010) organized verbal de-escalation techniques into two broad categories: active listening and 
asking questions.  
Active listening involves an officer “listening for the total meaning of the words spoken 
by the individual in crisis” (Olivia et al., 2010; p. 20). There are additional types of de-escalation 
statements that fall under the active listening umbrella, but a simple example of this technique is 
an officer using utterances such as “Uh-huh” or “Okay” to express to the individual that they are 
listening. A second active listening technique is introducing oneself, which entails an officer 
providing their name, affiliation, and purpose for interacting with an individual in crisis and does 
not include simple greetings such as “Hello” or “Hey there.” A third listening technique, using 
“I” statements, entails an officer communicating to the person in crisis that they are “aware of 
the individual’s problem or crisis issues,” in a sincere manner (p. 21). Examples of “I” 
statements can include, “I can see that you are upset [or angry],” “I want to help you,” or “I’m 
listening,” (p. 21). A fourth technique, restating statements, involves paraphrasing what the 
individual has said back to the person in order to acknowledge that the officer is “listening and 
understanding, and also encourages the individual in crisis to provide further details” (p. 21). The 
fifth technique, mirroring/reflecting statements, includes an officer “[expressing] to the 
individual an understanding of his or her main feelings” (p. 21). Examples of such statements 
can include a person in crisis stating “I’m tired of no one listening to me, and it makes me 
angry,” with the officer responding: “It makes you angry,” (p. 21). The final active listing 
technique, summarizing/paraphrasing statements, is similar in content to restating statements but 
differs in timing; while restating statements occur at the beginning of an encounter, 


 
46 
 
summarizing/paraphrasing statements typically occur later and serve to “recap or summarize the 
information conveyed [by the person in crisis]” (p. 21).  
In addition to active listing techniques, de-escalation can also involve asking questions 
(open or closed-ended) that require individuals to respond at length or with simple “yes” or “no” 
responses. While open-ended questions (e.g., “How are you doing today?” or “What other things 
are going on?”) allow the officer to gather potentially pertinent information from the individual 
in their own words, closed-ended questions (e.g., “Are you thinking of hurting yourself?” or 
“Will you let me take you to get some help?”) allow the officer to obtain more specific 
information (p. 22).  
Video Coding Measures - “Other” De-escalation. Participants could also attempt to de-
escalate an encounter though non-verbal techniques, such as managing the distance between 
themselves and the individuals on the simulation screens. As an example, in the town park 
simulation the homeless man becomes increasingly agitated and stands up from the park bench in 
order to advance closer to the participant. In response, participants could back away from the 
screen to maintain the same (simulated) distance from the man and avoid having to physically 
confront the man or use a weapon. Such non-verbal techniques were captured with the variable 
other_deescalate, which was coded as 1 when the participant backs away from the screen and 0 
otherwise. Although this type of behavior was relatively infrequent and mostly occurred during 
the homeless man scenario, it represents an additional non-verbal means of de-escalation that 
was deemed important to record after observing it during the first testing round of video coding.  
Personality Traits. Personality traits were measured using the Multidimensional 
Personality Questionnaire-Brief Form (MPQ-BF; Patrick, Curtin, & Tellegen, 2002). The MPQ-


 
47 
 
BF is a 155-question self-report personality scale designed to assess 11 lower-level traits that can 
be combined into the three primary superfactors. The three superfactors and their constituent 
traits are: Positive Emotionality (consisting of wellbeing, social potency, achievement, and social 
closeness), Negative Emotionality (consisting of stress reaction, alienation, and aggression), and 
Constraint (consisting of control, harm avoidance and traditionalism). Higher scores for each 
superfactor correspond to higher levels of the trait. Raw scores are standardized such that 
normative scores on each superfactor have a mean of 50 and a standard deviation of 10. Scores 
from the MPQ-BF are highly correlated with those of the longer version of the scale (Patrick et 
al., 2002) and show strong convergent/discriminant validity with other personality assessments 
(Patrick et al., 2002; Patrick & Kramer, 2017)—especially the superfactor scores (Gomez, 
Griffiths & Stavropolous, 2020). Due to copyright restrictions, a copy of the MPQ-BF is not 
included in this report.  
Need for Cognition. Need for Cognition (NFC) was measured with the 18-item self-
report Need for Cognition - Short Form scale (Cacioppo, Petty, & Kao, 1984). The scale consists 
of items such as “I prefer complex to simple problems” and “I try to anticipate and avoid 
situations where there is a likely chance I will have to think in depth about something” (reverse-
coded). Participants rate each item on a 5-point scale (1=extremely unlike me; 5=extremely like 
me). Total scores are calculated as the sum of the 18 ratings, with higher scores corresponding to 
higher need for cognition. Factor analysis demonstrates that the scale measures a unidimensional 
construct, and psychometric testing indicates it has strong internal reliability and test-retest 
reliability (Cacioppo, et al., 1996; Cacioppo et al., 1984; Sadowski, 1993; Sadowski & Gulgoz, 
1992; Sargent, 2004). Furthermore, the scale has been shown to have good convergent and 


 
48 
 
discriminant validity (Cacioppo et al., 1996), with high levels of NFC associated with a greater 
tendency to be curious, to scrutinize information when making decisions, to focus more heavily 
on complex tasks, and to use empirical information to form judgments. Those with high NFC are 
also less likely to experience intense emotional states, and are less susceptible to anxiety 
(Cacioppo et al. 1996). See Appendix D for a copy of this scale. 
Cognitive Reflection. Cognitive reflection was measured with the Cognitive Reflection 
Test (CRT: Frederick, 2005). The CRT consists of three logic problems (see Appendix E). Each 
problem is designed to suggest an intuitive, incorrect answer; however, with further reflection 
the correct response can become apparent. The number of problems answered correctly is the 
participant’s CRT score (either 0, 1, 2 or 3). Higher scores correspond to how well the individual 
can suppress System 1’s impulse to reply with an intuitive answer. The CRT is correlated with 
but conceptually distinct from academic achievement, cognitive ability, and NFC. Furthermore, 
the CRT has been shown to be predictive of different decision-making strategies as well as of 
one’s ability to avoid certain cognitive biases (Frederick, 2005; Mata, Ferreira, & Sherman, 
2013; Oechssler, Roider, & Schmitz, 2009; Toplak, West, & Stanovich, 2011, 2014), prompting 
Frederick (2005:37) to assert that the CRT’s “predictive validity equals or exceeds other 
cognitive tests that involve up to 215 items and take up to 3½ hours to complete.” 
Demographics. All participants were asked to self-report demographic characteristics 
including age, sex, race, educational background, employment status and prior military service. 
Civilian participants were asked additional questions about their lifetime interactions with police, 
including being stopped by an officer and being arrested.  
 
 


 
49 
 
Professional Experiences (Law Enforcement Participants Only). Officers were asked 
how many years of experience as an officer they have completed at their current agency, and 
across all agencies at which they have worked. Officers were also asked about the number of 
times (a) suspects have used forced against them, (b) they have used force against suspects, (c) 
citizens have filed complaints against them, (d) they have been officially sanctioned for 
misconduct, and (e) they have been officially recognized/received commendations for superior 
service as an officer. Appendix F contains the set of demographic questions as well as the 
professional experiences questions for police officers.  
Social Networks (Law Enforcement Participants Only). A name generator was used to 
capture social network data within each department (Campbell & Lee, 1991). The name 
generator required officers to identify other officers in their department whom they would 
consider friends. There was no minimum or maximum number of reported ties that officers could 
identify.4 After identifying the fellow officers they consider to be friends, participants were then 
asked additional details about each relationship including: how long they knew the tie (1 “Less 
than one year” to 5 “More than 10 years”), the duration of their working relationship (1 “Less 
than a month” to 8 “More than 10 years”), how frequently they speak with that tie (1 “Very 
rarely (less than once PER MONTH” to 7 “EVERY DAY or nearly everyday”), how important 
that tie is to them (1 “Not important at all” to 5 “Extremely important”), whether they considered 
that officer a mentor (1 if “Yes”, 0 otherwise), if they completed their initial training to be an 
officer with that tie (1 if “Yes”, 0 otherwise), if the tie was a close or extended family member (1 
                                                          
4 As a practical matter, we included 40 spaces in the online survey page for respondents to fill in full names for their 
ties. Only one respondent hit this maximum but they did not complete the survey. The remainder of the sample 
reported fewer than 30 ties to fellow officers they consider friends.  


 
50 
 
if “Yes”, 0 otherwise with a follow-up question with each of the listed categories as options), 
how much time they are around that officer on a daily basis (1 “Fifteen minutes or less” to 7 
“More than 8 hours”), and the impact on that relationship if they were to be suspended for using 
excessive force during an arrest (1 “The relationship would become much weaker, or no longer 
exist” to 7 “The relationship would become much stronger”, reverse coded from the survey).  
In the final section of the survey respondents were asked about the perceived ties between 
their ties - i.e., if the officer they nominated as a friend would consider the other officers they 
nominated as their own friends. Answers to this question allow us to know the directionality of 
ties; not simply the ties an individual respondent reports but also the ties they believe to exist 
between their ties. The complete survey instrument for the social network measures appears in 
Appendix G. 
With this data, numerous network measures were created to inform our analysis of 
discretionary officer behaviors. For example, “network size” was computed for each officer and 
represents the size (i.e., number of officers reported as ties) of their respective social network 
within their department. Further, various descriptive measures of each officer’s social network 
were computed, including the average impact on relationships if the respondent were to be 
suspended for excessive use of force, which we use here as a measure of peer attitudes 
supporting high levels of force. We also computed network density values for each respondent, 
calculated as the percentage of reported directional ties between nominated officers divided by 
the potential number of ties that could exist between all nominated officers. For example, if an 
officer nominates three fellow officers as “friends” then there are three potential directed ties in 
the network: 1) Officer #1 is friends with Officer #2, 2) Officer #1 is friends with Officer #3, and 


 
51 
 
3) Officer #2 is friends with Officer #3. If the respondent only reports that Officers #1 and #2 are 
friends, this means that the percentage of actual ties in their network relative to the number of 
potential ties is 33.33%.  
Attitudes toward Police (Civilian Participants Only). A set of 20 questions were 
developed to measure civilian attitudes toward the police and police use of force. These 
questions can be grouped into four basic themes: how well civilians understand the difficulty and 
dangerousness of police work (4 questions), civilians’ views of police officer professionalism 
and decision making (6 questions), civilians’ views on the appropriate level of force in various 
confrontational situations (8 questions), and civilians’ global perception of the police (2 
questions).  
Civilians responded to all items using a series of Likert scales (see Appendix H for a 
copy of this questionnaire). For the questions related to how well civilians understand police 
work, Likert values range from 0 to 10 with higher scores corresponding to greater levels of 
perceived understanding. For the questions about professionalism and decision making, Likert 
values range from 1 to 5 with higher scores correspond to more favorable opinions except in the 
case of the final three items, which were reverse coded (i.e., “Police officers are too quick to use 
force,” “When it comes to using force, police officers should spend more time thinking before 
they act,” and “Police officers are ‘trigger-happy’ and too eager to shoot”). For the questions 
about appropriate levels of force, Likert values range from 1 to 3 with higher scores 
corresponding with greater levels of force being acceptable. Finally, for the two global 
perceptions of police, Likert values range from -5 to +5, with higher scores corresponding to 
more favorable views.  


 
52 
 
Control Variables. In addition to the focal independent variables described above, we 
also include several control variables in our analyses. In each of the scenarios, coders indicated a 
timestamp for what we called a “control event.” Control events were different for each scenario: 
1) in the Homeless Man scenario this is when the man leaves the bench he is sitting on; 2) in the 
Domestic Violence scenario this is when Chet slams his car door, and 3) in the Collision 
Investigation scenario this is when the officer on the ground finished yelling “He’s got a gun!” 
We recorded timestamps for these events because the simulator’s central processing unit would 
occasionally “lag” causing the video to freeze momentarily and artificially extend the length of 
the scenario. In the rare case where a scenario froze, it most often occurred in the Homeless Man 
scenario and involved a few additional moments of silence before the man got up from the 
bench. An additional control variable was used to flag whether the control event occurred or not, 
as some participants responded with force before an event occurred thereby ending the scenario.  
A small number of participants (n=7) did not provide valid answers to several survey 
items in our models, including the Need for Cognition scale, Cognitive Reflection scale, their 
age, and their sex. A series of dichotomous variables were created to flag these observations, 
equal to 1 if the participant had a missing value and 0 otherwise. For those participants missing 
information on the aforementioned covariates, zeroes were imputed for these values in place of 
missing values. Replacing these missing values allowed us to include these participants in our 
analyses while also flagging these values as imputed with the dichotomous indicators so as not to 
affect the estimation of coefficients for the variables with imputed zero values. This process 
allowed us to gain back five of the original seven missing participants, with two remaining 
excluded because their missingness on the Cognitive Reflection Scale perfectly predicted an 


 
53 
 
outcome in the logistic regression models.  
Our final set of control variables pertain strictly to officer participants. First, we created 
another dichotomous missingness indicator to flag officers that did not complete the social 
network survey. Of the 64 officers in our analysis sample, 50 completed the social network 
survey, while 14 did not. To keep this latter group of officers in our regression models, we 
imputed zeroes for the social network variables and flagged these imputed values with the 
dichotomous missingness indicator. As such, coefficients for the social network variables in our 
models are interpreted among the officers who provided answers to the social network survey, 
excluding the officers who either did not fill out the social network survey at all or provided 
invalid answers. The other control variable for officers is a multi-category indicator for the 
department an officer was recruited from. This variable is included in the models to account for 
similarities across officers coming from the same departments.  
Procedure 
 
Law Enforcement Participants. Law enforcement officers were recruited in the manners 
described in Appendix A. The research team emailed officers the informed consent form 
information and a link to the first online survey containing the MPQ-BF, the Need for Cognition 
scale, the demographics questions, and professional experience questions. After officers 
submitted their responses to the first survey, their browser was automatically routed to the 
second online survey containing the social network questions. All officers who completed the 
first online survey were contacted about scheduling their appointment in the simulator, and as 
needed, were sent reminder emails about completing the second online survey.  
 
 
 


 
54 
 
As officers arrived for their simulator appointment, the firearms instructor provided them 
with the infrared firearm, taser, pepper spray and flashlight for their duty belt. The V-Threat-
Fire® device was then placed on the back of the officer’s belt. Officers completed the three 
training scenarios in random order, as pre-determined by the research team. A research team 
member turned on the video cameras prior to each training session, and then stepped behind the 
video screens and out of sight of the officer. After the exercises, officers were given a paper copy 
of the Simulator Experience Feedback form and the Cognitive Reflection Test to complete.  
 
Note that some officers arrived for simulator training without having previously 
completed the online surveys. In these instances, officers were given paper copies of Informed 
Consent Forms to sign prior to completing any study measures. The research team then followed 
up with these participants by email, sending them the link to the first online survey. As needed, 
reminder emails were sent to officers prompting them to complete the online surveys.  
 
Initially, participants who completed both online surveys were emailed their $20 gift card 
incentive. Participants who completed only the first survey were sent reminder emails to also 
complete the second. If officers failed to respond to these reminders, they were eventually 
emailed their $20 gift card for completing the first online survey and still asked to complete the 
second, with the hopes that the norm of reciprocity would prompt them to complete the 
remaining questionnaire. When it became evident that officers were not responding to the 
reminder emails, the research team began to offer an additional incentive for completing the 
study in full. Officers were notified that those who completed all portions of the study would be 
entered into one of several random drawings for an additional $100 gift card (purchased with 
University funds and not NIJ grant funds).  


 
55 
 
When the research team saw that this random drawing was not yielding higher 
completion rates, the team offered yet another additional incentive–this time, a guaranteed 
additional $30 gift card to those who completed all components of the study (also paid for with 
University funds and not NIJ grant funds). Thus, all totaled, officers who completed the study in 
full would receive the original $20 incentive plus an additional $30 incentive and also be entered 
into a random drawing for an additional $100.  
Civilian Participants. Civilian participants were recruited in the manners described in 
Appendix A. The research team emailed civilians the informed consent form information and a 
link to an online survey containing the MPQ-BF, the Need for Cognition scale, and the 
demographics questions. As needed, civilians were sent reminder emails about completing the 
online survey. All civilians who completed the online survey were emailed a $5 electronic gift 
card and then contacted about scheduling their appointment in the simulator.  
As civilians arrived for their simulator appointment, they were given a paper copy of the 
Attitudes toward Police questionnaire (to measure pretest attitudes). The firearms instructor then 
helped civilians put on the duty belt with the firearm, taser, pepper spray and V-Threat-Fire® 
device (or alternatively, these items were attached to the participants own belt). The infrared 
flashlight was handed to civilians as needed. The instructor demonstrated how to use each item 
and instructed participants to respond to the scenarios as if they were an officer, including 
providing verbal commands to suspects as necessary. Civilians then completed the three training 
scenarios in random order. A research team member turned on the video cameras prior to each 
training session, and then stepped behind the video screens and out of sight of the participant. 
Immediately after the exercises, civilians were given a paper copy of the Simulator Experience 


 
56 
 
Feedback form and a second copy of the Attitudes toward Police questionnaire (to measure 
posttest attitudes). Participants also completed the Cognitive Reflection Test questions, and were 
given a $15 gift card for completing their simulator session.  
 
Note that some participants recruited through a Citizen’s Police Academy program 
(described in Appendix A) arrived for simulator training without having previously completed 
the online survey. In these instances, civilians were given paper copies of Informed Consent 
Forms to sign prior to completing any study measures. The research team then followed up with 
these participants by email, sending them the link to the online survey. As needed, reminder 
emails were sent to civilians prompting them to complete the survey.  
Analytic Plan  
The analysis employs a binary logistic regression to predict if force was used in the 
simulated scenario, a multinomial logistic regression model to predict the type of force used in 
simulated scenarios–be it no force, non-lethal force (pepper spray or taser), or lethal force–and 
an ordinary least squares (OLS) regression to predict the length of time until weapon use.  Binary 
logistic regression is best able to model dichotomous categorical outcomes, such as whether or 
not force was used during the scenario. Multinomial logistic regression is designed to handle 
situations in which the outcome variable is polytomous - i.e., situations where an outcome may 
take on one of three or more nominal categories. In the case of the scenarios we will use in this 
analysis, a participant may resolve situations by using (1) no force, (2) only verbal de-escalation, 
(3) non-lethal force (pepper spray or taser), or (4) lethal force (firearm).  
The multinomial regression model (and essentially, the binary logistic model) takes the 
following form: 


 
57 
 
𝜂𝑖𝑘= 𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝜋𝑖𝑘
𝜋𝑖𝐾
) = 𝛼𝑘+ 𝛽𝑘∗𝑃𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑖+ 𝛾𝑘∗𝐷𝑒𝑚𝑜𝑖+ 𝛿𝑘∗𝑆𝑛𝑒𝑡𝑖+ 𝜀𝑖𝑘 
 
where 𝜂𝑖𝑘 is the latent propensity that individual i belongs to outcome category k, 𝑃𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑖 is a 
series of personality features derived from the MPQ-BF, the NFC scale score, and the CRT 
score,  𝐷𝑒𝑚𝑜𝑖  is a series of individual demographic characteristics, and 𝑆𝑛𝑒𝑡𝑖 represents an 
officer’s social network characteristics. All models correct standard errors for clustering of 
scenarios within individuals and include a multi-category indicator for an officer’s department to 
account for department effects on scenario outcomes. Furthermore, this analysis will assess how 
much each series of independent variables contributes to the explained variance in our outcomes 
by estimating three models for each analysis: (1) a model including only personality and 
cognitive variables, (2) a model including personality, cognitive, demographic and professional 
experience variables, and (3) a model including all of the aforementioned measures plus the 
social network variables. Likelihood ratio tests are estimated to compare model fit after each 
iteration, assessing if the inclusion of demographic variables improves model fit compared to a 
model only including personality variables, then assessing if also including social network 
characteristics significantly improves model fit over including just personality and demographic 
variables.  
Ordinary least squares (OLS) regression is employed to predict the amount of time 
elapsed before a participant uses some type of non-lethal or lethal force. Traditional OLS takes 
the following form: 
 
𝑌𝑖= 𝛼+ 𝛽∗𝑃𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑖+ 𝛾∗𝐷𝑒𝑚𝑜𝑖+ 𝛿∗𝑆𝑛𝑒𝑡𝑖+ 𝜀𝑖 


 
58 
 
 
All predictor variables (e.g., those on the right-hand side of the equation) are repeated from the 
multinomial logistic regression detailed above. The only substantial difference for this model is 
that we may actually observe the outcome 𝑌𝑖 - the amount of time (in seconds) before the 
participant uses lethal or non-lethal force. Similar to the analyses described above, we also assess 
the degree to which each block of covariates contributes to explaining variation in the time to use 
of force. Specifically, we repeat the procedure outlined above for the binomial and multinomial 
regression models and enter variables in three blocks, then compare model fit statistics to the 
prior model including fewer variables. All models also correct standard errors by clustering them 
within participants and account for department effects by including a multi-category department 
indicator. 
Lastly, paired sample t-tests are used to compare civilians’ pretest and posttest measures 
of attitudes toward police recorded immediately before and after their simulator exercises.  
RESULTS 
Table 3 summarizes the variables used in the primary analyses, including the personality, 
cognitive, and demographic characteristics of the final sample of participants (N=165) as well as 
various officer-only and civilian-only measures. On average, participants scored slightly higher 
than normative populations on positive emotionality, were slightly lower on negative 
emotionality, and were generally consistent with normative populations on constraint.5  
Additionally, participants answered approximately one of the three Cognitive Reflection Test 
questions correctly, and reported moderate Need for Cognition scores.  
                                                          
5 Recall that normative MPQ-BF scores have a mean of 50 with a standard deviation of 10.  


 
59 
 
Table 3.  Summary Statistics of Participant Characteristics (N=165) 
 
Full Sample 
(N=165) 
 
Officer Sample 
(n=64) 
 
Civilian Sample 
(n=101) 
 
Mean 
or % 
 
SD 
 
Mean 
or % 
 
SD 
 
Mean 
or % 
 
SD 
Personality Traits 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Positive Emotionality 
56.80 
8.11 
 
57.21 
8.92 
 
56.55 
7.58 
   Negative Emotionality 
46.50 
9.28 
 
46.53 
9.48 
 
46.48 
9.20 
   Constraint 
49.43 
7.95 
 
51.12 
6.90 
 
48.36 
8.41 
Cognitive Factors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Cognitive Reflection Test score 
0.84 
1.01 
 
0.80 
0.95 
 
0.87 
1.06 
   Need for Cognition score 
65.21 
10.42 
 
64.16 
11.21 
 
65.87 
9.90 
Demographics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Age in years 
41.74 
12.68 
 
35.80 
9.16 
 
45.55 
13.19 
   Sex (1=Male) 
71.95% 
– 
 
89.06% 
– 
 
61.00% 
– 
   Race 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       White 
84.85% 
– 
 
89.06% 
– 
 
82.18% 
– 
       Black 
4.85% 
– 
 
3.13% 
– 
 
5.94% 
– 
       Hispanic 
4.85% 
– 
 
3.13% 
– 
 
5.94% 
– 
       Other 
5.46% 
– 
 
4.69% 
– 
 
5.94% 
– 
   Employment Status 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Unemployed 
6.06% 
– 
 
0.00% 
– 
 
9.90% 
– 
       Employed <40 hrs. 
10.91% 
– 
 
0.00% 
– 
 
17.82% 
– 
       Employed >=40 hrs. 
75.76% 
– 
 
100.00% 
– 
 
60.40% 
– 
       Retired 
7.27% 
– 
 
0.00% 
– 
 
11.88% 
– 
   Education Level 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Less than HS diploma 
0.61% 
– 
 
0.00% 
– 
 
0.99% 
– 
       HS diploma or GED 
8.48% 
– 
 
10.94% 
– 
 
6.93% 
– 
       Some college 
28.48% 
– 
 
35.94% 
– 
 
23.76% 
– 
       Associates degree 
13.33% 
– 
 
17.19% 
– 
 
10.89% 
– 
       Bachelor's degree 
32.73% 
– 
 
28.13% 
– 
 
35.64% 
– 
       Graduate degree 
16.36% 
– 
 
7.81% 
– 
 
21.78% 
– 
   Prior military (1=Yes) 
7.88% 
– 
 
20.31% 
– 
 
0.00% 
– 
Citizens Only Measures 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Ever stopped by an officer? (1=Yes) 
– 
– 
 
– 
– 
 
66.34% 
– 
   Ever arrested? (1=Yes) 
– 
– 
 
– 
– 
 
6.67% 
– 
Officer Only Measures 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Years of experience 
– 
– 
 
10.14 
8.64 
 
– 
– 
   Ever used force against a suspect (1=Yes) 
– 
– 
 
21.88% 
– 
 
– 
– 
   Suspect ever used force on you (1=Yes) 
– 
– 
 
39.06% 
– 
 
– 
– 
   Number of citizen complaints 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       0 times 
– 
– 
 
51.56% 
– 
 
– 
– 
       1 time 
– 
– 
 
15.63% 
– 
 
– 
– 
       2 times 
– 
– 
 
17.19% 
– 
 
– 
– 
       3-5 times 
– 
– 
 
9.38% 
– 
 
– 
– 
       6+ times 
– 
– 
 
6.26% 
– 
 
– 
– 
 
 


 
60 
 
Table 3.  Continued. 
 
Full Sample 
(N=165) 
 
Officer Sample 
(n=64) 
 
Civilian Sample 
(n=101) 
 
Mean  
or % 
 
SD 
 
Mean  
or % 
 
SD 
 
Mean  
or % 
 
SD 
 Number of Times Officially Sanctioned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       0 times 
– 
– 
 
73.44% 
– 
 
– 
– 
       1 time 
– 
– 
 
23.44% 
– 
 
– 
– 
       2 times 
– 
– 
 
1.56% 
– 
 
– 
– 
       3-5 times 
– 
– 
 
1.56% 
– 
 
– 
– 
Social Network Characteristics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Network density 
– 
– 
 
42.03 
41.81 
 
– 
– 
   Network size 
– 
– 
 
4.78 
5.01 
 
– 
– 
   Average impact of suspension on ties 
– 
– 
 
3.13 
1.93 
 
– 
– 
 
Most officers in the sample are male (89%) and White (89%). All of the officers were 
working full-time within their respective departments. On average, officers were 36 years old 
with roughly 10 years of experience as a law enforcement officer. Approximately one-in-five 
officers reported having used force on a suspect during their career, and approximately half of 
the officers have had complaints filed against them by citizens for misconduct (with roughly one-
fourth of officers reported being officially sanctioned because of misconduct). Additionally, 
officers had approximately five work colleagues in their professional social network, and on 
average the officers reported that their relationships within their peer networks would become 
“slightly weaker” (mean=3.13) if the officer was suspended for using excessive force. 
Most civilians in the sample were male (61%), White (82%), and employed on a full-time 
basis (60%). On average, the civilians were 46 years old. Most have been stopped by the police 
at some point in their life (63%), with approximately 7% having been previously arrested.  
Table 4 provides summary statistics of the scenario-related measures for each of three 
scenarios viewed by the 165 participants (N=495 participant-scenarios). Across the three 
scenarios, force of any type was used least often (32.13%) and de-escalation was used most often 


 
61 
 
(69.06%) when dealing with the homeless man in the park (Scenario 1; low-threat). There was 
considerable variability in the use of de-escalation across officer and civilian participants, with 
nearly all officers employing this tactic at some point (93.75%) versus approximately half of the 
civilians (53.47%). When force was used in this scenario, it almost always involved non-lethal 
force (i.e., pepper spray or taser) regardless of participant type.  
Force was much more common (65.45%) in the domestic violence call (Scenario 2; 
medium-threat), with participants most often using lethal force to stop the suspect as he is about 
to stomp the officer on the ground. Officers were again more likely than civilians to use de-
escalation tactics at some point during this scenario (50.00% versus 12.87%, respectively).  
Force was used by 40.60% of participants in the collision investigation scenario (Scenario 3; 
high-threat); however, there was large variability in this measure across officers and civilians. 
Whereas approximately 80% of officers were likely to respond with force (and typically lethal 
force), approximately 80% of civilians stood without taking any action at all (not even 
attempting verbal de-escalation). De-escalation tactics, while rarely used in this situation, were 
again more commonly adopted by officers. Anecdotal conversations with civilians after the 
scenario exercises were completed revealed that they were often unsure which person in the 
collision investigation scenario was the aggressor, and that they did not immediately notice the 
gun in the suspect’s hand. Findings from the Simulator Feedback Experience questions bear out 
some of the civilians’ uncertainty of how to respond, compared to officers. Whereas both 
civilians and officers rated the video exercises to be highly realistic (collective mean=8.68 out of 
10), civilians rated their level of comfort interacting with the suspects on the screen to be 
somewhat lower than officers (respective means=6.03 vs. 8.05 out of 10; see Table 4).  
 
 


 
62 
 
Table 4.  Summary Statistics of Scenario-Related Variables (N=495 participant scenarios) 
  
 
Full Sample 
(N=165) 
 
Officer Sample 
(n=64) 
 
Civilian Sample 
(n=101) 
 
Mean 
or % 
 
SD 
 
Mean 
or % 
 
SD 
 
Mean 
or % 
 
SD 
Scenario 1 (Homeless Man) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Response tactic used (most serious) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   None/No tactic used 
21.21% 
– 
 
6.25% 
– 
 
30.69% 
– 
   Verbal de-escalation (no force) 
46.67% 
– 
 
62.50% 
– 
 
36.63% 
– 
   Pepper Spray 
12.73% 
– 
 
7.81% 
– 
 
15.84% 
– 
   Taser 
18.79% 
– 
 
23.44% 
– 
 
15.84% 
– 
   Firearm 
0.61% 
– 
 
0.00% 
– 
 
0.99% 
– 
Used any force (1=Yes) 
32.13% 
– 
 
31.25% 
– 
 
32.67% 
– 
Time elapsed until force was used1 
66.47 
8.17 
 
70.75 
5.83 
 
63.88 
8.35 
Verbal de-escalation techniques 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Used any verbal de-escalation? 
69.09% 
 
 
93.75% 
 
 
53.47% 
 
   Variety of types used2 
2.32 
1.12 
 
2.73 
1.21 
 
1.87 
0.83 
   Number times used (across all types)2 
5.03 
3.73 
 
6.72 
3.95 
 
3.15 
2.33 
Scenario 2 (Domestic Violence) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Response tactic used (most serious) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   None/No tactic used 
23.03% 
– 
 
17.19% 
– 
 
26.73% 
– 
   Verbal de-escalation (no force) 
11.52% 
– 
 
21.88% 
– 
 
4.95% 
– 
   Pepper Spray 
1.82% 
– 
 
1.56% 
– 
 
1.98% 
– 
   Taser 
21.21% 
– 
 
23.44% 
– 
 
19.80% 
– 
   Firearm 
42.42% 
– 
 
35.94% 
– 
 
46.53% 
– 
Used any force (1=Yes) 
65.45% 
– 
 
60.94% 
– 
 
68.31 
– 
Time elapsed until force was used1 
75.53 
10.06 
 
74.05 
13.42 
 
76.36 
7.54 
Verbal de-escalation techniques 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Used any verbal de-escalation? 
27.27% 
 
 
50.00% 
 
 
12.87% 
 
   Variety of types used2 
1.16 
0.37 
 
1.16 
0.37 
 
1.15 
0.38 
   Number times used (across all types)2 
1.93 
1.07 
 
2.03 
1.18 
 
1.69 
0.75 
Scenario 3 (Collision Investigation) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Response tactic used (most serious) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   None/No tactic used 
56.36% 
– 
 
18.75% 
– 
 
80.20% 
– 
   Verbal de-escalation (no force) 
3.03% 
– 
 
1.56% 
– 
 
3.96% 
– 
   Pepper Spray 
0.00% 
– 
 
0.00% 
– 
 
0.00% 
– 
   Taser 
4.24% 
– 
 
3.13% 
– 
 
4.95% 
– 
   Firearm 
36.36% 
– 
 
76.56% 
– 
 
10.89% 
– 
Used any force (1=Yes) 
40.60% 
– 
 
79.69% 
– 
 
15.84% 
– 
Time elapsed until force was used1 
15.91 
4.25 
 
15.76 
4.69 
 
16.38 
2.36 
Verbal de-escalation techniques 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Used any verbal de-escalation? 
6.06% 
 
 
9.38% 
 
 
3.96% 
 
   Variety of types used2 
1.10 
0.32 
 
1.17 
0.41 
 
1.00 
0.00 
   Number times used (across all types)2 
1.50 
0.71 
 
1.50 
0.84 
 
1.50 
0.58 
Simulator Experience Feedback 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Ever been in a simulator before (1=Yes) 
37.0% 
– 
 
70.3% 
– 
 
15.8% 
– 
   How comfortable interacting with video 
6.81 
2.46 
 
8.05 
1.52 
 
6.03 
2.63 
   How realistic was the scenario 
8.67 
1.39 
 
8.17 
1.48 
 
8.98 
1.24 
   Play first person shooter games (1=Yes) 
24.2% 
– 
 
32.8% 
– 
 
18.8% 
– 
1Values are conditional on the participant using some type of force. 
2Values are conditional on the participant making at least one verbal de-escalation statement.  
 
 


 
63 
 
Research Question 1: How do personality traits, cognitive styles, professional experience and 
officer social networks influence the decision to use force during an encounter with a non-
compliant citizen? 
 
Table 5 presents an abridged set of results from a logistic regression predicting use of any 
physical force–be it lethal or non-lethal force. (The unabridged results from this model can be 
found in Table 5a in Appendix I.)  Note that the regression model includes both officers and 
civilians, and includes data from all three scenarios, so the unit of analysis is the person-scenario 
(N=495). Covariates are entered in three blocks: (1) personality/cognition variables, (2) 
demographics/professional experience variables, and (3) social network variables. All models 
include controls for the type of participant (with civilian participant as the reference category), 
the type of scenario (with the domestic violence scenario as the reference category), the 
department an officer belongs to (with Agency A as the reference category), the timing of the 
control event (i.e., frozen video) in the scenario and if it occurs, and whether the participant was 
missing information for one of six variables (see Table 5a in Appendix I for the results of these 
additional control variables shown).  
The results from Model 1 in Table 5 indicate that Positive Emotionally is inversely and 
marginally significantly associated with the use of force (b=-0.024, p<.10), suggesting that 
individuals scoring higher in Positive Emotionality are less likely to use any type of force, 
controlling for participant type and scenario type. All other personality and cognitive variables 
are insignificant, though the directions of the coefficients are sometimes consistent with 
expectations. For example, individuals higher on Constraint (b=-0.022) appear to have a slightly 
lower log odds of using force to resolve the scenarios, though the coefficient is not significantly 
different from zero.  
 
 


 
64 
 
Table 5.  Logistic Regression Predicting Use of Any Force (N=495 participant scenarios) - Abridged Findings 
 
Model 1: 
Personality & 
Cognitive Factors 
 
Model 2: 
Demographic & 
Experience Factors 
 
Model 3:  
Social Network 
Factors 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
Personality Factors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Positive Emotionality 
-0.024+ 
0.014 
 
-0.024 
0.016 
 
-0.027 
0.016 
   Negative Emotionality 
0.003 
0.012 
 
0.001 
0.012 
 
0.001 
0.012 
   Constraint 
-0.022 
0.015 
 
-0.022 
0.015 
 
-0.014 
0.016 
Cognitive Factors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Cognitive Reflection 
-0.051 
0.115 
 
-0.113 
0.113 
 
-0.121 
0.113 
   Need for Cognition 
0.013 
0.011 
 
0.008 
0.013 
 
0.013 
0.013 
Control Variables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Participant Type (1=Officer) 
0.835* 
0.401 
 
0.383 
0.859 
 
-1.931+ 
1.048 
   Scenario Type 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Domestic viol. (reference) 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Homeless man 
-1.320*** 
0.333 
 
-1.380*** 
0.377 
 
-1.433*** 
0.376 
       Collision investigation 
-3.462** 
1.240 
 
-3.649* 
1.480 
 
3.600* 
1.460 
Demographics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Age (in years) 
 
 
 
0.008 
0.014 
 
0.004 
0.014 
   Sex (1=Male) 
 
 
 
0.106 
0.328 
 
0.119 
0.322 
   Race 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       White (reference) 
 
 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Black 
 
 
 
0.335 
0.614 
 
0.323 
0.633 
       Hispanic 
 
 
 
0.787 
0.425 
 
0.697 
0.429 
       Other 
 
 
 
0.558 
0.424 
 
0.450 
0.425 
Professional Experiences 
(Officers Only) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Years of experience 
 
 
 
-0.045 
0.029 
 
-0.033 
0.031 
   Number of citizen complaints 
 
 
 
0.296* 
0.150 
 
0.330* 
0.167 
   Number of official sanctions 
 
 
 
0.637 
0.534 
 
0.575 
0.571 
Social Network 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Network density 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.002 
0.007 
   Network size 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.152* 
0.066 
   Impact of suspension on ties 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.294+ 
0.174 
Additional Variables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   See Table 5a 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Model Characteristics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Constant 
4.576* 
1.993 
 
4.758* 
2.563 
 
4.373+ 
2.562 
   Log Pseudolikelihood 
-275.424 
 
-261.991+ 
 
-257.757+ 
   Pseudo R-squared 
0.194 
 
0.233 
 
0.245 
+=p<.10, *=p<.05, **=p<.01, ***=p<.001 
Likelihood ratio tests are computed to compare Model 2 to Model 1 and Model 3 to Model 2. Significant results 
indicate improved model fit relative to the simpler comparison model. 
 
With respect to the control variables in the model, participants who are officers are more 
likely to use force in the simulator exercises than civilians (b=0.835, p<.05), with no apparent 
differences between officers across departments relative to those from Agency A (see Table 5a). 


 
65 
 
There are also significant differences in the likelihood of using force across the scenarios. 
Relative to the domestic violence scenario, participants were less likely to use force in both the 
homeless man scenario (b=-1.320, p<.001) and the collision investigation scenario (b=-3.462, 
p<.01). The latter finding comes as a surprise, as the collision investigation scenario was a high-
threat situation where the use of force was clearly justified.   
Model 2 in Table 5 adds the block of demographic characteristics about participants, 
including basic demographic factors (e.g., age, sex, race), indicators for each participant’s 
educational and employment backgrounds, and professional experiences as a police officer (for 
officers only). Accounting for these additional regressors renders the coefficient for Positive 
Emotionality non-significant, and no other personality or cognitive variables emerge as sharing a 
significant relationship with the probability of using force. Similarly, the coefficient for 
participant type (b=0.383) is no longer significant, indicating that officers no longer differ from 
civilians in their odds of using force in the simulator. Basic demographic characteristics are also 
unrelated to the probability of using force with one exception: their number of prior citizen 
complaints against an officer (b=0.296, p<.05). Officers with more prior complaints have a 
greater likelihood to use force in the simulator. Similar to Model 1, the coefficients for scenario 
type still indicate that using force is less likely in the homeless man scenario (b=-1.380, p<.001) 
and in the collision investigation scenario (b=-3.649, p<.05), holding all else constant. Although 
significant coefficients are rare in Model 2, this block of covariates does significantly contribute 
to model fit and increases explained variation in use of force to 0.233 compared to the pseudo r-
squared from Model 1 of 0.194.  
Model 3 in Table 5 adds three social network characteristics to the analyses: network 


 
66 
 
density, network size, and the average impact on an officer’s ties should they be suspended for 
inappropriate use of force. As seen in the table, the number of citizen complaints against an 
officer retains a positive and significant relationship with the probability of using force (b=0.330, 
p<.05). Both network size (b=0.152, p<.05) and the average impact of suspension on social ties 
(b=0.294, p<.10) are also positive and at least marginally significant. Collectively, these findings 
suggest that larger networks are related to a higher likelihood of using force, and that an officer 
who reports that their social ties would become stronger if they are suspended (i.e., greater peer 
support for higher levels of violence) are more likely to use force, holding all else constant. We 
also find that including social network characteristics in the model changes the relationship 
between participant type and the likelihood of using force. Whereas in Model 1 it appeared that 
officers were significantly more likely to use force as compared to civilians, the coefficient in 
Model 3 (b=-1.931, p<.10) suggests the opposite; controlling for the variety of personality, 
cognitive, demographic, and social network characteristics, officers are less likely to use force in 
the simulator as compared to civilians. 
As with both Models 1 and 2, scenario type is significantly associated with the likelihood 
of using force but the results are slightly different. Although participants remain less likely to use 
force in the homeless man scenario (b=-1.433, p<.001), controlling for social network 
characteristics changes the sign of the collision investigation scenario coefficient (b=3.600, 
p<.05), indicating the scenario is now associated with a greater likelihood to use force. Finally, 
the inclusion of social network characteristics in Model 3 significantly improves model fit 
relative to Model 2 and the explained variation in use of force increases slightly to 0.245.  
Given the different levels of threat each scenario poses (low, medium, and high) and the 


 
67 
 
significant differences in the likelihood of using force across the scenarios, separate regressions 
were conducted for each individual scenario. Rather than presenting the covariates as separate 
blocks, we present these scenario-specific regressions with all personality/cognitive variables, 
demographic/professional experience variables and social network variables included in a single 
model. Table 6 summarizes an abridged list of results from these logistic regressions predicting 
using force of any type for each scenario. The unabridged set of results can be found in Table 6a 
in Appendix I. 
As seen in Table 6, in Scenario 1 (Homeless Man; low-threat) use of force is not 
predicted by any of the personality and cognitive measures except for Need for Cognition (at 
p<.10). The coefficient for NFC is positive, meaning the participants who are more active 
“thinkers” are more likely to use force (b=0.081). Compared to their White participants, Black 
participants are more likely to use force (b=2.384, p<.05), and compared to civilians, police 
officers are less likely to use force (b=‐7.622, p<.05). Furthermore, officers with more years of 
experience are less likely to use force in this situation (b=-0.218, p<.05), but those with more 
official sanctions for misconduct are more likely to use force (b=3.495, p<.01). Finally, those 
officers who report that their social ties would become stronger if they are suspended are more 
likely to use force, holding all else constant (b=1.990, p<.01). The model accounted for 32% of 
the variance in use of force in Scenario 1.  
This same set of predictors performs less well in explaining the variance of the domestic 
violence scenario (pseudo r-squared = 0.169). None of the personality or cognitive factors are 
predictive of using force, and while the coefficient for being an officer is still associated with a 
lower likelihood of using force compared to civilians (b=‐4.958), the effect is now significant at 


 
68 
 
p<.10. Similarly, the number of citizen complaints against an officer and the size of the officer’s 
social network are both positively related to use of force at p<.10.  
 
Table 6.  Logistic Regression Predicting Use of Force (Any Force) - Scenario Specific Findings, Abridged    
 
Scenario 1: 
Homeless Man 
(n=126) 
 
Scenario 2: 
Domestic Violence 
(n=162) 
 
Scenario 3: 
Collision Invest. 
(n=146) 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
Personality Factors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Positive Emotionality 
‐0.024 
0.046 
 
‐0.023  
0.027   
‐0.051 
0.052 
   Negative Emotionality 
0.025 
0.031 
 
‐0.020  
0.023 
 
0.025 
0.029 
   Constraint 
‐0.0483  
0.036 
 
‐0.026  
0.028 
 
0.025 
0.040 
Cognitive Factors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Cognitive Reflection 
‐0.308 
0.298 
 
‐0.171  
0.204 
 
‐0.082 
0.322 
   Need for Cognition 
0.081+  
0.044 
 
0.0130  
0.022 
 
0.012 
0.041 
Control Variables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Participant Type (1=Officer) 
‐7.622*  
3.066 
 
‐4.958+  
2.536 
 
0.810 
1.866 
Demographics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Age (in years) 
0.039  
0.030 
 
0.003  
0.025 
 
‐0.041 
0.032 
   Sex (1=Male) 
‐1.111  
0.790 
 
‐0.165  
0.527 
 
2.766+  
1.632 
   Race 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       White (reference) 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Black 
2.384*  
1.153 
 
‐0.716 
0.943 
 
1.729 
1.625 
       Hispanic 
0.507 
1.522 
 
1.548  
1.060 
 
0.369 
1.184 
       Other 
0 
—- 
 
1.455 
1.662 
 
2.330+  
1.191 
Professional Experiences 
(Officers Only) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Years of experience 
‐0.218* 
0.096 
 
‐0.009 
0.054 
 
0.070  
0.060 
   Number of citizen complaints 
0.538 
0.377 
 
0.548+  
0.290 
 
‐0.133 
0.340 
   Number of official sanctions 
3.495**  
1.330 
 
0.763 
1.168 
 
‐0.146  
0.996 
Social Network 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Network density 
‐0.018 
0.015 
 
0.018+  
0.010 
 
‐0.015 
0.013 
   Network size 
0.025 
0.190 
 
0.136  
0.086 
 
0.450* 
0.199 
   Impact of suspension on ties 
1.990**  
0.673 
 
0.255 
0.378 
 
0.458 
0.421 
Additional Variables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   See Table 6a 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Model Characteristics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Constant 
‐1.831  
5.144 
 
13.788  
8.393 
 
‐3.460  
5.887 
   Log Pseudolikelihood 
‐54.158 
 
‐87.356  
 
‐50.266 
   Pseudo R-squared 
0.319 
 
0.169 
 
0.493 
+=p<.10, *=p<.05, **=p<.01, ***=p<.001 
 
The set of predictor variables is best able to predict use of force in the high-threat, 
collision investigation scenario (pseudo r-squared = 0.493). However, only a few variables in the 


 
69 
 
model are statistically significant (see Table 6a for the full results). While participant type is no 
longer significant in the model, being male and of some “other” race are both positively related 
to use of force at p<.10, and network size is positively related at p<.05.  
In sum, the findings from these regression analyses indicate that the model of predictors 
is best able to explain variance at the extreme levels of threat (homeless man and collision 
investigation) rather than in the middle (domestic violence scenario). Contrary to expectations, 
none of the personality or cognitive factors were significantly associated with using force in the 
expected direction, and the impact of demographic, professional experience, and social network 
variables were rather inconsistent across models. However, it is notable that officers were less 
likely than civilians to use force in general (and especially in the low- and medium-threat 
scenarios), but officers with more citizen complaints for misconduct and those with greater peer 
support for high levels of force were more likely to use force relative to other officers.  
 
Research Question 2:  How do personality traits, cognitive styles, professional experience, and 
officer social networks influence the length of time required to make a force/no force decision 
during the encounter? 
 
Table 7 summarizes the abridged results from a series of OLS regressions predicting the 
amount of time that elapses in a scenario until a participant uses non-lethal or lethal force. (The 
unabridged results from this model can be found in Table 7a in Appendix I). We report the 
results from these models in the same manner as we did in the prior section; that is, each model 
adds an additional set of participant characteristics, beginning with personality and cognitive 
factors, then demographic and professional factors, and finally, social network information. It is 
important to note that these models only include the participant-scenario observations in which 
non-lethal or lethal force was used (n=228 participant-scenarios). As such, the coefficients from 


 
70 
 
these models should be interpreted with caution as we condition being in this sample on the 
participant’s behavior within the scenario, which can be caused by a variety of factors we can 
and cannot observe.  
 
Table 7.  OLS Regression Predicting Time Until Force is Used (N=228) - Abridged Findings 
 
Model 1: 
Personality & 
Cognitive Factors 
 
Model 2: 
Demographic & 
Experience Factors 
 
Model 3:  
Social Network 
Factors 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
Personality Factors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Positive Emotionality 
0.044 
0.084 
 
0.065 
0.059 
 
0.069 
0.061 
   Negative Emotionality 
-0.054 
0.066 
 
-0.028 
0.068 
 
-0.034 
0.070 
   Constraint 
0.040 
0.070 
 
0.034 
0.070 
 
0.050 
0.075 
Cognitive Factors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Cognitive Reflection 
0.862 
0.531 
 
1.030+ 
0.585 
 
0.743 
0.514 
   Need for Cognition 
-0.035 
0.058 
 
-0.050 
0.057 
 
-0.049 
0.061 
Control Variables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Participant Type (1=Officer) 
1.524 
1.122 
 
1.149 
2.759 
 
2.248 
5.601 
   Scenario Type 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Domestic viol. (reference) 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Homeless man 
-8.453*** 
1.372 
 
-8.050*** 
1.450 
 
-7.656*** 
1.537 
       Collision investigation 
-53.050*** 
3.211 
 
-53.022*** 
3.543 
 
-52.775*** 
3.441 
Demographics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Age (in years) 
 
 
 
0.129* 
0.051 
 
0.115* 
0.053 
   Sex (1=Male) 
 
 
 
0.674 
1.229 
 
0.710 
1.351 
   Race 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       White (reference) 
 
 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Black 
 
 
 
-5.772 
3.607 
 
-6.399+ 
3.345 
       Hispanic 
 
 
 
-3.601* 
1.534 
 
-5.157** 
1.773 
       Other 
 
 
 
-2.770 
3.340 
 
-2.462 
3.590 
Professional Experiences 
(Officers Only) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Years of experience 
 
 
 
0.053 
0.143 
 
0.105 
0.164 
   Number of citizen complaints 
 
 
 
-1.205+ 
0.648 
 
-0.680 
0.627 
   Number of official sanctions 
 
 
 
0.966 
1.317 
 
0.991 
1.467 
Social Network 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Network density 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.068+ 
0.040 
   Network size 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.274 
0.218 
   Impact of suspension on ties 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-2.019* 
0.982 
Additional Variables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   See Table 7a 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Model Characteristics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Constant 
67.031*** 
6.999 
 
63.552*** 
6.944 
 
62.760*** 
7.235 
   Log-likelihood 
-791.660 
 
-781.315 
 
-776.779+ 
   R-squared 
0.919 
 
0.926 
 
0.929 
+=p<.10, *=p<.05, **=p<.01, ***=p<.001 


 
71 
 
 
As seen in Model 1 in Table 7, personality and cognitive characteristics do not share a 
relationship with the time until force is used but the scenario type clearly does. The time until 
force is used in the collision investigation scenario is much lower (b=-53.050, p<.001) compared 
to the domestic violence scenario, and we see a similar pattern for the homeless man scenario 
(b=-8.453, p<.001). However, both results are undoubtedly caused by the timing of the 
threatening behaviors that appear within these scenarios, and merely represent a largely 
mechanistic relationship with the time until a participant uses force. Collectively, the variables in 
this model account for 91.9% of the variation in the timing of force. This is largely due to both 
the nature of the scenarios and several of the control variables in this analysis. The timing to use 
force in these scenarios is somewhat compressed relative to the total amount of interaction time 
that exists in each. Generally, there are singular events in each scenario that provoke intervention 
and the participants then have anywhere from five to eight seconds to decide how to react. 
Controlling only for scenario type, control event timing, and whether a control event occurs 
accounts for 91.4% of the variation in timing of force (models not shown), so much of this 
explained variance is purely accounting for the timing of events in the scenarios.  
 
The inclusion of demographic and professional experience variables in Model 2 yields 
several findings. First, for every one unit increase in the cognitive reflection scale, a participant 
takes approximately one additional second to use force, holding all else constant (b=1.030, 
p<.10). Age is also related to taking a longer time to use force (b=0.129, p<.05), while 
identifying as Hispanic is associated with taking less time to use force relative to identifying as 
White (b=-3.601, p<.05). With regard to officer participants, for every additional citizen 
complaint levied against the officer, our model suggests that the officer uses force 1.205 seconds 


 
72 
 
sooner (p<.10). Including demographic characteristics does not result in a significant 
improvement to model fit, but does increase explained variance to 92.6%. 
 
The addition of officer social network characteristics in Model 3 causes a few changes in 
the pattern of results. To begin, the cognitive reflection scale is no longer related to time until 
force is used. The coefficient for Black participants is also now significant, suggesting that 
participants who identify as Black tend to use force about six seconds sooner than White 
participants (b=-6.399, p<.10). Both an officer’s network density and their average anticipated 
impact of suspension to their ties to other officers in their department are significantly related to 
the time until force is used, but in opposite directions. For every percentage point increase in the 
percent of ties that are also friends with one another, an officer takes an additional 0.068 seconds 
(p<.10) to use force. By contrast, an officer who anticipates that their social ties will become 
stronger on average if they are suspended is expected to use force roughly two seconds sooner 
(b=-2.019, p<.05) for every one point increase in this scale. With respect to the remaining 
significant relationships in Model 3, these are largely identical to their equivalent results in 
Model 2 with some minor changes to the magnitude of the effects. The explained variance of the 
model increases slightly to 92.9% after including the social network variables. 
In sum, the amount of time that passes until a participant uses force varies across 
scenarios, but this is likely due to the point-in-time during the scenario when the underlying 
threat appears and nothing more. Police officers and civilians do not differ in the timing in which 
they use force; however, differences across race did emerge with White participants taking the 
longest amount of time to decide to respond with force. Similarly, older participants took longer 
to use force. Contrary to expectation, personality and cognitive variables were found to be 


 
73 
 
unrelated to the time to use force, though some social networks variables were related (especially 
the average impact of suspension on friendship ties). Unfortunately, attempts to explore these 
relationships further in additional analyses using scenario-specific models and/or across 
participant types were unsuccessful due to issues associated with the reduced sample size (recall 
that not everyone in the sample used force).  
 
Research Question 3:  How do personality traits, cognitive styles, professional experience and 
officer social networks influence the type of tactic employed—either verbal de-escalation, less 
lethal force, or lethal force?  
 
Tables 8, 9, 10 and 11 report the abridged results from a multinomial logistic regression 
predicting the type of tactic a participant employs, including: (1) no tactic, (2) verbal de-
escalation, (3) non-lethal force–i.e., pepper spray or taser, and 4) lethal force. The full set of 
results from these models can be found in Tables 8a, 9a, 10a and 11a, respectively, in Appendix 
I. Each outcome variable in these models reflects the most serious tactic a participant used during 
a given scenario, such that participants who initially used verbal de-escalation but later used 
lethal force are coded as a 4 (lethal force) on this variable. The use of multiple response tactics 
was fairly common among participants, especially among officers, as they tended to (but did not 
always) escalate their responses in accordance with the behavior of actors in the simulation.  
The results reported in Tables 8, 9 and 10 use verbal de-escalation as the reference 
category, so coefficients should be interpreted as increases or decreases in the log odds of using 
the corresponding comparison tactic (i.e., no tactic, non-lethal force, or lethal force) relative to 
using verbal de-escalation as a result of a one-unit change in independent variable. Given the 
general public’s concerns about police using force as opposed to non-force options, we selected 
verbal de-escalation as the reference category in order to provide what we felt were the most 


 
74 
 
meaningful contrasts–specifically, the contrast between a non-forceful tactic and the physically 
forceful tactics. For good measure, we also include the comparison of using no tactic at all 
relative to de-escalation. Table 11 summarizes the findings of our final contrast: the likelihood of 
using lethal force relative to non-lethal force. We include this comparison given the public’s 
concern over the police using lethal force even when non-lethal options are also available to 
officers.    
Table 8 provides the results for the first contrast: no tactic used as compared to verbal de-
escalation. In Model 1, none of the personality variables exhibit a significant association with 
using no tactic relative to verbal de-escalation. As compared to citizens, officers are less likely to 
use no tactic at all relative to using verbal de-escalation (b=-2.256, p<.001). Additionally, 
participants are less likely to use no tactic relative to verbal de-escalation in the homeless man 
scenario. Although significant findings are sparse in Model 1, the included variables collectively 
account for 0.324 of the variation in tactic type used.  
Model 2 in Table 8 adds in demographic and professional experience variables. As 
compared to female participants, male participants are less likely to use no tactic relative to using 
verbal de-escalation (b=-1.031, p<.05). While officers in general are less likely to use no tactic 
relative to verbal de-escalation (b=-2.092, p<.10), those officers with more official sanctions 
(b=1.821, p<.05) are more likely to use no tactic relative to verbal de-escalation. Finally, as 
compared to Model 1, Model 2 has an improved model fit and explains slightly more of the 
variation in tactic choice (pseudo r-squared = 0.380, compared to Model 1’s pseudo r-squared of 
0.324). 
 
 


 
75 
 
Table 8.  Multinomial Logistic Regression Predicting Type of Force Used, Contrast 1: No Tactic Used Relative to 
Verbal De-escalation (N=495) - Abridged Findings 
 
Model 1: 
Personality & 
Cognitive Factors 
 
Model 2: 
Demographic & 
Experience Factors 
 
Model 3:  
Social Network 
Factors 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
Personality Factors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Positive Emotionality 
0.006 
0.020 
 
0.002 
0.025 
 
-0.000 
0.025 
   Negative Emotionality 
-0.003 
0.019 
 
-0.008 
0.020 
 
-0.008 
0.020 
   Constraint 
-0.004 
0.024 
 
-0.019 
0.026 
 
-0.015 
0.027 
Cognitive Factors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Cognitive Reflection 
-0.188 
0.187 
 
-0.126 
0.195 
 
-0.103 
0.199 
   Need for Cognition 
-0.012 
0.019 
 
0.004 
0.018 
 
0.001 
0.018 
Control Variables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Participant Type (1=Officer) 
-2.256*** 
0.498 
 
-2.092+ 
1.147 
 
-2.226 
1.678 
   Scenario Type 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Domestic viol. (reference) 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Homeless man 
-1.027* 
0.504 
 
-1.223* 
0.532 
 
-1.257* 
0.557 
       Collision investigation 
-0.002 
1.806 
 
0.028 
1.857 
 
0.280 
1.945 
Demographics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Age (in years) 
 
 
 
0.019 
0.021 
 
0.020 
0.021 
   Sex (1=Male) 
 
 
 
-1.031* 
0.447 
 
-0.955* 
0.451 
   Race 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       White (reference) 
 
 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Black 
 
 
 
0.906 
0.711 
 
1.106 
0.763 
       Hispanic 
 
 
 
1.340 
1.170 
 
1.252 
1.214 
       Other 
 
 
 
-0.801 
0.746 
 
-0.987 
0.803 
Professional Experiences 
(Officers Only) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Years of experience 
 
 
 
-0.075 
0.046 
 
-0.068 
0.044 
   Number of citizen complaints 
 
 
 
-0.365 
0.300 
 
-0.420 
0.314 
   Number of official sanctions 
 
 
 
1.821* 
0.760 
 
1.998* 
0.779 
Social Network 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Network density 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-0.012 
0.012 
   Network size 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-0.070 
0.101 
   Impact of suspension on ties 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.171 
0.357 
Additional Variables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   See Table 8a 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Model Characteristics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Constant 
5.815+ 
3.338 
 
5.576 
3.408 
 
5.563 
3.402 
   Log Pseudolikelihood 
-455.696 
 
-417.695* 
 
-410.324 
   Pseudo R-squared 
0.324 
 
0.380 
 
0.391 
+=p<.10, *=p<.05, **=p<.01, ***=p<.001 
Likelihood ratio tests are computed to compare Model 2 to Model 1 and Model 3 to Model 2. Significant results 
indicate improved model fit relative to the simpler comparison model. 
 
 
 
 


 
76 
 
Model 3 in Table 8 incorporates the officer social network characteristics. The inclusion 
of these measures typically results in very little change from the findings in Model 2 other than 
the magnitude of existing effects adjusting slightly. Congruent with this, a likelihood ratio test 
comparing Model 3 to Model 2 is insignificant, suggesting that adding the social network 
characteristics into this series of models results in no significant improvement in the model’s fit. 
This is also evident in the change to the pseudo r-squared value as it increases from Model 2 by 
just .011 points to 0.391.  
Table 9 presents the results for the second contrast: non-lethal force as compared to 
verbal de-escalation. Of the personality variables, only Constraint is related to type of force used, 
indicating that participants who scored higher on the constraint scale were less likely (b=-0.036, 
p<.10) to use non-lethal force relative to using verbal de-escalation. The only other notable 
finding in Model 1 is that, relative to the collision investigation scenario, participants in the 
domestic violence scenario were less likely to use non-lethal force (b=-4.794, p<.05) relative to 
verbal de-escalation. Model fit statistics remain the same as they are reported for the multinomial 
logistic regression as a whole, and not the individual contrasts presented in each table.  
Model 2 adds the demographic and professional experience measures into the analysis. 
As seen in the table, higher levels of Constraint remain negatively related (b=-0.040, p<.10) to 
using non-lethal force relative to verbal de-escalation. Additionally, officers with more sanctions 
are more likely (b=2.049, p<.05) to use non-lethal force relative to verbal de-escalation. Finally, 
participants remain less likely (b=-4.944, p<.05) to use non-lethal force relative to verbal de-
escalation in the traffic accident scenario as compared to the domestic violence scenario. 
 
 


 
77 
 
Table 9.  Multinomial Logistic Regression Predicting Type of Force Used, Contrast 2: Non-Lethal Force Relative to 
Verbal De-escalation (N=495) - Abridged Findings 
 
Model 1: 
Personality & 
Cognitive Factors 
 
Model 2: 
Demographic & 
Experience Factors 
 
Model 3:  
Social Network 
Factors 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
Personality Factors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Positive Emotionality 
-0.026 
0.024 
 
-0.025 
0.027 
 
-0.029 
0.028 
   Negative Emotionality 
-0.009 
0.018 
 
-0.023 
0.022 
 
-0.023 
0.022 
   Constraint 
-0.036+ 
0.020 
 
-0.040+ 
0.023 
 
-0.038 
0.023 
Cognitive Factors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Cognitive Reflection 
-0.072 
0.178 
 
-0.165 
0.184 
 
-0.192 
0.182 
   Need for Cognition 
0.004 
0.019 
 
0.004 
0.023 
 
0.010 
0.024 
Control Variables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Participant Type (1=Officer) 
-0.497 
0.499 
 
-1.838 
1.506 
 
-6.210** 
1.878 
   Scenario Type 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Domestic viol. (reference) 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Homeless man 
-0.458 
0.525 
 
-0.599 
0.572 
 
-0.696 
0.609 
       Collision investigation 
-4.794* 
1.874 
 
-4.944* 
1.966 
 
-4.646* 
2.054 
Demographics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Age (in years) 
 
 
 
0.016 
0.023 
 
0.016 
0.023 
   Sex (1=Male) 
 
 
 
-0.573 
0.471 
 
-0.574 
0.465 
   Race 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       White (reference) 
 
 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Black 
 
 
 
0.770 
0.821 
 
1.004 
0.816 
       Hispanic 
 
 
 
1.409 
1.318 
 
1.323 
1.338 
       Other 
 
 
 
-0.616 
0.884 
 
-0.728 
0.928 
Professional Experiences 
(Officers Only) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Years of experience 
 
 
 
-0.129 
0.080 
 
-0.110 
0.076 
   Number of citizen complaints 
 
 
 
0.386 
0.265 
 
0.312 
0.299 
   Number of official sanctions 
 
 
 
2.049* 
0.824 
 
2.247** 
0.827 
Social Network 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Network density 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-0.004 
0.012 
   Network size 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.097 
0.138 
   Impact of suspension on ties 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.881* 
0.416 
Additional Variables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   See Table 9a 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Model Characteristics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Constant 
4.874 
3.810 
 
3.483 
4.545 
 
3.189 
4.443 
   Log Pseudolikelihood 
-455.696 
 
-417.695* 
 
-410.324 
   Pseudo R-squared 
0.324 
 
0.380 
 
0.391 
+=p<.10, *=p<.05, **=p<.01, ***=p<.001 
Likelihood ratio tests are computed to compare Model 2 to Model 1 and Model 3 to Model 2. Significant results 
indicate improved model fit relative to the simpler comparison model. 
 
Model 3 incorporates the social network characteristics into this contrast. While the 
results for prior sanctions for misconduct (b=2.247, p<.01) and the collision investigation 


 
78 
 
scenario (b=-4.646, p<.05) remain similar in magnitude, direction, and significance, the finding 
for Constraint does not. The coefficient remains negative, but it is no longer statistically 
significant. However, the inclusion of social network characteristics reveals a significant finding 
for participant type suggesting that, relative to civilians, officers are generally less likely to use 
non-lethal force relative to verbal de-escalation (b=-6.210, p<.01). Further, the coefficient for the 
average impact of suspension on social ties suggests that officers who anticipate that their ties 
will become stronger are more likely to use non-lethal force relative to verbal de-escalation 
(b=0.881, p<.05). 
 
Table 10 reports the results for our third contrast: lethal force relative to verbal de-
escalation. The results from Model 1 suggest that participants higher in Cognitive Reflection 
(b=-0.292, p<.10) tend to be less likely to use lethal force relative to verbal de-escalation. Other 
than this, the only other significant finding from Model 1 is that participants are much less likely 
to use lethal force relative to verbal de-escalation in the homeless man scenario (b=-5.414, 
p<.001) in comparison to the domestic violence scenario.  
Model 2 incorporates demographic and professional experience variables. As seen in the 
table, Cognitive Reflection (b=-0.331, p<.10) and the homeless man scenario (b=-5.829, p<.001) 
coefficients retain their significance and increase slightly in magnitude. Additionally, Hispanic 
(b=2.343, p<.05) participants are found to be more likely to use lethal force relative to verbal de-
escalation, as are officers who report a higher number of official sanctions (b=1.162, p<.10). At 
the same time, officers with additional years of experience are less likely to use lethal force (b=-
0.068, p<.10).  
 
 


 
79 
 
Table 10.  Multinomial Logistic Regression Predicting Type of Force Used, Contrast 3: Lethal Force Relative to 
Verbal De-escalation (N=495) - Abridged Findings 
 
Model 1: 
Personality & 
Cognitive Factors 
 
Model 2: 
Demographic & 
Experience Factors 
 
Model 3:  
Social Network 
Factors 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
Personality Factors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Positive Emotionality 
-0.014 
0.021 
 
-0.024 
0.029 
 
-0.026 
0.030 
   Negative Emotionality 
0.015 
0.017 
 
0.015 
0.019 
 
0.014 
0.020 
   Constraint 
-0.015 
0.022 
 
-0.022 
0.025 
 
-0.013 
0.026 
Cognitive Factors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Cognitive Reflection 
-0.292+ 
0.174 
 
-0.331+ 
0.189 
 
-0.361+ 
0.196 
   Need for Cognition 
0.005 
0.021 
 
0.012 
0.022 
 
0.018 
0.022 
Control Variables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Participant Type (1=Officer) 
-0.336 
0.563 
 
0.547 
1.002 
 
-1.893 
1.437 
   Scenario Type 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Domestic viol. (reference) 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Homeless man 
-5.414*** 
1.220 
 
-5.829*** 
1.371 
 
-5.904*** 
1.350 
       Collision investigation 
-1.036 
2.371 
 
-0.381 
2.670 
 
-0.468 
2.598 
Demographics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Age (in years) 
 
 
 
0.031 
0.022 
 
0.027 
0.023 
   Sex (1=Male) 
 
 
 
-0.664 
0.475 
 
-0.600 
0.478 
   Race 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       White (reference) 
 
 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Black 
 
 
 
1.218 
0.960 
 
1.371 
0.979 
       Hispanic 
 
 
 
2.343* 
1.022 
 
2.137+ 
1.093 
       Other 
 
 
 
0.452 
0.610 
 
0.258 
0.608 
Professional Experiences 
(Officers Only) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Years of experience 
 
 
 
-0.068+ 
0.037 
 
-0.046 
0.036 
   Number of citizen complaints 
 
 
 
-0.097 
0.218 
 
-0.042 
0.222 
   Number of official sanctions 
 
 
 
1.162* 
0.519 
 
1.136+ 
0.581 
Social Network 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Network density 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-0.001 
0.008 
   Network size 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.156+ 
0.088 
   Impact of suspension on ties 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.273 
0.258 
Additional Variables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   See Table 10a 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Model Characteristics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Constant 
4.874 
3.810 
 
3.483 
4.545 
 
3.189 
4.443 
   Log Pseudolikelihood 
-455.696 
 
-417.695* 
 
-410.324 
   Pseudo R-squared 
0.324 
 
0.380 
 
0.391 
+=p<.10, *=p<.05, **=p<.01, ***=p<.001 
Likelihood ratio tests are computed to compare Model 2 to Model 1 and Model 3 to Model 2. Significant results 
indicate improved model fit relative to the simpler comparison model. 
 
Model 3 incorporates the social network variables. Cognitive reflection (b=-0.361, p<.10) 
and the homeless man scenario (b=-5.904, p<.001) yet again retain their significance while also 
increasing slightly in magnitude. Participants who are Hispanic remain more likely to use lethal 


 
80 
 
force compared to verbal de-escalation (b=2.137, p<.10), as do officers who report a higher 
number of prior sanctions (b=1.136, p<.10) or have a larger social network within their 
department (b=0.156, p<.10). 
Table 11 reports the results for our final contrast: lethal force as compared to non-lethal 
force. Coefficients for this contrast may be interpreted as the change in the log odds of using 
lethal force as compared to non-lethal force if an independent variable were to increase by one 
unit (or, a group contrasted to the reference category where applicable). The results from Model 
1 suggest that participants higher in Negative Emotionality are slightly more likely (b=0.024, 
p<.10) to use lethal force relative to non-lethal force, but no other personality variable shares a 
significant association with type of force used.  
The demographic characteristics included in Model 2 are largely unrelated to type of 
force with one exception: officers with more complaints from citizens are more likely to use 
lethal over non-lethal force (b=-0.482, p<.10). Negative Emotionality remains positively and 
significantly associated with a higher likelihood of using lethal force rather than non-lethal force 
(b=0.037, p<.05), and accounting for demographic characteristics reveals a positive association 
for participant type suggesting that officers are more likely than civilians to use lethal over non-
lethal force (b=2.385, p<.10). Including the social network characteristics of officers in Model 3 
results in only very slight changes to the results from Model 2. The coefficient for Negative 
Emotionality is unchanged (b=0.037, p<.05). The coefficient for participant type increases in 
magnitude and significance (b=4.317, p<.05), suggesting officers are more likely than civilians 
to use lethal over non-lethal force–but the coefficient for the number of citizen complaints is no 
longer significantly related to type of force used. Instead, the number of official sanctions an 


 
81 
 
officer has received is significantly and negatively correlated (b=-1.111, p<.10) with using lethal 
versus non-lethal force.  
 
Table 11.  Multinomial Logistic Regression Predicting Type of Force Used, Contrast 3: Lethal Force Relative to 
Non-Lethal Force (N=495) - Abridged Findings 
 
Model 1: 
Personality & 
Cognitive Factors 
 
Model 2: 
Demographic & 
Experience Factors 
 
Model 3:  
Social Network 
Factors 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
Personality Factors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Positive Emotionality 
0.012 
0.020 
 
0.001 
0.019 
 
0.003 
0.019 
   Negative Emotionality 
0.024+ 
0.014 
 
0.037* 
0.018 
 
0.037* 
0.018 
   Constraint 
0.021 
0.022 
 
0.018 
0.024 
 
0.025 
0.025 
Cognitive Factors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Cognitive Reflection 
-0.220 
0.165 
 
-0.166 
0.183 
 
-0.230 
0.189 
   Need for Cognition 
0.001 
0.016 
 
0.008 
0.023 
 
0.007 
0.024 
Control Variables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Participant Type (1=Officer) 
0.0161 
0.484 
 
2.385+ 
1.362 
 
4.317* 
1.908 
   Scenario Type 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Domestic viol. (reference) 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Homeless man 
-4.956*** 
1.282 
 
-5.230*** 
1.49 
 
-5.209** 
1.500 
       Collision investigation 
3.757+ 
1.927 
 
4.563+ 
2.535 
 
4.177 
2.604 
Demographics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Age (in years) 
 
 
 
0.016 
0.019 
 
0.011 
0.019 
   Sex (1=Male) 
 
 
 
-0.091 
0.473 
 
-0.026 
0.458 
   Race 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       White (reference) 
 
 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Black 
 
 
 
0.448 
0.735 
 
0.367 
0.783 
       Hispanic 
 
 
 
0.934 
0.791 
 
0.815 
0.794 
       Other 
 
 
 
1.068 
0.896 
 
0.986 
0.924 
Professional Experiences 
(Officers Only) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Years of experience 
 
 
 
0.061 
0.084 
 
0.064 
0.076 
   Number of citizen complaints 
 
 
 
-0.482+ 
0.267 
 
-0.354 
0.275 
   Number of official sanctions 
 
 
 
-0.887 
0.670 
 
-1.111+ 
0.614 
Social Network 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Network density 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.002 
0.012 
   Network size 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.059 
0.086 
   Impact of suspension on ties 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-0.608 
0.405 
Additional Variables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   See Table 11a 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Model Characteristics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Constant 
-5.333+ 
3.004 
 
-7.466+ 
4.221 
 
-7.198+ 
4.369 
   Log Pseudolikelihood 
-455.696 
 
-417.695* 
 
-410.324 
   Pseudo R-squared 
0.324 
 
0.380 
 
0.391 
+=p<.10, *=p<.05, **=p<.01, ***=p<.001 
Likelihood ratio tests are computed to compare Model 2 to Model 1 and Model 3 to Model 2. Significant results 
indicate improved model fit relative to the simpler comparison model. 


 
82 
 
In sum, the tactic participants employed in the simulator varied by several factors 
including personality and cognitive variables, participant type (officer versus civilian), 
professional experiences of the officer, and social network measures. For example, individuals 
with higher levels of Negative Emotionality were more likely to use lethal force than non-lethal 
force, and individuals with possessing greater Cognitive Reflection were less likely to use lethal 
force relative to de-escalation techniques. Overall, officers are more likely than civilians to use 
lethal force than non-lethal force, and officers who have a more official sanctions for misconduct 
are more likely to use pepper spray, taser or firearm than using de-escalation techniques (but they 
are less likely to use lethal force than non-lethal force). Finally, officers with larger social 
networks were more likely to use lethal force relative to de-escalation techniques, while officers 
who felt that the strength of their network ties would grow stronger if they were suspended for 
excessive force were more likely to use non-lethal force than de-escalation techniques. 
 
Research Question 4:  Does first-hand experience in a virtual simulation environment impact 
civilian’s attitudes toward (and perceptions of) police officers and/or the ways in which officers 
use force?   
 
 
Table 12 summarizes the findings from the pre-post comparisons of the questions relating 
to how well civilians understand the difficulty and dangerousness of police work, civilians' views 
of police officer professionalism and decision making, civilians’ views on the appropriate level 
of force in various confrontational situations, and the two questions measuring civilians’ global 
perception of the police. As seen in the table, this sample of civilians held highly favorable views 
of the police at baseline. For example, for two global assessment items (impression of the police 
and satisfaction with police) the mean pretest values are 4.56 and 4.59 (out of 5.00) respectively. 
The civilians also rated the difficulty, stressfulness, and dangerousness of policing to be quite 


 
83 
 
high (means of approximately 9.40 out of 10.00), and viewed police officers as highly 
professional, deserving of more pay, and being treated harshly by the media (means of 
approximately 4.30 to 4.40 out of 5.00).  
Despite these strong baseline impressions, the civilians’ brief experience inside the 
simulator increased these impressions further. In the posttest assessment, civilians rated police 
work to be significantly more difficult, more stressful and more dangerous (all ps<.05). They 
rated police as significantly more professional, deserving of more pay, and are treated unfairly by 
the media (all ps<.05). Additionally, after the simulator exercises the civilians were significantly 
less likely to endorse the idea that the police are too quick to use force, and less likely to endorse 
the idea that they should slow down and think more before using force (ps<.05). Although the 
ratings for the two global measures also increased, these changes were not significant.  
The brief experience inside the simulator also impacted civilians’ views of the level of 
force that is acceptable in various situations. Civilians endorsed using significantly higher levels 
of force in the posttest administration in six of the eight conditions described in Table 12 (all 
ps<.05). The only two conditions that did not experience a significant change are the one that 
presents the least threat to officers (i.e., suspect who refuses to lay on the ground) and the one 
that presents the greatest threat (i.e., suspect points a gun toward an officer).  
 
In sum, although civilians had favorable pre-existing views of policing, their brief 
experience in a firearms training simulator enhanced these views even further. Their exposure to 
the simulator exercises also led to participants feeling that higher levels of force are warranted in 
certain situations–especially those where the threat of harm is not extremely low or extremely 
high.  
 
 


 
84 
 
Table 12.  Pre- and Post-Test Attitudes towards Police, Civilian Sample (N=101) 
 
Pre-Test 
Mean (SD) 
Post-Test 
Mean (SD) 
 
t-value 
Understanding the Difficulties/Dangers 
(Scale of 0 to 10) 
 
 
 
     Understand risks and challenges 
7.37 
(1.88) 
7.47 
(2.54) 
0.50 
     How difficult an officer’s job is 
9.43 
(0.89) 
9.70 
(0.58) 
4.39*** 
     How stressful an officer’s job is 
9.35 
(0.79) 
9.72 
(0.55) 
5.48*** 
     How dangerous an officer’s job is 
9.37 
(0.95) 
9.72 
(0.60) 
5.22*** 
Views of Professionalism and Decision Making 
(Scale of 1 to 5) 
 
 
 
     Police behave in professional manner 
4.32 
(0.56) 
4.42 
(0.55) 
2.57** 
     Police are treated too harshly by media 
4.30 
(0.83) 
4.48 
(0.72) 
3.34*** 
     Police should be paid more 
4.46 
(0.67) 
4.60 
(0.60) 
3.45*** 
     Police are too quick to use force 
2.44 
(0.86) 
1.91 
(0.86) 
-7.52*** 
     Police should think more before acting 
2.54 
(0.93) 
2.17 
(1.06) 
-4.35*** 
     Police are trigger-happy 
1.62 
(0.73) 
1.52 
(0.69) 
-1.73* 
View on Using Force on a Suspect who… 
(Scale of 1 to 3)  
 
 
 
     Refuses to lay on the ground 
2.00 
(0.00) 
2.00 
(0.25) 
0.00 
     Suddenly charges toward an officer 
2.47 
(0.50) 
2.60 
(0.49) 
3.11** 
     Tries to hit an officer with his fists 
2.22 
(0.42) 
2.42 
(0.50) 
4.45*** 
     Refuses to take his hand from his pockets 
2.19 
(0.49) 
2.36 
(0.50) 
3.31*** 
     Quickly pulls unknown object from pocket 
2.67 
(0.49) 
2.77 
(0.42) 
2.41** 
     Is holding a knife 
2.60 
(0.53) 
2.72 
(0.45) 
2.77** 
     Is holding a gun toward the ground 
2.70 
(0.48) 
2.88 
(0.33) 
4.66*** 
     Is holding a gun toward the officer 
2.98 
(0.14) 
3.00 
(0.00) 
1.42+ 
Global Views 
(Scale of -5 to +5) 
 
 
 
     General impression of police 
4.56 
(0.96) 
4.60 
(0.88) 
1.16 
     Satisfaction with police 
4.59 
(0.91) 
4.63 
(0.86) 
1.07 
+=p<.10, *=p<.05, **=p<.01, ***=p<.001 


 
85 
 
DISCUSSION 
Interest in police use of force is not new, with concerns about abuses of such power 
dating back as far as the 13th Century (Alpert & Dunham, 2004). However, in recent years 
policing has faced a “legitimacy crisis” of unprecedented levels (Nix, Campbell, Byers & Alpert, 
2017: p. 310)—not just in the US, but in many countries around the world (Oberwittler & Roche, 
2019). In a cultural climate where public outcries to defund “warrior style policing” are common 
(Cobbina-Dungy & Jones-Brown, 2021) and in which police agencies are employing new 
practices to hold officers more accountable (Wright & Houston, 2021), research on use of force 
decision making is needed to better understand how individual-level characteristics shape such 
quick and critical decisions. The current study was designed to help address this need.     
 
This study sought to explore the impact of law enforcement officers’ personality 
characteristics, dual process cognitive factors (i.e., System 1 and System 2 thinking styles), 
professional experiences and social networks on the decision to use force inside a training 
simulator. For purposes of comparison, civilian participants completed the same personality 
assessment, cognitive questionnaires and use of force measures. The inclusion of civilian 
participants also allowed for an examination of the impact of a brief educational experience (i.e., 
completing training exercises inside the simulator) on civilians’ attitudes toward police and use 
of force decisions. Although the final sample of police officers in the study was smaller than 
anticipated, the study is able to provide some tentative conclusions about the role of individual 
level factors on use of force decision making (with ps<.10 or ps<.05).  
 
 


 
86 
 
Summary of Findings 
Prior research has shown that individuals scoring high on the personality trait of Negative 
Emotionality, and those who score low on the trait of Constraint are more susceptible to rule 
breaking behaviors, including violence and delinquency (Burt & Donnellan, 2008; Caspi et al., 
1994; Kreuger et al., 1994; 1996). Accordingly, the current study sought to determine if these 
same personality traits might predict higher levels of force during the training simulations–even 
in those simulations where the threat may be low-to-moderate. Contrary to expectations, neither 
Negative Emotionality nor Constraint were predictive of the decision to use force of any type 
(Table 5) regardless of the level of threat in the scenario (Table 6), and neither were predictive of 
the timing of force being used (Table 7). There is some evidence to suggest that participants who 
have lower levels of Constraint are more likely to use pepper spray or a taser rather than verbal 
de-escalation techniques (Table 9, Model 2), but this effect disappears when controlling for 
social network variables. Higher levels of Negative Emotionality were associated with higher 
likelihoods to use lethal force relative to non-lethal force (Table 11), but otherwise, these 
personality traits (along with Positive Emotionality) fail to distinguish between those who use 
force from those who use only de-escalation techniques. 
 
Prior research also reveals that individuals who have a strong Need for Cognition 
(Cacioppo & Petty, 1984; Cacioppo et al., 1996) are more attentive to detail and make more 
deliberative decisions (System 2 processing), as opposed to more instinctive decisions (System 1 
processing). The current study therefore sought to determine whether an officer’s Need for 
Cognition slowed their use of force decision making in order to allow time for a more 
contemplative assessment of risk and its corresponding use of force response. Similarly, prior 


 
87 
 
research suggests that one’s Cognitive Reflection level shapes the way the individual thinks 
about risk and reward, presumably by relying more heavily on System 1’s quick cognitive 
processing rather than System 2’s slow processing (Frederick, 2005; Toplak et al, 2011). 
Although no study to our knowledge has specifically examined the role of Cognitive Reflection 
in police use of force decisions, such quick-thinking cognitive styles have been theorized to 
account for racial disparities in police use of force (Mears et al., 2017). Thus, the current study 
sought to more formally explore the role of Cognitive Reflection in an officer’s decision to use 
force on a non-compliant citizen.    
In the current study, Need for Cognition and Cognitive Reflection were generally 
unrelated to the prediction of any force being used (Table 5). Note that greater Cognitive 
Reflection was associated with longer response times for using force (Table 7, Model 2), but this 
effect disappears when controlling for social network variables. An effect for Cognitive 
Reflection also appeared in the homeless man scenario (Table 6), such that those with greater 
reflective abilities were more likely to use any type of force in this low-threat encounter. 
However, in the aggregate across all scenarios, individuals possessing greater cognitive 
reflection were less likely to use lethal force relative to de-escalation techniques (Table 10).   
Professional experience is theoretically related to use of force decision making, with 
veteran officers better able to rely on years of training–including de-escalation training–in order 
to resolve conflicts without using force (McElvain & Kposowa, 2004; Paoline & Terrill, 2007). 
We therefore examined the role of being a police officer versus civilian and the number of years 
of experience as an officer, as well as an officer’s history of complaints of police misconduct, on 
the decision to use force. Results from the current study reveal that police officers are generally 


 
88 
 
less likely to use force of any type than untrained civilians (Table 5), especially in the low-to-
medium threat situations (Table 6, Scenario 1 and 2). Officers are also more likely than civilians 
to use de-escalation tactics than non-lethal tactics (Table 9), but more likely to use lethal force 
than non-lethal force (Table 11). However, there were no differences between officers and 
civilians in the timing of force (Table 7), or in terms of using de-escalation versus lethal force 
(Table 10). Furthermore, officers with more years of professional experience were less likely to 
use force in the homeless man scenario (Table 6), and less likely to use lethal force more 
generally compared to using de-escalation tactics (Table 10)—although this latter effect 
disappears when controlling for social network variables.  
Officers who have a prior history of citizen complaints and/or official sanctions for 
misconduct are more likely to use force of any type (Table 5), more likely to use force in the 
homeless man and domestic violence scenarios (Table 6), are quicker to use force (Table 7, 
Model 2; although this effect disappears controlling for social network variables), and are more 
likely to use pepper spray or taser (Table 9) and a firearm (Table 10) than de-escalation 
techniques. However, those with prior histories of complaints/sanctions for misconduct are more 
likely to use de-escalation techniques rather than to do nothing at all (Table 8), and are less likely 
to use lethal force than pepper spray/taser (Table 11).  
Given that officers’ perceived justifications for using force as well as their actual 
behaviors are thought to be shaped by organizational cultures/social networks (Ouellet, Hashimi, 
Gravel & Papachristos, 2019; Weisburd et al., 2001), the current study sought to assess how the 
size and strength of one’s professional social network influences that individual’s decision to use 
force. The study’s original design was to explore whether officers within the same social 


 
89 
 
networks make similar decisions inside the training simulator. However, due to low study 
participation among officers and the resulting need to recruit officers from across a larger 
number of departments, the study’s ability to map out network clusters was compromised. 
Nevertheless, the study continued to examine how decision making was influenced by the size of 
an officer’s social network and the network’s perceived attitudes toward force (i.e., would the 
relationships within the networks become stronger if the participant were to be suspended for 
using excessive force).  
In the current study, officers with larger social networks and/or greater network densities 
(i.e., having friends who are friends with each other) were more likely to use force of any type 
(Table 5), more likely to use force in the domestic violence and collision investigation scenarios 
(Table 6), took slightly longer to decide to use force (Table 7) and were more likely to use lethal 
force relative to de-escalation techniques (Table 10). Officers who felt that the strength of their 
network ties would grow stronger if they were suspended for excessive force (a measure of peer 
support surrounding use of force) were more likely to use force of any type (Table 5), more 
likely to use force in the homeless man scenario (Table 6), used force more quickly (Table 7), 
and were more likely to use pepper spray/taser relative to de-escalation techniques (Table 9). 
Overall, these findings suggest that officers who have a larger friendship network of officers and 
whose network tends to support colleagues who may use excessive force are generally more 
likely to use force themselves and use it more quickly, including in low-threat situations.  
Finally, prior research suggests that multi-week civilian educational programs, such as 
Citizens Police Academies, generate a greater understanding of the nature of police work and 
more positive attitudes toward the police (Lee, 2016; Perez et al., 2021; 2022), but the impact of 


 
90 
 
an acute intervention on citizen’s attitudes toward police is not as well understood. Results from 
the current study reveal that the time civilian participants spent inside the firearms training 
simulator–despite being brief–had an immediate impact on their attitudes toward police officers 
and use of force decision making (Table 12). Even though the civilians in the current study had 
highly favorable opinions of the police at baseline, their appreciation of the difficulties, 
stressfulness and dangerousness of police work grew following the simulator training. At the 
posttest phase, civilians also were more likely to endorse the notion that police behave 
professionally, are treated too harshly by the media, and should be paid more. After spending 
time in the simulator, civilians are also less likely to endorse the notion that police are too quick 
to use force and are “trigger happy.”   
The simulator experience appeared to increase the level of force civilians felt was 
acceptable across a variety of situations (Table 12). The only instances where acceptable force 
levels did not increase were those where there was either little threat to the officer (suspect 
refuses to lay on the ground as ordered), or extremely high levels of threat (suspect is pointing a 
gun toward the officer). In these two situations, civilians’ perceptions of acceptable force are 
largely immutable; however, in other situations where the threat level is more moderate and/or 
situations are more ambiguous, perceptions can change. Given that high profile cases of police 
use of force often involve threats that fall between the extremes, providing civilians with 
opportunities to experience these encounters inside a simulator may help to create more 
understanding and foster greater trust of the police. 
 
 


 
91 
 
Implications 
 
There are several themes that emerge from this body of results. First, while personality 
assessments may be useful for screening those individuals who are applying to be officers 
(Detrick & Chibnall, 2002; 2013), this study did not find that personality is useful for 
understanding use of force decisions among those who meet the initial screening standards to 
become officers. There may be more promise, however, by examining cognitive factors. The fact 
that individuals scoring higher in Need for Cognition were more likely to use de-escalation 
techniques than lethal force suggests that these individuals are more cognitively flexible and are 
able to consider additional means for resolving conflict besides lethal force. As departments 
come to understand how Need for Cognition and other cognitive constructs may impact decision 
making, use of force training may be modified to recognize an officer’s cognitive need to 
consider multiple response options before deciding which to pursue (and when it is safe to do 
so).    
A second theme that emerges is that police training equips officers with important de-
escalation skills. In the low threat scenario (Homeless Man), which provides the greatest 
opportunity to use de-escalation, we find that officers use de-escalation tactics more often than 
untrained civilians. Such a finding suggests that officer training matters. Given the national 
outcry against use of excessive force, this finding also suggests that a nationwide movement 
toward, and preference for, prioritizing de-escalation tactics is worth pursuing. Additional 
investments in de-escalation facilities and training curriculums, such as those recently adopted in 
Charlotte, North Carolina (Melton, 2021) are needed, and some states and agencies have started 
to prioritize de-escalation within training academies. The current study suggests that those 


 
92 
 
investments may prove worthwhile, although emerging evidence also suggests that officers must 
be open and receptive to de-escalation adoption, and that field supervisors (many of whom are 
more experienced officers) may play an important role in facilitating receptivity (Engel, Isaza, 
Motz, McManus & Corsaro, 2022). 
While trained officers were more adept than civilians at using de-escalation in the 
situations that best permit it, they were also more likely than civilians to use lethal force when 
necessary. Ultimately, this is what should be expected of trained law enforcement officers - to 
use de-escalation techniques when it is appropriate to do so, but to use lethal force when it is 
legally acceptable and necessary to protect officer and civilian safety. As the nation sees growing 
support for arming citizens so they can theoretically provide the same protection afforded by 
officers (e.g., arming school teachers; see Politico, 2022), findings from the current study 
question whether these citizens will be able to make the same decisions as trained officers.  
While not a focus of the study, the low threat scenario offered us the opportunity to 
explore how officers and civilians responded to a call involving a person in a mental health 
crisis. In this study, officers were more likely to use verbal de-escalation techniques to manage 
the situation as compared to citizens. How officers respond to calls for service involving people 
with mental illnesses has been the subject of increased scrutiny after several high profile 
incidents that ended with lethal force. While many urban police departments have crisis 
intervention teams as part of their units, smaller more rural departments may not have the 
resources for these teams. Training officers how to respond to these individuals should continue 
to be a priority. 


 
93 
 
A third theme that emerges from the study’s findings is that police officers with a 
documented history of citizen complaints and/or confirmed misconduct were sometimes more 
likely to use force in the simulated scenarios. However, the results were inconsistent across 
models and could also be interpreted in various ways. Citizen complaints, for example, might be 
related to duty assignments (e.g., working in more challenged neighborhoods or during peak 
crime times; serving arrest warrants on violent fugitives; participating on task force/high 
intensity crime response teams - see, for example, Terrill, Ingram, Somers & Paoline, 2018). 
Alternatively, citizen complaints often do reflect accusations of misuse of force (Hickman, 2006) 
or other officer behaviors/attitudes that need to be proactively addressed. And documented 
findings of sanctioned activities and misconduct are perhaps more serious than citizen 
complaints from an organizational and community perspective. 
Regardless, both of these measures appear to inform officer decision-making with respect 
to use of force, engagement in de-escalation, and willingness to use more or less force at certain 
times. Sophisticated early intervention/warning systems (Alpert & Walker, 2000; Walker, 2003) 
often capture historical data and patterns on these potential predictors of force decisions. These 
systems, while potentially expensive and sometimes time-consuming to implement, should 
nevertheless be broadly expanded across law enforcement agencies and used proactively by first 
line supervisors. 
Fourth, the social network analyses offer a richer understanding of how an officer’s peers 
might exert influence on decisions and behavior with respect to use of force. In this study, we 
found that law enforcement peers definitively matter in predicting use of force decisions and 
outcomes, and in reinforcing the (internalized) legitimacy of those decisions. These are important 


 
94 
 
findings given that agency culture can impact organizational support for legitimate use of force 
and procedural justice (Silver, Roche, Bilach & Bontrager, 2018), that agencies are moving 
toward a “duty to intervene” posture when it comes to use of excessive force response, and that 
formal and informal leaders play important roles in establishing cultural norms and maintaining 
adherence to departmental policy and the law, including use of force practices in the field (Police 
Executive Research Forum, 2016; Huberts, Kaptein, & Lasthuizen, 2007; Weisburd, Greenspan, 
Hamilton, Williams & Bryant, 2001). 
We are not suggesting that officers in this study made firearms simulation decisions that 
would be considered excessive force in the field. In fact, a primary purpose of the simulation 
training is to provide immediate feedback and coaching in response to the officer’s decisions. 
However, law enforcement leaders should remain mindful of, and attentive to, officers (and 
supervisors) who maintain close friendships with colleagues who accumulate numerous and 
documented excessive force complaints. Leaders should also understand that those attitudes can 
be coached and be contagious, and can also migrate across social networks. On the other hand, 
those same attitudes can be proactively identified (sometimes through psychological testing 
and/or training processes (Scrivner, 1994), measured to some degree (via early 
warning/intervention systems), and mitigated through closer supervision and de-escalation role 
modeling (Engel et al., 2022). 
Finally, citizen perceptions of the legitimacy of law enforcement processes, and trust in 
and support for use of force by officers, are often shaped by personal experiences and contacts 
with police (Harrell & Davis, 2020; Peyton, Sierra-Arevalo & Rand, 2019). The current study 
perhaps extends citizens’ understanding of law enforcement challenges by providing them with 


 
95 
 
an opportunity to assume the role of an officer/deputy, and experience, first-hand, several use of 
force decisions inside a firearms simulator environment. Citizen academies often offer similar 
opportunities, with perhaps a single simulator experience at the end of the training, and these 
academies do help shape citizens’ perception of the police (Cohn, 1996). However, citizen 
academies are not specifically designed to impact citizen perceptions of police use of force, 
which can vary considerably across demographic subgroups (Johnson & Kuhns, 2009) and 
cultures (Johnson, Maguire & Kuhns, 2014). And persistent, negative perceptions of the 
legitimacy of use of force can quickly erode trust and confidence in the law enforcement process 
(U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, 2018). 
Unlike traditional citizen academies, this study specifically focused attention on 
perceptions of use of force by exposing a sample of (pro-police) citizens to multiple simulator 
scenarios at varying threat levels, and measured the impact of those experiences on changes in 
perceptions regarding policing more generally, and use of force specifically. The results 
indicated that helping citizens understand the timing, complexities, and challenges of use of 
force decisions positively informed and impacted their perceptions, again within a sample of 
citizens who were clearly supportive of police. Communities and law enforcement agencies that 
are continually challenged by misuse/excessive force complaints, or by recent officer-involved 
shooting events, might consider broader adoption of citizen simulator experiences as one method 
of improving police-community relationships. While training simulators such as that used in the 
current study are too expensive for many law enforcement agencies, advances in virtual reality 
headsets and their use in police training (Potts, Hawken, Hillhouse & Farabee, 2022) may make 
these simulation exercises more economical.  


 
96 
 
Limitations & Future Research 
 
The generalizability of our study findings, to some extent, were limited by the officer 
sample size. Recall that the original study design was necessarily modified as a result of some 
unforeseen events which impacted officer recruitment/retention (e.g., the George Floyd killing 
and the subsequent impact on officer and departmental engagement and willingness to 
participate; the nationwide shutdown associated with the early stages of the COVID-19 
pandemic; the unanticipated transition from a single-screen VirTra-100® projector to a five-
screen VirTra-300® projector during the study). Our attempts to generate broader interest from 
officers/deputies from several nearby agencies, and to further incentivize participating officers, 
had a limited impact. Subsequently, the relatively small number of officers included in the study, 
while not unique to studies using firearms simulators (cf: Hine, Porter, Westera, Alpert & Allen, 
2019; Hulse & Memom, 2006; Mitchell & Flin, 2007), constrained our ability to run certain 
officer-specific and scenario-specific analyses. 
To some degree, the officer sample size limitation was offset by our inclusion of a 
civilian sample, which provided opportunities for comparative analyses and allowed us to 
explore the impact of simulated training on civilian attitudes toward police and police use of 
force. Nevertheless, future studies could easily replicate this study design within a larger law 
enforcement setting, or again across multiple agencies, and perhaps consider other methods for 
successfully recruiting officers. Ideally, this study could operate and coincide with standard in-
service annual firearms simulator training requirements, which could generate maximum 
enrollment. In addition, study results may differ across different types of law enforcement 


 
97 
 
agencies (municipal/city, sheriff’s offices, state agencies; urban, suburban or rural; small, 
medium, large, etc.), and these are important contextual variations that should be explored. 
A second study limitation was perhaps both a strength and a potential weakness. Every 
officer and civilian who participated was trained by the same instructor (from Agency A) in the 
firearms simulator. In many respects, that decision/outcome is positive in the sense that there was 
some consistency in the pre-simulator setup, feedback language, and overall training process 
used. On the other hand, we recognized that officers who worked within the instructor’s agency 
(of approximately 30 officers) likely had a pre-established relationship with the instructor, while 
officers from other agencies and the civilians generally did not. The extent and implications of 
those relationships, which are unknown, may have had some impact on the study results. 
To clarify, instructor feedback to familiar officers during simulations was potentially 
different (sometimes more relaxed; perhaps, at times, more critical, etc.) than feedback to 
unfamiliar officers and civilians. The pre-established relationship and feedback language, if 
provided following the first simulation, could also potentially impact decision-making in the 
second or third simulations. Further, for officers working in Agency A, it is possible that the 
simulator instructor was (anonymously) identified within an officer’s social network and/or was 
a supervisor for the officer at one time or another; as such, the feedback may have been delivered 
differently yet again. 
While personality assessments may be useful for screening those applying to be officers, 
this study did not find that personality is useful for understanding use of force decisions. It is 
perhaps the case that by using personality tests or other forms of “readiness assessments” at the 
screening phase, police departments create a more homogenous group of officers than would be 


 
98 
 
found in the general population. If that is the case, then it may prove to be more difficult to 
distinguish differences in personality and their effects on use of force decisions in a more 
granular fashion. This, combined with a limited sample size, perhaps helps explain our findings 
that personality failed to predict outcomes in the majority of cases. Future research should 
continue to examine personality factors and use of force decisions utilizing a larger sample of 
officers and with a variety of personality measures.  
Our study failed to capture whether social network contacts were supervisors, past or 
present, although we did ask about whether social ties served as mentors. Out of the 49 officers 
that provided valid information on the social network survey, and reported at least one tie within 
the department, 42 (85.71%) reported that at least one of their named ties was a mentor. Whether 
the mentors were also formal supervisors, or was the simulator trainer (officers in Agency A) is 
unknown. Future studies may want to consider whether having a completely independent trainer 
is worth considering, or, alternatively, measure pre-existing relationships between trainers and 
trainees and between supervisors and subordinates, particularly in smaller agency settings. 
Finally, future research should continue to study peers using social network analysis 
techniques. In spite of the rich history of police subculture research (see Crank, 2004; Paoline & 
Terrill, 2014), social network methods have yet to be widely employed to examine discretionary 
officer behavior. As noted above, our sample included several small police departments in 
suburban and rural areas. Exploring the relevance of social networks in a larger police 
department may help us further understand these relationships.  
 


 
99 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Allison, M., & Brimacombe, C.A.E. (2010). Alibi believability: The effect of prior convictions 
and judicial instructions. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 40, 1054–1084. 
 
Alpert, G.P., & Dunham, R.G. (2004). Understanding Police Use of Force: Officers, Suspects, 
and Reciprocity. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
 
Alpert, G.P. & Walker, S. (2000). Police accountability and early warning systems: Developing 
policies and programs. Justice Research and Policy, 2(2): 59-72 
 
Amnesty International. (2011). USA: Excessive and lethal force? Amnesty international’s 
concerns about deaths and ill-treatment involving police use of TASERs. Retrieved from 
https://www.amnestyusa.org/reports/usa-excessive-and-lethal-force-amnesty-internationals-
concerns-about-deaths-and-ill-treatment-involving-police-use-of-tasers/ 
 
Baglivio, M.T., Wolff, K.T., DeLisi, M., Vaughn, M.G., & Piquero, A.R. (2016). Effortful 
control, negative emotionality, and juvenile recidivism: an empirical test of DeLisi and Vaughn’s 
temperament-based theory of antisocial behavior. The Journal of Forensic Psychiatry & 
Psychology, 27, 376-403. 
 
Baron, J., Scott, S., Fincher, K., & Metz, S.E. (2015). Why does the cognitive reflection test 
(sometimes) predict utilitarian moral judgment (and other things)? Journal of Applied Research 
in Memory and Cognition, 4(3), 265-284. 
 
Barrick, M.R., & Mount, M.K. (1991). The Big 5 personality dimensions and job performance: 
A meta-analysis. Personnel Psychology, 44, 1-26. 
 
Bayley, D.H., & Bittner, E. (1997). Learning the skills of policing. In R. G. Dunham & G. Alpert 
(Eds.), Critical Issues in Policing: Contemporary Readings (3th ed.) (pp. 114-137). Prospect 
Heights, IL: Waveland. 
 
Bayley, D.H., & Garofalo, J. (1989). The management of violence by police patrol officers. 
Criminology, 27, 1-25. 
 
Bechara, A., & Damasio, A.R. (2005). The somatic marker hypothesis: A neural theory of 
economic decision. Games and Economic Behavior, 52, 336-372. 
 
Bennell, C., Jones, N.J., & Corey, S. (2007). Does use-of-force simulation training in Canadian 
police agencies incorporate principles of effective training? Psychology, Public Policy, and Law, 
13, 35-58. 
 
Brennan, M. (2020). Amid Pandemic, Confidence in Key U.S. Institutions Surges. Retrieved from 
https://news.gallup.com/poll/317135/amid-pandemic-confidence-key-institutions-surges.aspx 


 
100 
 
Burt, S.A., & Donnellan, M.B. (2008). Personality correlates of aggressive and non-aggressive 
antisocial behavior. Personality and Individual Differences, 44, 53-63. 
 
Cacioppo, J.T., & Petty, R.E. (1984). The efficient assessment of need for cognition. Journal of 
Personality Assessment, 48, 306-307. 
 
Cacioppo, J.T., Petty, R.E., Feinstein, J.A., & Jarvis, W.B.G. (1996). Dispositional 
differences in cognitive motivation: The life and times of individuals varying in need for 
cognition. Psychological Bulletin, 119, 197-253. 
 
Cacioppo, J.T., Petty, R., & Kao, C.F. (1984). The efficient assessment of Need for Cognition. 
Journal of Personality Assessment, 48, 306-307. 
 
Campbell, K.E., & Lee, B.A. (1991). Name generators in surveys of personal networks. Social 
Networks, 13, 203-221. 
 
Campitelli, G., & Labollita, M. (2010). Correlations of cognitive reflection with judgments and 
choices. Judgment & Decision Making, 5, 182-191. 
 
Caspi, A., Moffitt, T.E., Silva, P.A., Stouthamer‐Loeber, M., Krueger, R.F., & Schmutte, P.S. 
(1994). Are some people crime‐prone? Replications of the personality‐crime relationship  across 
countries, genders, races, and methods. Criminology, 32, 163-196. 
 
Caspi, A., & Silva, P.A. (1995). Temperamental qualities at age three predict personality traits in 
young adulthood: Longitudinal evidence from a birth cohort. Child Development, 66, 486-498. 
 
Chaiken, S. (1980). Heuristic versus systematic information processing and the use of source 
versus message cues in persuasion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 39(5), 752-
766. 
 
Church, A.T. (1994). Relating the Tellegen and five-factor models of personality structure. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 898 –909. 
 
Cobbina-Dungy, J. E., & Jones-Brown, D. (2021). Too much policing: Why calls are made to 
defund the police. Punishment & Society, doi.org/10.1177/14624745211045652 
 
Cohn, E.G. (1996). Citizen police academy: A recipe for improving police-community 
relationships. Journal of Criminal Justice, 24(3): 265-271 
 
Correll, J., Park, B., Judd, C.M., Wittenbrink, B., Sadler, M.S., & Keese, T. (2007). Across the 
thin blue line: Police officers and racial bias in the decision to shoot. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 92, 1006-1023. 
 
Crank, J. (2004). Understanding Police Culture. New York, NY: Routledge 


 
101 
 
Crawford, C., & Burns, R. (1998). Predictors of the police use of force: The application of a 
continuum perspective in Phoenix. Police Quarterly, 1, 41-63. 
 
Cullen, M.J., Ones, D.S., Drees, S.A., Viswesvaran, C., & Langkamp, K. (2003). A meta-
analysis of the MMPI and police officer performance. In S. W. Spilberg & D. S. Ones (Chairs), 
Personality and Work Behaviors of Police Officers. Symposium conducted at the 18th Annual 
Meeting of the Society of Industrial and Organizational Psychology. 
 
Dantzker, M.L., & McCoy, J.H. (2006). Psychological screening of police recruits: A Texas 
perspective. Journal of Police and Criminal Psychology, 21, 23-32. 
 
Davis, R.D., Rostow, C.D., Pinkston, J.B., Combs, D.R., & Dixon, D.R. (2004). A re-
examination of the MMPI-2 aggressiveness and immaturity indices in law enforcement 
screening. Journal of Police and Criminal Psychology, 19, 17-26. 
 
DeLisi, M. & Vaughn, G. (2014). Foundation for a temperament-based theory of antisocial 
behavior and criminal justice system involvement. Journal of Criminal Justice, 42, 10-25.  
 
Derlega, V.J., Lewis, R.J., Harrison, S., Winstead, B.A., & Costanza, R. (1989). Gender 
differences in the initiation and attribution of tactile intimacy. Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 
13, 83-96. 
 
Detrick, P., & Chibnall, J.T. (2002). Prediction of police officer performance with the Inwald 
personality inventory. Journal of Police and Criminal Psychology, 17, 9-17.  
 
Detrick, P., & Chibnall, J.T. (2013). Revised NEO Personality Inventory normative data for 
police officer selection. Psychological Services, 10, 372–377. 
 
DiLalla, D.L., Gottesman, I.I., Carey, G., & Vogler, G.P. (1993). Joint factor structure of the 
Multidimensional Personality Questionnaire and the MMPI in a psychiatric and high-risk 
sample. Psychological Assessment, 5, 207. 
 
Dowler, K., & Zawilski, V. (2007). Public perceptions of police misconduct and discrimination: 
Examining the impact of media consumption. Journal of Criminal Justice, 35, 193–203. 
 
Dror, I.E. (2007). Perception of risk and the decision to use force. Policing, 1, 265-272. 
 
Eith, C., & Durose, M.R. (2011). Contacts Between Police and the Public, 2008. Washington, 
DC: US Department of Justice (NCJ 234599). 
 
Engel, R. S., Isaza, G. T., Motz, R. T., McManus, H. D., & Corsaro, N. (2022). De-Escalation 
Training Receptivity and First-Line Police Supervision: Findings from the Louisville Metro  
Police Study. Police Quarterly, 25, 201–227. https://doi.org/10.1177/10986111211049834 
 
 


 
102 
 
Exum, M.L., Austin, L.A. & Franklin, J.D. (2017). Intoxication and arousal. In W. Bernasco, H. 
Elferrs & J. van Gelder (Eds.), Oxford Handbook on Offender Decision Making. Oxford, UK: 
Oxford University Press. 
 
Exum, M.L., & Zachowicz, A. (2014). Sexual arousal and the ability to access sexually 
aggressive consequences from memory. In J. van Gelder, H. Elfers, D. Reynald, & D. Nagin 
(Eds.), Affect and Cognition in Criminal Decision Making (pp. 97-118). Abingdon, UK: 
Routledge. 
 
Federal Bureau of Investigation (2020). Crime in the United States, 2019. Retrieved from 
https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2019/crime-in-the-u.s.-2019/topic-pages/tables/expanded-
homicide-data-table-14.xls 
 
Federal Bureau of Investigation (2022). FBI Releases 2021 Statistics on Law Enforcement 
Officers Killed in the Line of Duty. Retrieved from https://www.fbi.gov/news/press-
releases/press-releases/fbi-releases-2021-statistics-on-law-enforcement-officers-killed-in-the-
line-of-duty 
 
Frederick, S. (2005). Cognitive reflection and decision making. The Journal of Economic 
Perspectives, 19, 25-42. 
 
Garner J.H., Hickman M.J., Malega R.W., & Maxwell, C.D. (2018). Progress toward national 
estimates of police use of force. PLoS ONE 13(2): e0192932. 
doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0192932  
 
Garner, J., Maxwell, C., & Heraux, C. (2002). Characteristics associated with the prevalence and 
severity of force used by the police. Justice Quarterly, 19, 705-746. 
 
Gerber, G.L. (2019). Police personality: Theoretical issues and research. In J. Kitaeff (Ed.) 
Handbook of Police Psychology, Revised Edition (pp. 477-493). New York: Routledge.  
 
Goldberg, L.R. (1990). An alternative "description of personality": The big-five factor structure. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59(6), 1216-1229. 
 
Gomez, R., Griffiths, M.D., & Stavropoulos, V. (2020). Internal and external validity of the brief 
version of the Multidimensional Personality Questionnaire: Exploratory structural equation 
modelling. PloS one, 15, 1-14. 
 
Graham v. Connor, 490 U.S. 386 (1989) 
 
Gravel, J., Hashimi, S., Oullet, M., & Chi Tong, H. (2017). Understanding Police Misconduct. 
Yale Hackathon - Policy Lab & The Justice Collaboratory, February 2017. 
 
 
 


 
103 
 
Harrell, E. & Davis, E. (2020). Contacts between the police and the public: 2018. Washington 
DC: US Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics 
 
Hickman, M.J. (2006). Citizen complaints about police use of force. Law Enforcement 
Management and Statistics, Special Report (NCJ 210296, June). Washington DC: Bureau of 
Justice Statistics 
 
Hine, K.A., Porter, L.E., Westera, N.J., Alpert, G.P, & Allen, A. (2019). What were they 
thinking? Factors influencing police recruits’ decisions about force. Policing and Society, ,29, 
673-691. 
 
Huberts, L., Kaptein, M., & Lasthuizen, K. (2007). The study of three leadership styles on 
integrity violations committed by police officers. Policing: An international journal of police 
strategies and management, 30(4): 587-607 
 
Hulse, L.M., & Memom, A. (2006). Fatal impact? The effects of emotional arousal and weapon 
presence on police officers’ memories for a simulated crime. Legal and Criminological 
Psychology, 11, 313-325. 
 
Intravia, J., Wolff, K.T., & Piquero, A.R. (2018). Investigating the effects of media consumption 
on attitudes toward police legitimacy. Deviant Behavior, 39, 963-980. 
 
Johnson, Devon V. & Kuhns, Joseph B. (2009). Striking Out: Race and Support for Police Use 
of Force; Justice Quarterly, 26(3): 592-623 
 
Johnson, D., Maguire. E. R. & Kuhns, Joseph B. (2014). Public Perceptions of the Legitimacy of 
the Law and Legal Authorities: Evidence from the Caribbean. Law and Society Review, 48(4): 
947-978 
 
Kahneman, D. (2003). Maps of bounded rationality: Psychology for behavioral economics. The 
American Economic Review, 93, 1449-1475. 
 
Kahneman, D. (2011). Thinking, Fast and Slow. New York, NY: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 
 
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk. 
Economectrica, 42, 263-291. 
 
Kavanagh, J. (1997). The occurrence of resisting arrest in arrest encounters: A study of police-
citizen violence. Criminal Justice Review, 22, 16-33. 
 
Kleider, H., & Parrott, D.J. (2009). Aggressive shooting behavior: How working memory and 
threat influence shoot decisions. Journal of Research in Personality, 43, 494-497. 
 
 
 


 
104 
 
Kleider, H., Parrott, D.J., & King, T.Z. (2010). Shooting behaviour: How working memory and 
negative emotionality influence police officer shoot decisions. Applied Cognitive 
Psychology, 24, 707-717. 
  
Komarraju, M., & Karau, S.J. (2005). The relationship between the big five personality traits and 
academic motivation. Personality and Individual Differences, 39, 557-567. 
 
Krueger, R.F., Caspi, A., Moffitt, T.E., White, J., & Stouthamer‐Loeber, M. (1996). Delay of 
gratification, psychopathology, and personality: Is low self‐control specific to externalizing 
problems? Journal of Personality, 64, 107-129. 
 
Krueger, R.F., Schmutte, P.S., Caspi, A., Moffit, T.E., Campbell, K., & Silva, P.A. (1994). 
Personality traits linked to crime among men and women: Evidence from a birth cohort. Journal 
of Abnormal Psychology, 103, 328–338 
 
Kuhns, J.B., & Knutsson, J. (2010). Police Use of Force: A Global Perspective. Santa Barbara, 
CA: Praeger Security International. 
 
Landman, A., Nieuwenhuys, A., & Oudejans, R.R.D. (2015). Decision-related action orientation 
predicts police offices’ shooting performance under pressure. Anxiety, Stress, & Coping, 29, 570-
579. 
 
Lee, T.L. (2016). Tennessee citizen police academies: Program and participant characteristics, 
American Journal of Criminal Justice, 41, 236-254.  
 
Leippe, M.R., Eisenstadt, D.E., Rauch, S.M., & Seib, H. (2004) Timing of eyewitness expert 
testimony, jurors’ need for cognition, and case strength as determinants of trial verdicts. Journal 
of Applied Psychology, 89, 524–541. 
 
Loewenstein, G.F. (1996). Out of control: Visceral influences on behavior. Organizational and 
Human Decision Making Processes, 65, 272-292. 
 
Louis, M.R. (1983). Organizations as culture-bearing milieu. In L.R. Pondy, P.J. Frost, G. 
Morgan, & T.C. Dandridge (Eds.), Organizational Symbolism (pp. 23-44). Greenwich, CT: Jai 
Press, Inc. 
 
MacDonald, J.M., Kaminski, R.J., Smith, M.R. (2009). The effect of less-lethal weapons on 
injuries in police use-of-force events. American Journal of Public Health, 99, 2268-2274. 
 
Magnusson, D. (1990). Personality development from an interactional perspective. In L.A. 
Pervin (Ed.), Handbook of Personality: Theory and Research (pp. 193-222). New York, NY: 
Guilford Press. 
 
 
 


 
105 
 
Mata, A., Ferreira, M.B., & Sherman, S.J. (2013). The metacognitive advantage of deliberative 
thinkers: A dual-process perspective on overconfidence. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 105, 353–373. 
 
McAuliff, B.D., & Kovera, M.B. (2008). Juror need for cognition and sensitivity to 
methodological flaws in expert evidence. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 38, 385–408. 
 
McElvain, J.P., & Kposowa, A.J. (2004). Police officer characteristics and internal affairs 
investigations for use of force allegations. Journal of Criminal Justice, 32, 265-279. 
 
Mears, D.P., Craig, M.O., Stewart, E.A., & Warren, P.Y. (2017). Thinking fast, not slow: How 
cognitive biases may contribute to racial disparities in the use of force in police-citizen 
encounters. Journal of Criminal Justice, 53, 12-24.  
 
Melton, B. (2021). CMPD opens state-of-the-art de-escalation training facility in Charlotte. 
WCCB news story. Retrieved from https://www.wccbcharlotte.com/2021/08/17/cmpd-opens-
state-of-the-art-de-escalation-training-facility-in-charlotte/  
 
Mitchell, L., & Flin, R. (2007). Shooting decisions by police firearms officers. Journal of 
Cognitive Engineering and Decision Making, 1, 375-390. 
 
Morabito, E.V., & Doerner, W.G. (1997). Police use of less-than-lethal force: Oleoresin 
Capsicum (OC) spray. Policing: An International Journal of Police Strategies & Management, 
20(4), 680-697. 
 
Nagin, D.S., & Pogarsky, G. (2003). An experimental investigation of deterrence: Cheating, 
self-serving bias, and impulsivity. Criminology, 41, 167-194. 
  
National Institute of Justice (2008). Study of Deaths Following Electro Muscular Disruption: 
Interim Report. Washington, DC: US Department of Justice (NCJ 222981) 
 
Nieuwenhuys, A., Savelsbergh, G.J.P., & Oudejans, R.R.D. (2012). Shoot or don’t shoot? Why 
police officers are more inclined to shoot when they are anxious. Emotion, 12, 827-833. 
 
Nieuwenhuys, A., Savelsbergh, G.J.P., & Oudejans, R.R. (2015). Persistence of threat-induced 
errors in police officers' shooting decisions. Applied Ergonomics, 48, 263-272. 
 
Nix, J., Campbell, B.A., Byers, E.H., & Alpert, G.A. (2015). A bird’s eye view of civilians killed 
by police in 2015: Further evidence of implicit bias. Criminology & Public Policy, 16, 309-340.  
 
Nix J., & Wolfe, S.E. (2017) The impact of negative publicity on police self-legitimacy. Justice 
Quarterly, 34, 84–108. 
 


 
106 
 
Oberwittler, D., & Roche, S. (2019). Police-Citizens Relations around the World. New York: 
Routledge. 
 
Oechssler, J., Roider, A., & Schmitz, P.W. (2009). Cognitive abilities and behavioral biases. 
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 72, 147–152. 
 
Oliva, J.R., Morgan, R., & Compton, M.T. (2010). A practical overview of de-escalation skills in 
law enforcement: Helping individuals in crisis while reducing police liability and injury. Journal 
of Police Crisis Negotiations, 10, 15-19.  
 
Oudejans, R.R.D. (2008). Reality-based practice under pressure improves handgun shooting 
performance of police officers. Ergonomics, 51, 261-273. 
 
Ouellet, M., Hashimi, S., Gravel, J., & Papachristos, A.V. (2019). Network exposure and 
excessive use of force: Investigating the social transmission of police misconduct. Criminology 
& Public Policy, 18, 675-704.  
 
Paoline, E.A., III, & Terrill, W. (2007). Police education, experience, and the use of force. 
Criminal Justice and Behavior, 34, 179-196. 
 
Paoline, E.A., III, & Terrill, W. (2014). Police culture: Adapting to the strains of the job. 
Durham, NC: Carolina Academic Press. 
 
Patrick, C.J., Curtin, J.J., & Tellegen, A. (2002). Development and validation of a brief form of 
the Multidimensional Personality Questionnaire. Psychological Assessment, 14, 150-163. 
 
Patrick C.J., & Kramer M.D. (2017). Multidimensional Personality Questionnaire (MPQ). In V. 
Zeigler-Hill & K.T. Shackelford (Eds.), Encyclopedia of Personality and Individual Differences 
New York: Springer. doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-28099-8_48-1 
 
Paxton, J.M., Ungar, L., & Greene, J.D. (2012). Reflection and reasoning in moral judgment. 
Cognitive Science, 36, 163-177. 
 
Perez, N.M., Nguyen, T., & Vogel, B. (2020). Community police academies: Assessing the 
effect of education on public perceptions of police. The Police Journal: Theory, Practices and 
Principles, 94, 206-221.  
 
Perez, N.M., Nguyen, T., & Vogel, B. (2022). The lasting effect of community police academies: 
Results of a 6-month follow-up. The Police Journal: Theory, Practices and Principles, 95, 459-
472. 
 
Petrocelli, J.V., & Dowd, K. (2009). Ease of counterfactual thought generation moderates the 
relationship between need for cognition and punitive responses to crime. Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 35, 1179–1192. 


 
107 
 
 
Petty, R.E., & Cacioppo, J.T. (1986). Communication and Persuasion: Central and Peripheral 
Routes to Attitude Change. New York, NY: Springer. 
 
Peyton, K., Sierra-Arevalo, M. & Rand, D.G. (2019). A field experiment on community policing 
and police legitimacy. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 116 (40) 19894-19898 
 
Pew Research Center (2017a). Behind the Badge. 6. Police Views, Public Views. Retrieved from 
http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2017/01/11/police-views-public-views/  
 
Pew Research Center (2017b). Key Findings on How Police View their Jobs Amid Protests and 
Calls for Reform. Retrieved from http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2017/01/11/police-key-
findings/  
 
Pierce, M. (September 14, 2020). President Trump and Joe Biden Offer Opposing Visions of 
Policing. Los Angeles Times. Retrieved from https://www.latimes.com/politics/story/2020-09-
14/trump-biden-police-policy 
 
Politico (2022). National Tracking Poll #2205161, May 25-25, 2022, Crosstabulation Results. 
https://www.politico.com/f/?id=00000180-fe73-de59-a7ec-ff77a2360000 
 
Pope, J., & Meyer, R. (1999). An attributional analysis of juror’s judgments in a criminal case: A 
preliminary investigation. Social Behavior and Personality, 27, 563-574. 
  
Potts, J., Hawken, A., Hillhouse, M. & Farabee, D. (2022). Virtual reality for law enforcement 
training: A demonstration and implication for dispatch priming. Police Practice and Research, 
23, 623-632. 
 
Rassin, E. (2015). Rational-thinking promotes suspect-friendly legal decision making. Applied 
Cognitive Psychology, 30, 460-464. 
 
Reaves, B.A. (2015). Local Police Departments, 2013: Personnel, Policies, and Practices (No. 
NCJ 248677). Washington, DC: US Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, Bureau 
of Justice Assistance. 
 
Richards, K.J. (2007). De-escalation techniques. In M.T. Compton & R.J. Kotwicki (Eds.) 
Responding to Individuals with Mental Illnesses (pp. 160-174). Sudbury, MA: Jones and Bartlett 
Publishers, Inc.  
 
Rosenbaum, D.P., Schuck, A.M., Costello, S.K., Hawkins, D.F., & Ring, M.K. (2005). Attitudes 
toward the police: The effects of direct and vicarious experiences. Psychology Quarterly, 8, 343-
365. 
 
Rubinstein, J. (1973). City police. New York, NY: Farrar, Strauss, and Girox. 


 
108 
 
Sadowski, C.J. (1993). An examination of the short need for cognition scale. The Journal of 
Psychology, 127(4), 451-454. 
 
Sadowski, C.J., & Gulgoz, S. (1992). Internal consistency and test-retest reliability of the Need 
for Cognition Scale. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 74, 610-610. 
             
Sanders, B. (2008) Using personality traits to predict police officer performance. Policing: An 
International Journal of Police Strategies & Management, 31, 129-147. 
 
Sargent, M. (2004). Less thought, more punishment: Need for cognition predicts support for 
punitive responses to crime. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 30, 1485–1493. 
 
Saus, E.R., Johnsen, B.H., Eid, J., Riisem, P.K., Andersen, R., & Thayer, J.F. (2006). The effect 
of brief situational awareness training in a police shooting simulator: An experimental study. 
Military Psychology, 18(Suppl.), S3-S21. 
 
Scrivner, E. (1994). Controlling police use of excessive force: The role of the police 
psychologist. National Institute of Justice, Research in Brief (October). Washington DC: U.S. 
Department of Justice, National Institute of Justice 
 
Sellbom, M., Fischler, G.L., & Ben-Porath, Y.S. (2007). Identifying MMPI-2 predictors of 
police integrity and misconduct. Criminal Justice and Behavior, 34, 985-1004. 
 
Shiffrin, R.M., & Schneider, W. (1977). Controlled and automatic human information processing 
II. Perceptual learning, automatic attending, and a general theory. Psychological Review, 84, 
127-190. 
 
Silver, J.R., Roche, S.P., Bilach, T.J & Bontrager, S. (2018). Traditional police culture, use of 
force, and procedural justice. Investigating individual, organizational, and contextual factors. 
Justice Quarterly, 34(7): 1272-1309 
 
Smith, D.A., & Visher, C. (1981). Street-level justice: Situational determinants of police 
decisions. Social Problems, 31, 167-77. 
 
Smith, M.R., Kaminski, R.J., Alpert, G.P., Fridell, L.A., MacDonald, J., & Kubu, B. (2010). A 
Multi-method Evaluation of Police Use of Force Outcomes: Final Report to the National 
Institute of Justice. Washington, DC: National Institute of Justice (Award # 2004-IJ-CX-0056). 
 
Smith, M.R., Kaminski, R.J., Rojek, J., Alpert, G.P., & Mathis, J. (2007). The impact of 
conducted energy devices and other types of force and resistance on officer and suspect injuries. 
Policing: An International Journal of Police Strategies & Management, 30, 423-448. 
 
 
 
 


 
109 
 
Sommers, S.R., & Kassin, S.M. (2001). On the many impacts of inadmissible testimony: 
Selective compliance, need for cognition, and the overcorrection bias. Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 27, 1368–1377. 
 
Sousa, W., Ready, J., & Ault, M. (2010). The impact of TASERs on police use-of-force 
decisions: Findings from a randomized field-training experiment. Journal of Experimental 
Criminology, 6, 35-55. 
 
Stanovich, K.E., & West, R.F. (2000). Individual differences in reasoning: Implications for the 
Rationality Debate? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 645-726. 
 
Starcke, K., & Brand, M. (2012). Decision making under stress: A selective review. 
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 36, 1228-1248. 
 
Surette, R. (2007). Media, Crime, and Criminal Justice: Images, Realities, and Policies. 
Belmont, CA: Thomas Wadsworth. 
 
Tellegen, A. (1985). Structures of mood and personality and their relevance to assessing anxiety, 
with an emphasis on self-report. In A. H. Tuma & J. D. Maser (Eds.), Anxiety and the Anxiety 
Disorders (pp. 681–706). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 
Tellegen, A., & Waller, N.G. (2008). Exploring personality through test construction: 
Development of the Multidimensional Personality Questionnaire. In G. J. Boyle, G. Matthews, & 
D. H. Saklofske (Eds.), The SAGE Handbook of Personality Theory and Assessment: Volume 2 - 
Personality Measurement and Testing: Personality Measurement and Assessment (pp. 261-292). 
London, UK: SAGE Publications. 
 
Terrill, W., Ingram, J.R., Somers, L.J. and Paoline III, E.A. (2018), "Examining police use of 
force and citizen complaints", Policing: An International Journal, Vol. 41 No. 4, pp. 496-509. 
doi.org/10.1108/PIJPSM-01-2018-0024 
 
Terrill, W., & Mastrofski, S.D. (2002). Situational and officer-based determinants of police 
coercion. Justice Quarterly, 19, 215-248. 
 
Terrill, W., & Reisig, M.D. (2003). Neighborhood context and police use of force. Journal of 
Research in Crime and Delinquency, 40, 291-321 
 
The Washington Post (n.d.) Fatal Force. Retrieved from  
https://www.washingtonpost.com/graphics/investigations/police-shootings-database/ 
 
Toplak, M.E., West, R.F., & Stanovich, K.E. (2011). The cognitive reflection test as a predictor 
of performance on heuristics-and-biases tasks. Memory & Cognition, 39, 1275-1289. 
 
 
 


 
110 
 
Toplak, M., West, R.F., & Stanovich, K.E. (2014). Assessing rational thinking using an 
expansion of the cognitive reflection test. Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology, 68, 
256-168. 
 
Twersky-Glasner, A. (2005). Police personality: What is it and why are they like that? Journal of 
Police and Criminal Psychology, 20, 56-67. 
 
United States Commission on Civil Rights (2018). Police use of force: An examination of 
modern policing practices. Washington DC. Retrieved from  
https://www.usccr.gov/files/pubs/2018/11-15-Police-Force.pdf  
 
Verhaeghen, P., & Aikman, S.N. (2022). Police as threat: The influence of race and the summer 
of Black Lives Matter on implicit and explicit attitudes toward the police. Journal of Community 
Psychology, 50, 3354-3370.  
 
Vickers, J. N., & Lewinski, W. (2012). Performing under pressure: gaze control, decision 
making and shooting performance of elite and rookie police officers. Human Movement Science, 
31, 101-117. 
 
Walker, S. (2003). Early intervention systems for law enforcement agencies: A planning and 
management guide. NCJ Number 201245: Washington DC: Office of Community Oriented 
Policing Services 
 
Weisburd, D., Greenspan, R., Hamilton, E.F., Bryant, K.A., & Williams, H. (2001). The Abuse of 
Police Authority: A National Study of Police Officers’ Attitudes. Washington, DC: Police 
Foundation. 
 
Weiss, W.U., Davis, R., Rostow, C., & Kinsman, S. (2003). The MMPI-2 L scale as a tool in 
police selection. Journal of Police and Criminal Psychology, 18, 57-60. 
 
Weitzer, R., & Tuch, S.A. (2005). Determinants of public satisfaction with the police. Police 
Quarterly, 8, 279-297. 
 
Wright, J.E., II., & Houston, B. (2021). Accountability at its finest: Law enforcement agencies 
and body-worn cameras. Public Performance & Management Review, 44, 735-757,  
 
 
 


 
111 
 
APPENDIX A:  
RECRUITMENT STRATEGIES 
Law Enforcement Agency Recruitment Strategies 
For purposes of anonymity, all law enforcement agencies invited to participate in the 
current study are referred to here as Agency A, Agency B, Agency C, etc. 
 
Agency A. Agency A is a municipal police department within the originally targeted 
county. At the start of the study, the agency had approximately 30 sworn officers serving a town 
of approximately 14,000 residents. Agency A owned the VirTra® firearms training simulator 
used in this study. Throughout the study, the simulator was operated by one of Agency A’s 
firearms training instructors.  
In the Fall of 2018, members of the research team met with officers during roll call 
meetings to announce the study and answer questions the officers may have had. Officers were 
informed that the study involved the completion of two online surveys and a series of firearms 
training exercises inside the simulator. Officers were also informed that they would receive a $20 
Amazon gift card for completing the online surveys. Given that officers would be completing the 
simulator exercises while on duty, and mindful of departmental restrictions prohibiting officers 
receiving external compensation while on duty, the $20 incentive was paired with only the online 
surveys, which officers could complete during off duty hours. After the roll call meetings, 
officers were emailed the consent form information and a link to the first online survey. The 
second survey was designed to launch automatically at the completion of the first.  
Agency A routinely uses the simulator as part of its officers’ annually required firearms 
training. The Chief of Police at Agency A agreed to allow the study’s VirTra® exercises to be 


 
112 
 
used as part of the department’s 2018 annual training. Members of the research team were 
present during these training sessions to video record those officers who provided their consent 
to participate in the study. Note that some officers provided consent by previously completing 
the online survey(s), while others who had not yet completed the survey but wanted to participate 
in the study signed consent forms prior to completing their training exercises. 
In the Summer of 2019, Agency A upgraded its training simulator from a single screen 
model (the VirTra-100®) to a five-screen model (VirTra-300®). All use of force data collected 
on the single screen model was now deemed unusable for the current report, and a new set of 
simulations for use with the upgraded simulator were selected for use. In the Fall of 2019, 
Agency A trained its officers using the new simulations, and members of the research team were 
present to re-consent officers in order to video record their training sessions for use in this study. 
Because annual firearms training was mandatory for all sworn officers—and because most 
officers consented to participate in the study—the research team was able to recruit most officers 
from Agency A. However, some officers declined to participate in the study, and others were 
excluded from participating because they had previously seen the simulations at a different 
training site. Other officers who originally completed the VirTra-100® simulations were 
unavailable to complete the VirTra-300® simulations because they retired/left the department 
before the new simulations were adopted. Any officers who were recently hired by Agency A 
were invited by the research team to participate in the study.  
Agency B. Agency B is a municipal police department within the originally targeted 
county. At the start of the study, the agency had approximately 25 sworn officers serving a town 
of approximately 15,000 residents. Recruitment at Agency B mirrored that of Agency A. In the 


 
113 
 
Spring of 2019, the research team met with officers during roll call meetings. Officers were 
emailed the consent form information and link to the first online survey. Agency B was invited 
to use the VirTra simulator at Agency A for their officers’ annual firearms training, and the 
Chief of Police at Agency B agreed to allow the study’s VirTra® simulations to be used during 
this training. Research team members video recorded the training sessions of those officers who 
agreed to participate in the study. After the simulator was upgraded to the five-screen model later 
that same year, Agency B’s 2019 use of force data were deemed unusable. However, in the early 
portion of 2020, Agency B returned to complete the newly selected VirTra-300® exercises as 
part of its annual training. The research team was able to recruit most officers from Agency B 
into the study, although some declined to take part or retired/left the department before the 2020 
data collection period. Any officers who were recently hired by Agency B were invited by the 
research team to participate in the study.  
Agency C. Agency C is a municipal police department within the originally targeted 
county. At the start of the study, the agency had approximately 90 sworn officers serving a town 
of approximately 35,000 residents. Recruitment in Agency C unfolded differently. In the Spring 
of 2019, members of the research team met with officers during roll call meetings to announce 
the study and answer questions officers may have had. Officers were then emailed consent form 
information and a link to the first online survey. While Agency C was also invited to use the 
firearms simulator for its annual training, the department declined. As a result, officers who 
wanted to participate in the study would now need to obtain permission from a supervisor in 
order to complete the VirTra® exercises while on duty, or they would need to schedule an 
appointment during off-duty hours to complete the exercises.  


 
114 
 
Several officers from Agency C completed the online surveys immediate after the 
research team’s initial recruitment visit; however, before appointments could be scheduled to 
complete these officers’ simulator exercises (and before recruitment of additional officers could 
take place), the research team had to suspend data collection for several months due to concerns 
raised by NIJ advisors about the training exercises, and due to the upgrading of the VirTra-100® 
to the VirTra-300®. After the simulator upgrade was complete and new training exercises were 
selected for use in the study (and after the research team re-enrolled officers from Agency A and 
B), the team turned its attention again to Agency C. However, the COVID-19 pandemic led to 
another suspension in recruitment at Agency C, this time lasting approximately one year. During 
this time, public criticism of police use of force erupted in response to the killing of George 
Floyd by a Minneapolis police officer.  
In the Summer of 2021, the research team attempted to re-connect and re-engage with the 
officers in Agency C, but only a few officers were recruited during this second wave and those 
who had previously been recruited were generally no longer interested in completing the 
firearms simulation exercises. Anecdotal evidence suggests the public’s scrutiny of the police 
following the death of George Floyd dissuaded some officers from participating. Over the course 
of the next year, the research team attempted to re-ignite interest in the project at Agency C, and 
even offered additional incentives for taking part in the project. Ultimately, few officers from 
Agency C completed enough of the data collection exercises to be included in the current study. 
Recognizing that recruitment at Agency C was not going to be as fruitful as originally expected, 
the research team sought to enroll law enforcement officers in other agencies. 
 
Agency D. Agency D is a municipal police department outside the originally targeted 


 
115 
 
county, but still within the same general region of the state. At the start of the study, the agency 
had approximately 18 sworn officers serving a town of approximately 5,000 residents. Agency 
D’s geographic distance from Agency A (where the simulator is located) did not make it a viable 
target for mass recruitment. However, in the Spring of 2021, the commander of a squad of five 
officers from Agency D contacted the firearms instructor at Agency A and asked if the squad 
could complete training exercises in the simulator. Given that these five officers would already 
be commuting to Agency A for training, the research team approached this squad as they arrived 
and invited them to participate in the study. Most agreed to take part.  
Agency E. Agency E is a municipal police department outside the originally targeted 
county, but still within the same general region of the state. At the start of the study, the agency 
had approximately 15 sworn officers serving a town of approximately 3,000 residents. In the 
Spring of 2021, the commanders of 13 officers from that agency contacted the firearms instructor 
at Agency A and asked if the officers could complete training exercises in the simulator. Given 
that these 13 officers would already be commuting to Agency A for training, the research team 
approached this squad upon their arrival and invited them to participate in the study. Most agreed 
to take part. 
Agency F. Agency F is the sheriff’s office serving the originally targeted county. At the 
start of the study, the office had approximately 240 sworn deputies serving a county of 
approximately 227,000 residents. In the Fall of 2021, members of the research team contacted 
the Deputy Sheriff at Agency F in order to invite the department to be a partner in the study. The 
Deputy Sheriff was supportive of our work, but for logistical reasons the research team was not 
granted permission to meet with deputies face-to-face to discuss the study or address questions. 


 
116 
 
Instead, study information had to be shared by way of an online recruitment video that the 
research team created. The team emailed a video link and a supplemental flyer about the study to 
each deputy. The team followed up with a separate email containing the informed consent form 
information and a link to the first online survey. Because the agency did not wish to have its 
deputies complete the simulator exercises as part of its annual training, any deputy interested in 
taking part in the study had to schedule an appointment to come to Agency A during off-duty 
hours. Few deputies expressed interest in participating in the project.  
Agency G. Agency G is a sheriff’s office within a neighboring state. At the start of the 
study, the department had approximately 130 sworn agents serving a county of approximately 
90,000 residents. In the Spring of 2022, members of the research team contacted the leadership 
staff at the agency in order to invite the department to be a partner in the study. The leadership at 
Agency G was supportive of our work, but for logistical reasons would not grant the research 
team permission to conduct face-to-face recruitment meetings with the deputies. Study 
information would again be shared by way of an online recruitment video and supplemental 
flyer. However, rather than providing the research team with a roster of all deputies’ email 
addresses so that the recruitment video and flyer could be distributed by the team, the leadership 
at Agency G wanted a staff member at the agency to be the one to distribute the information to 
deputies. Without a roster of email addresses, the research team could not send out informed 
consent form information or the first online survey link proactively to each deputy. Instead, the 
team would have to wait for deputies to contact them and request this information. Any deputies 
interested in participating would also have to schedule appointments in the firearms simulator 
during off-duty hours. Arguably, the limited access to deputies for purposes of recruitment, 


 
117 
 
coupled with the off-duty restriction for completing the training exercises, impacted the 
participation rate at Agency G. Only a few deputies participated in the project.  
Agency H. Agency H is a municipal police department outside the originally targeted 
county, but still within the same region of the state. At the start of the study, the agency had 
approximately 55 sworn officers serving a town of approximately 31,000 residents. In the Winter 
of 2021, the research team reached out to the Chief of Police in order to invite the department to 
be a partner in the study. The Chief was supportive of the research and was willing to have all of 
his officers receive training inside the simulator while on duty (just as Agency A and B had 
done). However, before granting full permission, the Chief wanted his department’s attorney to 
assess any liability to which the department might be exposed by participating.  
The attorney contacted the research team and raised questions about whether an officer’s 
survey responses or training video could be obtained through discovery in a civil rights case. 
With the assistance of a NIJ Human Subjects Protection Officer, the research team was able to 
satisfy the attorney’s concerns and he ultimately approved of the department’s involvement. 
However, by the time this approval was received, three months had passed since the original 
meeting with the Chief. A new COVID outbreak was now present within Agency H, and the 
Chief found himself short-staffed. He could no longer commit to sending large groups of on-duty 
officers to Agency A for simulator training. Instead, any officer who wanted to participate in the 
study would have to schedule a simulator appointment while off-duty.  
The Chief was also no longer interested in having the research team come speak to 
officers face-to-face for recruitment purposes, and so the research team had to again rely on an 
online recruitment video, which was supplemented with an electronic recruitment flyer. 


 
118 
 
Furthermore, the research team was not given a roster of the individual email addresses of the 
officers. The recruitment video and flyer would instead be distributed by a member of the 
department’s leadership team, and any officer interested in taking part would need to reach out to 
the research team for the consent form and link to the online survey. Ultimately, no officers from 
this department ever expressed interest in participating, and as such, Agency H is not mentioned 
as a participating department throughout the remainder of this report. 
Civilian Participants and Recruitment Strategies   
 
Adult civilians with no prior law enforcement or military training were recruited to 
participate in the study. Mindful of the need to travel to Agency A to complete the simulator 
exercises, the study sought to recruit civilians who resided in the same county as Agency A. In 
the hopes of recruiting a diverse set of civilians, a variety of recruitment strategies were adopted.  
 
Citizen Police Academy Participants. Agency A offers a multi-week “Citizen Police 
Academy” (CPA) to area residents. The program is designed to give citizens an opportunity to 
learn about local police operations, crime safety measures, self-defense strategies, and police 
training techniques. CPA participants also complete a series of training exercises inside the 
VirTra®. Agency A agreed to use the training exercises selected for this study in its CPA 
classes. Given that CPA participants would already be coming to Agency A to complete these 
exercises, the research team sought to recruit civilian participants from this pool of individuals.  
 
Police Department Social Media Post. The research team developed a social media post 
describing the current study and containing the research team’s contact information. Given that 
Agency A, B and C are all within the targeted catchment area for civilian recruitment, the 
research team asked each of the three departments to publish the post on their social media 


 
119 
 
platforms. Agency A and B agreed to do so. 
 
Neighborhood and Business Flyers. A paper flyer modeled after the social media post 
described above was printed and left in mailboxes of residents in several apartment complexes 
and single-family home neighborhoods throughout the county. Approximately 1,000 flyers were 
distributed in this manner. 
 
Paper copies of the flyer were also distributed to various businesses in the community for 
their employees and/or patrons. They were posted at local fitness centers, car washes, grocery 
stores, fire stations, video game stores, public laundromats, and at barber shops that cater to 
Black patrons. Approximately 200 flyers were distributed in this manner. 
Electronic copies of the flyer were emailed to public school teachers in the targeted 
county, to area churches with predominantly Black or multicultural denominations, and to more 
than 50 organizations in the county’s Chamber of Business membership directory.  
 
Email Announcement. With the assistance of the Chief of Police in Agency A, an email 
was sent to all town employees (in Agency A’s town) describing the study and including the 
research team’s contact information.  
 


 
120 
 
APPENDIX B: 
SIMULATOR EXPERIENCE FEEDBACK QUESTIONNAIRE 
1. Prior to today, have you ever completed any firearms training scenarios in a VirTra or 
VirTra-like video training simulator? (Check Box) 
[ ] No 
[ ] Yes 
 
2. On a scale of 0 to 10, how comfortable were you interacting with the actors on the video 
screen?  (Circle Number) 
  
0      
 1         2      
3      
4      
5      
6      
7      
8      
9      
10 
Not                                                                                              
Extremely 
At All                                                                                             
Comfortable 
Comfortable 
 
3. On a scale of 0 to 10, how realistic did those video scenarios feel/seem to you? (Circle 
Number) 
 0       1         2      
3      
4      
5      
6      
7      
8      
9      
10 
Not                                                                                              
Extremely 
At All                                                                                             
Realistic 
Realistic 
 
4. Do you play “first person shooter” video games such as Call of Duty, Rainbow Six Siege, 
or Doom? (Check Box) 
[ ] No 
[ ] Yes 
 
 
Yes – If ‘Yes,’ then in a typical week, how many hours per week do you spend 
             
playing first person shooter video games? 
   
_______________ hours/week 
 
 
 


 
121 
 
APPENDIX C: 
VIDEO CODING PROCESS & INTER-RATER RELIABILITY CHECKS 
Videos for each participant were coded independently by three separate coders and 
multiple rounds of reliability checks were estimated to ensure proper training of coders and 
agreement between their coding results. The first round of coding occurred on a testing set of 10 
participants. The primary coder (Co-PI DeWitt), then evaluated coding results across the three 
coders and reviewed notes made by each coder. The primary coder then revised the coding guide 
accordingly and all coders were tasked with coding new participant videos as they were recorded 
and processed. The primary coder periodically re-estimated comparisons across coders as time 
elapsed, with a final round of coding review completed in July 2022. 
         To evaluate inter-rater reliability, we used intraclass correlation coefficients (ICCs). ICCs 
were generated using the “icc” function in Stata version 17.0 specifying fixed effects for each 
coder and random effects for each participant. ICC values represent the correlation between 
individual coder values and the average values for each participant across coders. Outcomes for 
each calculation were calculated for participant-level indicators summed across the three 
scenarios coded for each participant, including 1) the total number of times pepper spray was 
drawn or used, 2) the total number of times a taser was drawn or used, 3) the total number of 
times a firearm was drawn or used (including the number of shots fired), 4) the total number of 
verbal de-escalation statements made and, 5) the variety of different verbal de-escalation 
techniques used. Table C1 provides summary statistics for each of these variables as well as ICC 
values and their respective 95% confidence intervals. 


 
122 
 
Table C1: Summary Statistics for Video Coding by Coder and with ICCs 
 
All Coders 
 
Coder 1 
 
Coder 2 
 
Coder 3 
 
ICC 
 
Mean 
SD 
 
Mean 
SD 
 
Mean 
SD 
 
Mean 
SD 
 
Value 
95% CI 
Pepper Spray 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Drawn 
0.34 
0.54 
 
0.34 
0.55 
 
0.34 
0.55 
 
0.32 
0.52 
 
0.985 
(0.981, 0.989) 
  Used 
0.17 
0.47 
 
0.19 
0.49 
 
0.18 
0.50 
 
0.16 
0.41 
 
0.958 
(0.946, 0.967) 
Taser 
  
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
  Drawn 
1.05 
0.93 
 
1.05 
0.93 
 
1.04 
0.94 
 
1.05 
0.93 
 
0.997 
(0.996, 0.998) 
  Used 
0.48 
0.80 
 
0.50 
0.82 
 
0.48 
0.82 
 
0.46 
0.78 
 
0.989 
(0.985, 0.991) 
Firearm 
  
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
  Drawn 
1.97 
0.75 
 
1.98 
0.74 
 
1.96 
0.74 
 
1.98 
0.77 
 
0.982 
(0.977, 0.986) 
  Used 
0.84 
0.71 
 
0.84 
0.71 
 
0.81 
0.69 
 
0.86 
0.84 
 
0.983 
(0.978, 0.987) 
  N Shots Fired 
1.89 
2.23 
 
1.91 
2.29 
 
1.84 
2.14 
 
1.92 
2.26 
 
0.982 
(0.977, 0.986) 
Verbal De-escalation 
  
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
  Number of Statements 
4.14 
4.35 
 
4.10 
4.39 
 
4.16 
4.34 
 
4.15 
4.36 
 
0.971 
(0.963, 0.978) 
  Variety Score 
1.36 
1.15 
 
1.36 
1.19 
 
1.34 
1.11 
 
1.38 
1.16 
 
0.956 
(0.944, 0.966) 


 
123 
 
         The means and standard deviations are all very similar across coders, generally differing 
in just the first or second decimal place. This agreement is reflected in the high values for the 
ICCs. Similar to other varieties of interrater reliability statistics (e.g., Cronbach’s alpha), the ICC 
ranges from 0 to 1, with values closer to 1 indicating more agreement. All ICC values for the 
characteristics displayed in Table A1 are within .05 points of perfect agreement. The associated 
confidence intervals also suggest very high levels of agreement, the minimum value being 0.944 
for the verbal de-escalation variety score. Without exception, ICC values and their confidence 
intervals indicate very high levels of agreement, suggesting a more than satisfactory level of 
interrater reliability.  
 
 
 


 
124 
 
APPENDIX D: 
NEED FOR COGNITION - SHORT FORM 
Instructions: For each of the statements below, please indicate to what extent the statement is 
characteristic of you, using the scale below. 
  
1 = extremely uncharacteristic 
2 = somewhat uncharacteristic 
3 = uncertain 
4 = somewhat characteristic 
5 = extremely characteristic 
 
  
  
Circle Your Answer 
1. 
I would prefer complex to simple problems. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
2. 
I like to have the responsibility of handling a 
situation that requires a lot of thinking. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
3.R 
Thinking is not my idea of fun. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
4. R 
I would rather do something that requires little 
thought than something that is sure to challenge 
my thinking abilities. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
5. R 
I try to anticipate and avoid situations where there 
is a likely chance I will have to think in depth 
about something. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6. 
I find satisfaction in deliberating hard and for long 
hours. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
7. R 
I only think as hard as I have to. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
8. R 
I prefer to think about small, daily projects to 
long-term ones. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
9. R 
I like tasks that require little thought once I've 
learned them. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 


 
125 
 
10. 
The idea of relying on thought to make my way to 
the top appeals to me. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
11. 
I really enjoy a task that involves coming up with 
new solutions to problems. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
12. R 
Learning new ways to think doesn't excite me 
very much. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
13. 
I prefer my life to be filled with puzzles that I 
must solve. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
14. 
The notion of thinking abstractly is appealing to 
me. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
15. 
I would prefer a task that is intellectual, difficult, 
and important to one that is somewhat important 
but does not require much thought. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
16. R 
I feel relief rather than satisfaction after 
completing a task that required a lot of mental 
effort. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
17. R 
It's enough for me that something gets the job 
done; I don't care how or why it works. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
18. 
I usually end up deliberating about issues even 
when they do not affect me personally. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
R=Reverse scored  
  
 
 
 


 
126 
 
APPENDIX E: 
COGNITIVE REFLECTION TEST   
Without using any outside help (no calculators, internet, asking others, etc.,), answer the 
questions below. Write your answers in the spaces provided. If you are not sure of the answer, 
then give us your best guess. 
   
1. A bat and a ball cost $1.10 in total. The bat costs $1.00 more than the ball. How much 
does the ball cost?  (Assume no sales tax.) 
  
 
 
Answer:  ______________ 
 
 
 
2. If it takes 5 machines 5 minutes to make 5 pencils, how long would it take 100 machines 
to make 100 pencils. 
 
   
 
Answer:  __________ minutes 
  
 
 
 
3. In a lake, there is a patch of lily pads. Every day, the patch doubles in size. If it takes 48 
days for the patch to cover the entire lake, how long would it take for the patch to cover 
half of the lake? 
 
 
 
 
Answer:  __________ days 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Answers: (1) 5-cents (2) 5 minutes (3) 47 days 
 
 


 
127 
 
APPENDIX F: 
DEMOGRAPHIC & PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCES QUESTIONS 
Instructions:  Please answer the questions below. Your answers will help us describe the two 
groups of people (officers and citizens) who participate in the study.  
  
1. How old are you?  __________ years old 
 
2. What is your biological sex?   
[ ] Male 
  
[ ] Female 
 
3. Which of the following best describes your race/ethnic background? 
[ ] White (Non-Hispanic) 
[ ]  Black or African American 
[ ]  Hispanic, Latino/Latina, or Spanish origin 
[ ]  American Indian or Alaska Native 
[ ]  Asian 
[ ]  Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander 
[ ]  Other  ______________________ 
 
4. What is the highest level of school you have completed or the highest degree you have 
received? 
 [ ] No high school experience 
 [ ] Some high school experience; No diploma 
 [ ] High school degree or high school degree equivalent (GED) 
 [ ] Some college; No degree 
 [ ] Associate’s degree (2 year college) 
 [ ] Bachelor’s degree (4 year college) 
 [ ] Graduate degree  
 
5. Which of the following categories best describes your employment status? 
 [ ] Employed, working 40 or more hours per week 
 [ ] Employed, working less than 40 hours per week 
 [ ] Not employed but currently looking for work 
 [ ] Not employed and NOT currently looking for work 
 [ ] Retired 
 [ ] Disabled; Not able to work 
 
6. Have you ever served in a branch of the military? 
[ ] No 
  
[ ] Yes;  If yes, how many years of military experience do you have? _____ years 
 
 
 


 
128 
 
Questions 7 - 12 were administered to civilian participants only. 
 
7. During your lifetime, how many times—if any—have you received police assistance for 
a problem/issue that you were having?  
 [ ] 0 times 
 [ ] 1 time 
 [ ] 2-4 times 
 [ ] 5-7 times 
 [ ] 8-9 times 
 [ ] 10 or more times 
 
8.  During your lifetime, how many times—if any—have you received superior police 
assistance for a problem/issue that you were having? 
 [ ] 0 times 
 [ ] 1 time 
 [ ] 2-4 times 
 [ ] 5-7 times 
 [ ] 8-9 times 
 [ ] 10 or more times 
 
9. During your lifetime, how many times—if any—have you been stopped/questioned by 
the police because they believed you had committed a violation or crime? 
 [ ] 0 times 
 [ ] 1 time 
 [ ] 2-4 times 
 [ ] 5-7 times 
 [ ] 8-9 times 
 [ ] 10 or more times 
 
10. During your lifetime, how many times—if any—have you been arrested? 
 [ ] 0 times 
 [ ] 1 time 
 [ ] 2-4 times 
 [ ] 5-7 times 
 [ ] 8-9 times 
 [ ] 10 or more times 
 
 


 
129 
 
11. During your lifetime, how many times—if any—have you personally experienced police 
misconduct (i.e., behaviors by the police that you believe are inappropriate or 
unjustified)? 
 [ ] 0 times 
 [ ] 1 time 
 [ ] 2-4 times 
 [ ] 5-7 times 
 [ ] 8-9 times 
 [ ] 10 or more times 
 
12. During your lifetime, how many times—if any—have you personally witnessed police 
misconduct committed against another person (i.e., behaviors by the police that you 
believe are inappropriate or unjustified)? 
 [ ] 0 times 
 [ ] 1 time 
 [ ] 2-4 times 
 [ ] 5-7 times 
 [ ] 8-9 times 
 [ ] 10 or more times 
 
Questions 13 - 19 were administered to police officer participants only. 
 
13. For how many years have you worked as a police officer at your CURRENT department? 
_____  years 
 
14. For how many years have you worked as a police officer in total ACROSS ALL 
departments where you have worked? 
_____  years 
 
15. Over the course of your career as a law enforcement officer (across all departments), how 
many times -if any- has someone used lethal force against you in the line of duty?  By 
lethal force we mean any force that is likely to cause serious bodily harm or death. 
 [ ] 0 times 
 [ ] 1 time 
 [ ] 2-4 times 
 [ ] 5-7 times 
 [ ] 8-9 times 
 [ ] 10 or more times 
 
 
 


 
130 
 
16. Over the course of your career as a law enforcement officer (across all departments), how 
many times -if any- have you used lethal force against another person in the line of duty?  
By lethal force we mean any force that is likely to cause serious bodily harm or death. 
 [ ] 0 times 
 [ ] 1 time 
 [ ] 2-4 times 
 [ ] 5-7 times 
 [ ] 8-9 times 
 [ ] 10 or more times 
 
17. Over the course of your career as a law enforcement officer (across all departments), how 
many times -if any- has a citizen filed a formal complaint of misconduct against you? 
Please include all complaints filed, even if they were deemed unfounded or did not result 
in any official sanction. 
 [ ] 0 times 
 [ ] 1 time 
 [ ] 2-4 times 
 [ ] 5-7 times 
 [ ] 8-9 times 
 [ ] 10 or more times 
 
18. Over the course of your career as a law enforcement officer (across all departments), how 
many times -if any- have you been officially sanctioned because of misconduct? Official 
sanctions include: a formal written reprimand, a demotion, suspension, etc. 
 [ ] 0 times 
 [ ] 1 time 
 [ ] 2-4 times 
 [ ] 5-7 times 
 [ ] 8-9 times 
 [ ] 10 or more times 
 
19. Over the course of your career as a police officer (across all departments), how many 
times—if any—have you been officially recognized/honored because of superior service 
while on duty?  Official recognitions/honors include: a formal written letter of 
acknowledgement, verbal recognition at a ceremony, receiving a certificate/plaque, etc. 
 [ ] 0 times 
 [ ] 1 time 
 [ ] 2-4 times 
 [ ] 5-7 times 
 [ ] 8-9 times 
 [ ] 10 or more times 
 
  
 
 


 
131 
 
APPENDIX G: 
SOCIAL NETWORK MEASURES 
 
Instructions 
Research suggests that our friends’ attitudes and behaviors can shape the way we make 
decisions. In this survey we will ask you about the officers in your department with whom you 
share a personal friendship. You will be asked to identify these officers by name, and indicate 
how well you know them.  
  
Please provide a full first and last name for each officer in your department whom you would 
consider to be a friend (and not just a coworker). This survey will allow you to list up to 40 
friends, but you should use only the spaces you need and leave the others blank. If you need to 
list more than 40 friends from your department, then please contact us and we will provide you 
with a pencil and paper copy of the survey to complete.  
  
All of this information will be kept confidential and your responses will only be known to the 
research staff, not your fellow officers. Your name and all of the names provided by you will be 
replaced with random identification numbers after data collection has ended. 
  
Click on the button below (bottom right) when you are ready to begin. 
  
   
Personal Information & Tie Names 
Question 1: 
What is your full name? (This information is needed to help us identify all  
friendships by name. Without your name, we cannot specify which two people are 
friends.) 
  
Question 2:  
What is your work email address? 
  
Question 3:  
In the spaces below, please provide the real names of officers (full first and last  
name) whom you would consider to be a friend (not just a coworker). Use a 
different space for each officer. Use as many spaces as you need to identify those 
officers in your department who make up your friendship network. 
 
When you have entered your final name, scroll to the bottom and click on the arrow to continue 
to the next page. 
 
**40 blank spaces provided in Qualtrics** 
  
  
 
 


 
132 
 
Information about Relationships with Ties 
Note: ${lm://Field/1} automatically populates tie names provided in Question 3. These questions 
repeat for each tie name provided by the respondent 
  
Question 4: 
How long have you known ${lm://Field/1}? 
         1. Less than one year 
         2. 1 to 3 years 
         3. 3+ to 5 years 
         4. 5+ to 10 years 
         5. More than 10 years 
  
Question 5.  
On average, how often do you speak with ${lm://Field/1}? 
         1. EVERY DAY or nearly everyday 
         2. Four or five times PER WEEK 
         3. Two or three times PER WEEK 
         4. Once PER WEEK 
         5. Two or three times PER MONTH 
         6. Once PER MONTH 
         7. Very rarely (less often than once PER MONTH) 
  
Question 6.  
How important would you say the relationship with ${lm://Field/1} is to you? 
         1. Extremely important 
         2. Very important 
         3. Moderately important 
         4. Slightly important 
         5. Not important at all 
  
 Question 7.  ${lm://Field/1} is someone I can turn to for support during difficult times in my  
life. 
         1. Strongly agree 
         2. Agree 
         3. Neither agree nor disagree 
         4. Disagree 
         5. Strongly disagree 
  
Question 8.  
About how much time are you around ${lm://Field/1} on a typical day of work? 
         1. Fifteen minutes or less 
         2. ½ hour to 1 hour 
         3. 1+ to 2 hours 
         4. 2+ to 4 hours 
         5. 4+ to 6 hours 
         6. 6+ to 8 hours 
          
7. More than 8 hours 
  


 
133 
 
Question 9. 
For how long have you worked with ${lm://Field/1}? 
         1. Less than a month 
         2. 1 to 3 months 
         3. 3+ to 6 months 
         4. 6+ months to 1 year 
         5. 1+ to 3 years 
         6. 3+ to 5 years 
         7. 5+ to 10 years 
         8. More than 10 years 
  
Question 10.  Did you complete your initial training to be an officer with ${lm://Field/1}? 
         1. Yes 
         2. No 
  
Question 11:  Would you consider ${lm://Field/1} to be a mentor? 
         1. Yes 
         2. No 
  
Question 12:  Is ${lm://Field/1} a member of your close (spouse, child, parent/grandparent) or  
extended (cousin, aunt/uncle, niece/nephew, in-law) family? 
         1. Yes 
         2. No 
  
Question 12A (if Yes to Question 12):  How is ${lm://Field/1} related to you? 
         1. Partner/Spouse 
         2. Mother or Father 
3. Sister or Brother 
4. Child 
5. Grandfather or Grandmother 
6. Cousin 
7. Aunt or Uncle 
8. Nephew or Niece 
9. Other Family 
 
 
 


 
134 
 
Question 13: Consider the following hypothetical situation. Suppose you were suspended 
without pay for using excessive force during the course of an arrest. The details of the incident 
and your suspension are well known across the department. How would your relationship with 
${lm://Field/1} be strengthened or weakened because of this incident? 
         1. The relationship would become much stronger 
         2. The relationship would become somewhat stronger 
         3. The relationship would become slightly stronger 
         4. It would have no effect at all on the relationship 
         5. The relationship would become slightly weaker 
         6. The relationship would become somewhat weaker 
         7. The relationship would become much weaker, or no longer exist 
  
Relationships between Ties 
Instructions: We want to know how many of your friends are friends with each other. Below on 
the left-hand side you will see a listing of all the friends you identified. To the right is the name 
of one of those friends. If a person on the left-side is friends with the person on the right, then 
drag that name over from the left to the right.  
 
When you are done, click on the arrow at the bottom to continue to the next page. There you will 
be asked to repeat this process, but this time with a different friend’s name on the right.  
  
Question 14:  Which of the following officers that you have named would ${lm://Field/1}  
consider to be a friend? Please use the same standards for calling someone a 
"friend" that you did in naming these officers as your friend.  
**List of all ties named in Question 3 presented** 
  
 
 
 


 
135 
 
APPENDIX H: 
ATTITUDES TOWARD POLICE QUESTIONNAIRE 
 
The questions below ask about your opinions of the police, and what it is like to be a police 
officer. 
  
Part I. Answer the question in this section by circling a number from 0 to 10. 
  
1. How well do you understand the risks and challenges that police officers face? 
  
0      
 1         2      
3      
4      
5      
6      
7      
8      
9      
10 
Not                                                                                              
Extremely 
At All                                                                                             
Well 
 
 
 
2. How difficult do you think a police officer’s job is? 
  
0      
 1         2      
3      
4      
5      
6      
7      
8      
9      
10 
Not                                                                                              
Extremely 
At All                                                                                             
Difficult 
 
 
 
3. How stressful do you think a police officer’s job is? 
  
0      
 1         2      
3      
4      
5      
6      
7      
8      
9      
10 
Not                                                                                              
Extremely 
At All                                                                                             
Stressful 
 
 
 
4. How dangerous do you think a police officer’s job is? 
  
0      
 1         2      
3      
4      
5      
6      
7      
8      
9      
10 
Not                                                                                              
Extremely 
At All                                                                                             
Dangerous 
  
  
 
 
 


 
136 
 
Part II. Indicate how much you agree or disagree with the statements below as they apply 
to the typical police officer. Use the scale: 
  
                                             SD = Strongly Disagree 
                                               D = Disagree 
                                               N = Neutral/Neither Disagree or Agree 
                                               A = Agree 
                                             SA = Strongly Agree 
  
Remember to think about typical police officers as you complete the items.  
 
  
  
Circle Your Answer 
1. 
Police officers behave in a professional manner. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
2. 
Police officers are treated unfairly (too harshly) 
by the media. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
3. 
Police officers should be paid more for the work 
they do. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
4. 
Police officers are too quick to use force. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
5. 
When it comes to using force, police officers 
should spend more time thinking before they act. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6. 
Police officers are "trigger-happy" and too eager 
to shoot. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
 
Part III. The questions in this section describe different situations between a police officer 
and a suspect. Please indicate if you think it is acceptable (appropriate) for the police 
officer to use force in the situation.  
  
If you think force is acceptable, please indicate if you think non-deadly or deadly force is 
acceptable.  
  
Non-deadly force includes grabbing/pushing/tackling the suspect, using pepper spray, or 
using a taser.  
 
Deadly force involves shooting the suspect.  
 
 
 


 
137 
 
1. Do you think it is acceptable for the police officer to use force on a suspect who is 
refusing to follow orders to lay down on the ground? 
[ ] No, force is not acceptable 
[ ] Yes, but only non-deadly force is acceptable 
[ ] Yes, deadly force is acceptable 
 
2. Do you think it is acceptable for the police officer to use force on a suspect who suddenly 
begins to charge toward the officer? 
[ ] No, force is not acceptable 
[ ] Yes, but only non-deadly force is acceptable 
[ ] Yes, deadly force is acceptable 
 
3. Do you think it is acceptable for the police officer to use force on a suspect who tries to 
hit the officer with his fists? 
[ ] No, force is not acceptable 
[ ] Yes, but only non-deadly force is acceptable 
[ ] Yes, deadly force is acceptable 
 
4. Do you think it is acceptable for the police officer to use force on a suspect who is 
refusing to take his hands out of his pocket? 
[ ] No, force is not acceptable 
[ ] Yes, but only non-deadly force is acceptable 
[ ] Yes, deadly force is acceptable 
 
5. Do you think it is acceptable for the police officer to use force on a suspect who quickly 
reaches in his pocket and pulls out an unknown object? 
[ ] No, force is not acceptable 
[ ] Yes, but only non-deadly force is acceptable 
[ ] Yes, deadly force is acceptable 
 
6. Do you think it is acceptable for the police officer to use force on a suspect who is 
holding a knife? 
[ ] No, force is not acceptable 
[ ] Yes, but only non-deadly force is acceptable 
[ ] Yes, deadly force is acceptable 
 
7. Do you think it is acceptable for the police officer to use force on a suspect who is 
holding a gun toward the ground? 
[ ] No, force is not acceptable 
[ ] Yes, but only non-deadly force is acceptable 
[ ] Yes, deadly force is acceptable 
 
 


 
138 
 
8. Do you think it is acceptable for the police officer to use force on a suspect who is 
holding a gun toward the officer? 
[ ] No, force is not acceptable 
[ ] Yes, but only non-deadly force is acceptable 
[ ] Yes, deadly force is acceptable 
 
 
Part IV. Finally, please answer the questions below about the police in your community.  
  
1. What is your general impression/opinion of the police in your community? 
 
-5       -4         -3      -2      -1      0      
1      
2      
3      
4      
5 
Extremely                                       Neutral                                      
Extremely 
Unfavorable                                                                                  
         Favorable 
 
 
  
2. Overall, how satisfied are you with the police in your community? 
 
 -5       -4         -3      -2      -1      0      
1      
2      
3      
4      
5 
Extremely                                       Neutral                                      
Extremely 
Unfavorable                                                                                  
         Favorable 
 
  
 
 


 
139 
 
APPENDIX I: 
UNABRIDGED TABLES OF REGRESSION RESULTS 
Table 5a. Logistic Regression Predicting Use of Any Force (N=495 participant scenarios)  - 
Unbridged Findings 
 
Table 6a. Logistic Regression Predicting Use of Force (Any Force) - Scenario Specific Findings, 
Unabridged 
 
Table 7a. OLS Regression Predicting Time Until Force is Used (N=228) - Unabridged Findings 
 
Table 8a. Multinomial Logistic Regression Predicting Type of Force Used, Contrast 1: No Tactic 
Used Relative to Verbal De-escalation (N=495) - Unabridged Findings 
 
Table 9a. Multinomial Logistic Regression Predicting Type of Force Used, Contrast 2: Non-
Lethal Force Relative to Verbal De-escalation (N=495) - Unabridged Findings 
 
Table 10a. Multinomial Logistic Regression Predicting Type of Force Used, Contrast 3: Lethal 
Force Relative to Verbal De-escalation (N=495) - Unabridged Findings 
 
Table 11a. Multinomial Logistic Regression Predicting Type of Force Used, Contrast 4: Lethal 
Force Relative to Non-Lethal Force (N=495) - Unabridged Findings 
 
 
 


 
140 
 
Table 5a.  Logistic Regression Predicting Use of Any Force (N=495 participant scenarios) - Unbridged Findings 
 
Model 1: 
Personality & 
Cognitive Factors 
 
Model 2: 
Demographic & 
Experience Factors 
 
Model 3:  
Social Network 
Factors 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
Personality Factors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Positive Emotionality 
-0.024+ 
0.014 
 
-0.024 
0.016 
 
-0.027 
0.016 
   Negative Emotionality 
0.003 
0.012 
 
0.001 
0.012 
 
0.001 
0.012 
   Constraint 
-0.022 
0.015 
 
-0.022 
0.015 
 
-0.014 
0.016 
Cognitive Factors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Cognitive Reflection 
-0.051 
0.115 
 
-0.113 
0.113 
 
-0.121 
0.113 
   Need for Cognition 
0.013 
0.011 
 
0.008 
0.013 
 
0.013 
0.013 
Control Variables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Participant Type (1=Officer) 
0.835* 
0.401 
 
0.383 
0.859 
 
-1.931+ 
1.048 
   Scenario Type 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Domestic viol. (reference) 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Homeless man 
-1.320*** 
0.333 
 
-1.380*** 
0.377 
 
-1.433*** 
0.376 
       Collision investigation 
-3.462** 
1.240 
 
-3.649* 
1.480 
 
3.600* 
1.460 
Demographics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Age (in years) 
 
 
 
0.008 
0.014 
 
0.004 
0.014 
   Sex (1=Male) 
 
 
 
0.106 
0.328 
 
0.119 
0.322 
   Race 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       White (reference) 
 
 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Black 
 
 
 
0.335 
0.614 
 
0.323 
0.633 
       Hispanic 
 
 
 
0.787 
0.425 
 
0.697 
0.429 
       Other 
 
 
 
0.558 
0.424 
 
0.450 
0.425 
Professional Experiences 
(Officers Only) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Years of experience 
 
 
 
-0.045 
0.029 
 
-0.033 
0.031 
   Number of citizen complaints 
 
 
 
0.296* 
0.150 
 
0.330* 
0.167 
   Number of official sanctions 
 
 
 
0.637 
0.534 
 
0.575 
0.571 
Social Network 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Network density 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.002 
0.007 
   Network size 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.152* 
0.066 
   Impact of suspension on ties 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.294+ 
0.174 
Additional Control Variables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Police Agencies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Agency A (reference) 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Agency B 
-0.242 
0.488 
 
-0.204 
0.548 
 
-0.182 
0.526 
       Agency C 
0.557 
0.724 
 
0.044 
0.839 
 
-0.376 
0.651 
       Agency D 
0.047 
0.810 
 
-0.631 
0.877 
 
-0.416 
0.818 
       Agency E 
0.163 
0.575 
 
-0.230 
0.597 
 
-0.089 
0.564 
       Agency F 
0.797 
0.726 
 
0.717 
0.667 
 
0.836 
0.707 
       Agency G 
-0.515 
0.634 
 
-1.000 
0.648 
 
-0.807 
0.674 
   Time to control event 
-0.047 
0.029 
 
-0.049 
0.034 
 
-0.048 
0.034 
   No control event (1=Yes) 
2.452* 
1.017 
 
2.582* 
1.105 
 
2.803* 
1.180 
   Missing data 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Missing Soc. Netwk (1=Yes) 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
 
2.362** 
0.805 
       Missing NFC score (1=Yes) 
0.724 
0.906 
 
0.289 
1.006 
 
0.488 
1.033 
       Missing age (1=Yes) 
----- 
----- 
 
0.235 
0.754 
 
-0.032 
0.745 
 


 
141 
 
Table 5a.  Continued. 
 
Model 1: 
Personality & 
Cognitive Factors 
 
Model 2: 
Demographic & 
Experience Factors 
 
Model 3:  
Social Network 
Factors 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
Additional Demographics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Education 
 
 
 
-0.039 
0.112 
 
-0.043 
0.111 
   Employment Status 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Work >=40 hrs. (reference) 
 
 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Work <40 hrs. 
 
 
 
-0.222 
0.427 
 
-0.186 
0.426 
       Unemployed 
 
 
 
-0.875 
0.587 
 
0.900 
0.593 
       Retired 
 
 
 
-0.921 
0.572 
 
-0.856 
0.593 
   Prior Military (1=Yes) 
 
 
 
-0.374 
0.380 
 
-0.154 
0.465 
Additional Professional 
Experiences (Officers Only) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Ever used force (1=Yes) 
 
 
 
-0.194 
0.481 
 
-0.340 
0.479 
   Force ever used on you (1=Yes) 
 
 
 
-0.003 
0.361 
 
-0.269 
0.409 
Civilian Experiences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Ever stopped by officer (1=Yes) 
 
 
 
0.431 
0.334 
 
0.412 
0.333 
   Ever arrested (1=Yes) 
 
 
 
0.780 
0.505 
 
0.782 
0.514 
Model Characteristics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Constant 
4.576* 
1.993 
 
4.758* 
2.563 
 
4.373+ 
2.562 
   Log Pseudolikelihood  
-275.424 
 
-261.991+ 
 
-257.757+ 
   Pseudo R-squared 
0.194 
 
0.233 
 
0.245 
+=p<.10, *=p<.05, **=p<.01, ***=p<.001 
Likelihood ratio tests are computed to compare Model 2 to Model 1 and Model 3 to Model 2. Significant results 
indicate improved model fit relative to the simpler comparison model. 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
142 
 
Table 6a.  Logistic Regression Predicting Use of Force (Any Force) - Scenario Specific Findings, Unabridged 
 
Scenario 1: 
Homeless Man 
(n=126) 
 
Scenario 2: 
Domestic Violence 
(n=162) 
 
Scenario 3: 
Collision Invest. 
(n=146) 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
Personality Factors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Positive Emotionality 
‐0.024 
0.046 
 
‐0.023  
0.027   
‐0.051 
0.052 
   Negative Emotionality 
0.025 
0.031 
 
‐0.020  
0.023 
 
0.025 
0.029 
   Constraint 
‐0.0483  
0.036 
 
‐0.026  
0.028 
 
0.025 
0.040 
Cognitive Factors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Cognitive Reflection 
‐0.308 
0.298 
 
‐0.171  
0.204 
 
‐0.082 
0.322 
   Need for Cognition 
0.081+  
0.044 
 
0.0130  
0.022 
 
0.012 
0.041 
Control Variables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Participant Type (1=Officer) 
‐7.622*  
3.066 
 
‐4.958+  
2.536 
 
0.810 
1.866 
Demographics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Age (in years) 
0.039  
0.030 
 
0.003  
0.025 
 
‐0.041 
0.032 
   Sex (1=Male) 
‐1.111  
0.790 
 
‐0.165  
0.527 
 
2.766+  
1.632 
   Race 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       White (reference) 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Black 
2.384*  
1.153 
 
‐0.716 
0.943 
 
1.729 
1.625 
       Hispanic 
0.507 
1.522 
 
1.548  
1.060 
 
0.369 
1.184 
       Other 
0 
—- 
 
1.455 
1.662 
 
2.330+  
1.191 
Professional Experiences 
(Officers Only) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Years of experience 
‐0.218* 
0.096 
 
‐0.009 
0.054 
 
0.070  
0.060 
   Number of citizen complaints 
0.538 
0.377 
 
0.548+  
0.290 
 
‐0.133 
0.340 
   Number of official sanctions 
3.495**  
1.330 
 
0.763 
1.168 
 
‐0.146  
0.996 
Social Network 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Network density 
‐0.018 
0.015 
 
0.018+  
0.010 
 
‐0.015 
0.013 
   Network size 
0.025 
0.190 
 
0.136  
0.086 
 
0.450* 
0.199 
   Impact of suspension on ties 
1.990**  
0.673 
 
0.255 
0.378 
 
0.458 
0.421 
Additional Control Variables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Police Agencies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Agency A (reference) 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Agency B 
‐2.798+  
1.560 
 
0.437 
0.901 
 
0.020 
1.270 
       Agency C 
‐4.801*  
2.148 
 
‐0.244 
1.307 
 
‐1.870  
1.791 
       Agency D 
0 
—- 
 
‐0.563  
1.473 
 
2.064  
1.890 
       Agency E 
‐2.919  
2.263 
 
0.501 
1.201 
 
‐0.667  
1.293 
       Agency F 
1.034  
1.467 
 
‐1.130  
1.203 
 
2.554+ 
1.509 
       Agency G 
‐8.060*  
3.366 
 
‐1.918  
1.427 
 
0 
—- 
   Time to control event 
‐0.036 
0,045 
 
‐0.189 
0.145 
 
‐0.017 
0.058 
   No control event (1=Yes) 
0 
—- 
 
0 
—- 
 
3.793*  
1.488 
   Missing data 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Missing Soc. Netwk (1=Yes) 
7.180**  
2.685 
 
4.077* 
1.956 
 
1.752 
1.582 
       Missing NFC score (1=Yes) 
0 
—- 
 
1.172  
2.065 
 
‐2.162  
2.579 
       Missing age (1=Yes) 
0 
—- 
 
0 
—- 
 
0 
—- 
 
 


 
143 
 
Table 6a.  Continued. 
 
Scenario 1: 
Homeless Man 
(n=126) 
 
Scenario 2: 
Domestic Violence 
(n=162) 
 
Scenario 3: 
Collision Invest. 
(n=146) 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
Additional Demographics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Education 
‐0.285 
0.245 
 
0.109  
0.175 
 
0.006 
0.337 
   Employment Status 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Work >=40 hrs. (reference) 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Work <40 hrs. 
‐0.503  
0.808 
 
‐0.922 
0.748 
 
 1.473  
1.012 
       Unemployed 
‐1.216  
0.943 
 
‐0.973  
0.799 
 
‐1.497  
1.042 
       Retired 
0 
—- 
 
‐0.315 
1.021 
 
0 
—- 
   Prior Military (1=Yes) 
‐0.229 
1.184 
 
‐0.389  
0.935 
 
0.238 
1.023 
Additional Professional 
Experiences (Officers Only) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Ever used force (1=Yes) 
‐1.131  
1.144 
 
0.160 
0.976 
 
0.680  
1.233 
   Force ever used on you (1=Yes) 
2.224+  
1.326 
 
‐0.127  
0.827 
 
‐1.936 
1.199 
Civilian Experiences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Ever stopped by officer (1=Yes) 
1.433*  
0.612 
 
0.167  
0.557 
 
0.563  
1.145 
   Ever arrested (1=Yes) 
0.758 
1.094 
 
1.436 
1.140 
 
1.833+  
1.071 
Model Characteristics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Constant 
‐1.831  
5.144 
 
13.788  
8.393 
 
‐3.460  
5.887 
   Log Pseudolikelihood  
‐54.158 
 
‐87.356 
 
‐50.266 
   Pseudo R-squared 
0.319 
 
0.169 
 
0.493 
+=p<.10, *=p<.05, **=p<.01, ***=p<.001 
 
 


 
144 
 
Table 7a.  OLS Regression Predicting Time Until Force is Used (N=228) - Unabridged Findings 
 
Model 1: 
Personality & 
Cognitive Factors 
 
Model 2: 
Demographic & 
Experience Factors 
 
Model 3:  
Social Network 
Factors 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
Personality Factors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Positive Emotionality 
0.044 
0.084 
 
0.065 
0.059 
 
0.069 
0.061 
   Negative Emotionality 
-0.054 
0.066 
 
-0.028 
0.068 
 
-0.034 
0.070 
   Constraint 
0.040 
0.070 
 
0.034 
0.070 
 
0.050 
0.075 
Cognitive Factors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Cognitive Reflection 
0.862 
0.531 
 
1.030+ 
0.585 
 
0.743 
0.514 
   Need for Cognition 
-0.035 
0.058 
 
-0.050 
0.057 
 
-0.049 
0.061 
Control Variables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Participant Type (1=Officer) 
1.524 
1.122 
 
1.149 
2.759 
 
2.248 
5.601 
   Scenario Type 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Domestic viol. (reference) 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Homeless man 
-8.453*** 
1.372 
 
-8.050*** 
1.450 
 
-7.656*** 
1.537 
       Collision investigation 
-53.050*** 
3.211 
 
-53.022*** 
3.543 
 
-52.775*** 
3.441 
Demographics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Age (in years) 
 
 
 
0.129* 
0.051 
 
0.115* 
0.053 
   Sex (1=Male) 
 
 
 
0.674 
1.229 
 
0.710 
1.351 
   Race 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       White (reference) 
 
 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Black 
 
 
 
-5.772 
3.607 
 
-6.399+ 
3.345 
       Hispanic 
 
 
 
-3.601* 
1.534 
 
-5.157** 
1.773 
       Other 
 
 
 
-2.770 
3.340 
 
-2.462 
3.590 
Professional Experiences 
(Officers Only) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Years of experience 
 
 
 
0.056 
0.143 
 
0.105 
0.164 
   Number of citizen complaints 
 
 
 
-1.205+ 
0.648 
 
-0.680 
0.627 
   Number of official sanctions 
 
 
 
0.966 
1.317 
 
0.991 
1.467 
Social Network 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Network density 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.068+ 
0.040 
   Network size 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.274 
0.218 
   Impact of suspension on ties 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-2.019* 
0.982 
Additional Control Variables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Police Agencies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Agency A (reference) 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Agency B 
-5.601+ 
3.318 
 
-4.965 
3.217 
 
-3.070 
2.636 
       Agency C 
-0.748 
0.960 
 
1.141 
1.701 
 
2.519 
2.455 
       Agency D 
-0.830 
1.644 
 
5.513+ 
2.907 
 
8.864* 
3.514 
       Agency E 
0.735 
1.329 
 
2.554 
2.215 
 
1.603 
2.912 
       Agency F 
-2.674 
2.361 
 
-0.416 
2.602 
 
-0.109 
2.720 
       Agency G 
-1.520 
1.373 
 
0.123 
2.254 
 
-1.450 
2.412 
   Time to control event 
0.145* 
0.063 
 
0.149* 
0.073 
 
0.154* 
0.072 
   No control event (1=Yes) 
1.211 
1.879 
 
1.912 
2.697 
 
2.496 
2.895 
   Missing data 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Missing Soc. Netwk (1=Yes) 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
 
-0.895 
4.567 
       Missing NFC score (1=Yes) 
-3.460 
4.256 
 
-5.531 
4.754 
 
-8.168+ 
4.827 
       Missing age (1=Yes) 
----- 
----- 
 
8.005* 
3.047 
 
7.404* 
3.234 
 


 
145 
 
Table 7a.  Continued. 
 
Model 1: 
Personality & 
Cognitive Factors 
 
Model 2: 
Demographic & 
Experience Factors 
 
Model 3:  
Social Network 
Factors 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
Additional Demographics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Education 
 
 
 
-0.463 
0.397 
 
-0.383 
0.377 
   Employment Status 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Work >=40 hrs. (reference) 
 
 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Work <40 hrs. 
 
 
 
3.687+ 
1.935 
 
4.139+ 
2.185 
       Unemployed 
 
 
 
1.364 
1.910 
 
1.325 
1.872 
       Retired 
 
 
 
-0.813 
1.628 
 
-0.557 
1.640 
   Prior Military (1=Yes) 
 
 
 
-0.067 
2.890 
 
-1.113 
2.487 
Additional Professional 
Experiences (Officers Only) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Ever used force (1=Yes) 
 
 
 
-1.947 
4.185 
 
-2.390 
4.420 
   Force ever used on you (1=Yes) 
 
 
 
-0.916 
2.764 
 
-2.343 
2.409 
Civilian Experiences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Ever stopped by officer (1=Yes) 
 
 
 
-1.903+ 
1.060 
 
-1.905+ 
1.123 
   Ever arrested (1=Yes) 
 
 
 
-1.972 
1.862 
 
-1.429 
1.802 
Model Characteristics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Constant 
67.031*** 
6.999 
 
63.552*** 
6.944 
 
62.760*** 
7.235 
   R-squared 
0.919 
 
0.926 
 
0.929 
+=p<.10, *=p<.05, **=p<.01, ***=p<.001 
 
 
 


 
146 
 
Table 8a.  Multinomial Logistic Regression Predicting Type of Force Used, Contrast 1: No Tactic Used Relative to 
Verbal De-escalation (N=495) - Unabridged Findings 
 
Model 1: 
Personality & 
Cognitive Factors 
 
Model 2: 
Demographic & 
Experience Factors 
 
Model 3:  
Social Network 
Factors 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
Personality Factors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Positive Emotionality 
0.006 
0.020 
 
0.002 
0.025 
 
-0.000 
0.025 
   Negative Emotionality 
-0.003 
0.019 
 
-0.008 
0.020 
 
-0.008 
0.020 
   Constraint 
-0.004 
0.024 
 
-0.019 
0.026 
 
-0.015 
0.027 
Cognitive Factors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Cognitive Reflection 
-0.188 
0.187 
 
-0.126 
0.195 
 
-0.103 
0.199 
   Need for Cognition 
-0.012 
0.019 
 
0.004 
0.018 
 
0.001 
0.018 
Control Variables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Participant Type (1=Officer) 
-2.256*** 
0.498 
 
-2.092+ 
1.147 
 
-2.226 
1.678 
   Scenario Type 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Domestic viol. (reference) 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Homeless man 
-1.027* 
0.504 
 
-1.223* 
0.532 
 
-1.257* 
0.557 
       Collision investigation 
-0.002 
1.806 
 
0.028 
1.857 
 
0.280 
1.945 
Demographics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Age (in years) 
 
 
 
0.019 
0.021 
 
0.020 
0.021 
   Sex (1=Male) 
 
 
 
-1.031* 
0.447 
 
-0.955* 
0.451 
   Race 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       White (reference) 
 
 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Black 
 
 
 
0.906 
0.711 
 
1.106 
0.763 
       Hispanic 
 
 
 
1.340 
1.170 
 
1.252 
1.214 
       Other 
 
 
 
-0.801 
0.746 
 
-0.987 
0.803 
Professional Experiences 
(Officers Only) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Years of experience 
 
 
 
-0.075 
0.046 
 
-0.068 
0.044 
   Number of citizen complaints 
 
 
 
-0.365 
0.300 
 
-0.420 
0.314 
   Number of official sanctions 
 
 
 
1.821* 
0.760 
 
1.998* 
0.779 
Social Network 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Network density 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-0.012 
0.012 
   Network size 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-0.070 
0.101 
   Impact of suspension on ties 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.171 
0.357 
Additional Control Variables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Police Agencies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Agency A (reference) 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Agency B 
1.059 
0.702 
 
0.663 
0.852 
 
0.420 
1.048 
       Agency C 
-0.590 
1.735 
 
-1.698 
1.857 
 
-2.019 
2.100 
       Agency D 
-1.906+ 
1.003 
 
-3.331* 
1.413 
 
-3.491* 
1.648 
       Agency E 
0.734 
1.134 
 
0.205 
1.397 
 
0.322 
1.388 
       Agency F 
-1.316 
1.232 
 
-2.039* 
0.967 
 
-2.608* 
1.061 
       Agency G 
-0.190 
1.634 
 
-1.693 
1.163 
 
-2.241+ 
1.247 
   Time to control event 
-0.060 
0.040 
 
-0.065 
0.042 
 
-0.060 
0.043 
   No control event (1=Yes) 
11.032*** 
1.408 
 
-.241*** 
1.651 
 
10.383*** 
1.609 
   Missing data 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Missing Soc. Netwk (1=Yes) 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
 
0.616 
1.577 
       Missing NFC score (1=Yes) 
-2.382 
1.983 
 
-1.089 
1.818 
 
-0.965 
1.814 
       Missing age (1=Yes) 
----- 
----- 
 
-1.225 
1.148 
 
-1.032 
1.132 


 
147 
 
Table 8a.  Continued. 
 
Model 1: 
Personality & 
Cognitive Factors 
 
Model 2: 
Demographic & 
Experience Factors 
 
Model 3:  
Social Network 
Factors 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
Additional Demographics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Education 
 
 
 
-0.025 
0.149 
 
-0.055 
0.152 
   Employment Status 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Work >=40 hrs. (reference) 
 
 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Work <40 hrs. 
 
 
 
0.050 
0.610 
 
0.093 
0.613 
       Unemployed 
 
 
 
1.447 
0.916 
 
1.459 
0.929 
       Retired 
 
 
 
-0.120 
0.695 
 
-0.157 
0.695 
   Prior Military (1=Yes) 
 
 
 
-0.033 
0.916 
 
0.602 
1.056 
Additional Professional 
Experiences (Officers Only) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Ever used force (1=Yes) 
 
 
 
1.589* 
0.743 
 
1.288 
0.844 
   Force ever used on you (1=Yes) 
 
 
 
0.465 
0.684 
 
0.658 
0.811 
Civilian Experiences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Ever stopped by officer (1=Yes) 
 
 
 
0.577 
0.477 
 
0.535 
0.477 
   Ever arrested (1=Yes) 
 
 
 
-0.053 
0.839 
 
-0.092 
0.846 
Model Characteristics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Constant 
5.815+ 
3.338 
 
5.576 
3.408 
 
5.563 
3.402 
   Log Pseudolikelihood 
-455.696 
 
-417.695* 
 
-410.324 
   Pseudo R-squared 
0.324 
 
0.380 
 
0.391 
+=p<.10, *=p<.05, **=p<.01, ***=p<.001 
Likelihood ratio tests are computed to compare Model 2 to Model 1 and Model 3 to Model 2. Significant results 
indicate improved model fit relative to the simpler comparison model. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
148 
 
Table 9a.  Multinomial Logistic Regression Predicting Type of Force Used, Contrast 2: Non-Lethal Force Relative 
to Verbal De-escalation (N=495) - Unabridged Findings 
 
Model 1: 
Personality & 
Cognitive Factors 
 
Model 2: 
Demographic & 
Experience Factors 
 
Model 3:  
Social Network 
Factors 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
Personality Factors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Positive Emotionality 
-0.026 
0.024 
 
-0.025 
0.027 
 
-0.029 
0.028 
   Negative Emotionality 
-0.009 
0.018 
 
-0.023 
0.022 
 
-0.023 
0.022 
   Constraint 
-0.036+ 
0.020 
 
-0.040+ 
0.023 
 
-0.038 
0.023 
Cognitive Factors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Cognitive Reflection 
-0.072 
0.178 
 
-0.165 
0.184 
 
-0.192 
0.182 
   Need for Cognition 
0.004 
0.019 
 
0.004 
0.023 
 
0.010 
0.024 
Control Variables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Participant Type (1=Officer) 
-0.497 
0.499 
 
-1.838 
1.506 
 
-6.210** 
1.878 
   Scenario Type 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Domestic viol. (reference) 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Homeless man 
-0.458 
0.525 
 
-0.599 
0.572 
 
-0.696 
0.609 
       Collision investigation 
-4.794* 
1.874 
 
-4.944* 
1.966 
 
-4.646* 
2.054 
Demographics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Age (in years) 
 
 
 
0.016 
0.023 
 
0.016 
0.023 
   Sex (1=Male) 
 
 
 
-0.573 
0.471 
 
-0.574 
0.465 
   Race 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       White (reference) 
 
 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Black 
 
 
 
0.770 
0.821 
 
1.004 
0.816 
       Hispanic 
 
 
 
1.409 
1.318 
 
1.323 
1.338 
       Other 
 
 
 
-0.616 
0.884 
 
-0.728 
0.928 
Professional Experiences 
(Officers Only) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Years of experience 
 
 
 
-0.129 
0.080 
 
-0.110 
0.076 
   Number of citizen complaints 
 
 
 
0.386 
0.265 
 
0.312 
0.299 
   Number of official sanctions 
 
 
 
2.049* 
0.824 
 
2.247** 
0.827 
Social Network 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Network density 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-0.004 
0.012 
   Network size 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.097 
0.138 
   Impact of suspension on ties 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.881* 
0.416 
Additional Control Variables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Police Agencies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Agency A (reference) 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Agency B 
-0.584 
0.986 
 
-0.700 
1.283 
 
-0.991 
1.362 
       Agency C 
0.713 
1.142 
 
-0.747 
1.870 
 
-1.704 
1.235 
       Agency D 
-0.980 
1.194 
 
-2.573+ 
1.419 
 
-2.382+ 
1.295 
       Agency E 
0.587 
0.829 
 
-0.226 
0.925 
 
-0.042 
0.971 
       Agency F 
1.123 
0.918 
 
0.681 
0.988 
 
0.568 
1.099 
       Agency G 
-0.494 
0.952 
 
-3.003* 
1.262 
 
-2.831* 
1.390 
   Time to control event 
-0.101* 
0.043 
 
-0.107* 
0.045 
 
-0.100* 
0.047 
   No control event (1=Yes) 
11.818*** 
1.305 
 
9.814*** 
1.555 
 
11.425*** 
1.536 
   Missing data 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Missing Soc. Netwk (1=Yes) 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
 
4.235* 
2.029 
       Missing NFC score (1=Yes) 
 
 
 
-13.710*** 
1.628 
 
-14.106*** 
1.774 
       Missing age (1=Yes) 
----- 
----- 
 
-14.564*** 
1.576 
 
-15.706*** 
1.576 


 
149 
 
Table 9a.  Continued. 
 
Model 1: 
Personality & 
Cognitive Factors 
 
Model 2: 
Demographic & 
Experience Factors 
 
Model 3:  
Social Network 
Factors 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
Additional Demographics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Education 
 
 
 
-0.019 
0.154 
 
-0.051 
0.158 
   Employment Status 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Work >=40 hrs. (reference) 
 
 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Work <40 hrs. 
 
 
 
-0.791 
0.734 
 
-0.769 
0.726 
       Unemployed 
 
 
 
0.118 
1.048 
 
0.154 
1.074 
       Retired 
 
 
 
-1.513+ 
0.782 
 
-1.504+ 
0.789 
   Prior Military (1=Yes) 
 
 
 
-0.133 
0.662 
 
0.267 
0.893 
Additional Professional 
Experiences (Officers Only) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Ever used force (1=Yes) 
 
 
 
0.811 
0.621 
 
0.474 
0.625 
   Force ever used on you (1=Yes) 
 
 
 
-0.069 
0.501 
 
-0.262 
0.566 
Civilian Experiences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Ever stopped by officer (1=Yes) 
 
 
 
0.817 
0.529 
 
0.758 
0.537 
   Ever arrested (1=Yes) 
 
 
 
0.711 
0.759 
 
0.672 
0.774 
Model Characteristics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Constant 
4.874 
3.810 
 
3.483 
4.545 
 
3.189 
4.443 
   Log Pseudolikelihood 
-455.696 
 
-417.695* 
 
-410.324 
   Pseudo R-squared 
0.324 
 
0.380 
 
0.391 
+=p<.10, *=p<.05, **=p<.01, ***=p<.001 
Likelihood ratio tests are computed to compare Model 2 to Model 1 and Model 3 to Model 2. Significant results 
indicate improved model fit relative to the simpler comparison model. 
 
 
 


 
150 
 
Table 10a.  Multinomial Logistic Regression Predicting Type of Force Used, Contrast 3: Lethal Force Relative to 
Verbal De-escalation (N=495) - Unabridged Findings 
 
Model 1: 
Personality & 
Cognitive Factors 
 
Model 2: 
Demographic & 
Experience Factors 
 
Model 3:  
Social Network 
Factors 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
Personality Factors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Positive Emotionality 
-0.014 
0.021 
 
-0.024 
0.029 
 
-0.026 
0.030 
   Negative Emotionality 
0.015 
0.017 
 
0.015 
0.019 
 
0.014 
0.020 
   Constraint 
-0.015 
0.022 
 
-0.022 
0.025 
 
-0.013 
0.026 
Cognitive Factors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Cognitive Reflection 
-0.292+ 
0.174 
 
-0.331+ 
0.189 
 
-0.361+ 
0.196 
   Need for Cognition 
0.005 
0.021 
 
0.012 
0.022 
 
0.018 
0.022 
Control Variables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Participant Type (1=Officer) 
-0.336 
0.563 
 
0.547 
1.002 
 
-1.893 
1.437 
   Scenario Type 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Domestic viol. (reference) 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Homeless man 
-5.414*** 
1.220 
 
-5.829*** 
1.371 
 
-5.904*** 
1.350 
       Collision investigation 
-1.036 
2.371 
 
-0.381 
2.670 
 
-0.468 
2.598 
Demographics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Age (in years) 
 
 
 
0.031 
0.022 
 
0.027 
0.023 
   Sex (1=Male) 
 
 
 
-0.664 
0.475 
 
-0.600 
0.478 
   Race 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       White (reference) 
 
 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Black 
 
 
 
1.218 
0.960 
 
1.371 
0.979 
       Hispanic 
 
 
 
2.343* 
1.022 
 
2.137+ 
1.093 
       Other 
 
 
 
0.452 
0.610 
 
0.258 
0.608 
Professional Experiences 
(Officers Only) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Years of experience 
 
 
 
-0.068+ 
0.037 
 
-0.046 
0.036 
   Number of citizen complaints 
 
 
 
-0.097 
0.218 
 
-0.042 
0.222 
   Number of official sanctions 
 
 
 
1.162* 
0.519 
 
1.136+ 
0.581 
Social Network 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Network density 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-0.001 
0.008 
   Network size 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.156+ 
0.088 
   Impact of suspension on ties 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.273 
0.258 
Additional Control Variables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Police Agencies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Agency A (reference) 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Agency B 
0.648 
0.654 
 
0.681 
0.722 
 
0.800 
0.793 
       Agency C 
-0.170 
1.072 
 
-0.558 
1.178 
 
-0.969 
1.297 
       Agency D 
-0.855 
1.013 
 
-2.195+ 
1.174 
 
-1.915+ 
1.144 
       Agency E 
0.307 
0.890 
 
0.031 
1.034 
 
0.312 
0.975 
       Agency F 
-0.714 
0.725 
 
-0.651 
0.728 
 
-0.701 
0.841 
       Agency G 
-0.706 
0.762 
 
-1.177 
0.834 
 
-1.234 
0.945 
   Time to control event 
-0.045 
0.055 
 
-0.031 
0.062 
 
-0.033 
0.060 
   No control event (1=Yes) 
-1.036 
2.371 
 
13.419*** 
1.382 
 
14.608*** 
1.309 
   Missing data 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Missing Soc. Netwk (1=Yes) 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
 
2.605* 
1.119 
       Missing NFC score (1=Yes) 
0.186 
1.722 
 
0.485 
1.607 
 
0.747 
1.633 
       Missing age (1=Yes) 
----- 
----- 
 
0.924 
1.289 
 
0.673 
1.295 


 
151 
 
Table 10a.  Continued. 
 
Model 1: 
Personality & 
Cognitive Factors 
 
Model 2: 
Demographic & 
Experience Factors 
 
Model 3:  
Social Network 
Factors 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
Additional Demographics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Education 
 
 
 
-0.146 
0.148 
 
-0.153 
0.149 
   Employment Status 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Work >=40 hrs. (reference) 
 
 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Work <40 hrs. 
 
 
 
0.304 
0.651 
 
0.371 
0.645 
       Unemployed 
 
 
 
0.544 
1.097 
 
0.523 
1.111 
       Retired 
 
 
 
-0.626 
0.787 
 
-0.570 
0.797 
   Prior Military (1=Yes) 
 
 
 
-0.741 
0.694 
 
-0.257 
0.959 
Additional Professional 
Experiences (Officers Only) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Ever used force (1=Yes) 
 
 
 
0.811 
0.621 
 
0.474 
0.625 
   Force ever used on you (1=Yes) 
 
 
 
-0.069 
0.501 
 
-0.262 
0.566 
Civilian Experiences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Ever stopped by officer (1=Yes) 
 
 
 
1.039+ 
0.542 
 
1.005+ 
0.540 
   Ever arrested (1=Yes) 
 
 
 
0.869 
0.750 
 
0.901 
0.749 
Model Characteristics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Constant 
4.874 
3.810 
 
3.483 
4.545 
 
3.189 
4.443 
   Log Pseudolikelihood 
-455.693 
 
-417.695* 
 
-410.324 
   Pseudo R-squared 
0.324 
 
0.380 
 
0.391 
+=p<.10, *=p<.05, **=p<.01, ***=p<.001 
Likelihood ratio tests are computed to compare Model 2 to Model 1 and Model 3 to Model 2. Significant results 
indicate improved model fit relative to the simpler comparison model. 
 
 
 


 
152 
 
Table 11a.  Multinomial Logistic Regression Predicting Type of Force Used, Contrast 4: Lethal Force Relative to 
Non-Lethal Force (N=495) - Unabridged Findings 
 
Model 1: 
Personality & 
Cognitive Factors 
 
Model 2: 
Demographic & 
Experience Factors 
 
Model 3:  
Social Network 
Factors 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
Personality Factors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Positive Emotionality 
0.012 
0.020 
 
0.001 
0.019 
 
0.003 
0.019 
   Negative Emotionality 
0.024+ 
0.014 
 
0.037* 
0.018 
 
0.037* 
0.018 
   Constraint 
0.021 
0.022 
 
0.018 
0.024 
 
0.025 
0.025 
Cognitive Factors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Cognitive Reflection 
-0.220 
0.165 
 
-0.166 
0.183 
 
-0.230 
0.189 
   Need for Cognition 
0.001 
0.016 
 
0.008 
0.023 
 
0.007 
0.024 
Control Variables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Participant Type (1=Officer) 
0.0161 
0.484 
 
2.385+ 
1.362 
 
4.317* 
1.908 
   Scenario Type 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Domestic viol. (reference) 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Homeless man 
-4.956*** 
1.282 
 
-5.230*** 
1.49 
 
-5.209** 
1.500 
       Collision investigation 
3.757+ 
1.927 
 
4.563+ 
2.535 
 
4.177 
2.604 
Demographics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Age (in years) 
 
 
 
0.016 
0.019 
 
0.011 
0.019 
   Sex (1=Male) 
 
 
 
-0.091 
0.473 
 
-0.026 
0.458 
   Race 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       White (reference) 
 
 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Black 
 
 
 
0.448 
0.735 
 
0.367 
0.783 
       Hispanic 
 
 
 
0.934 
0.791 
 
0.815 
0.794 
       Other 
 
 
 
1.068 
0.896 
 
0.986 
0.924 
Professional Experiences 
(Officers Only) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Years of experience 
 
 
 
0.061 
0.084 
 
0.064 
0.076 
   Number of citizen complaints 
 
 
 
-0.482+ 
0.267 
 
-0.354 
0.275 
   Number of official sanctions 
 
 
 
-0.887 
0.670 
 
-1.111+ 
0.614 
Social Network 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Network density 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.002 
0.012 
   Network size 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.059 
0.086 
   Impact of suspension on ties 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-0.608 
0.405 
Additional Control Variables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Police Agencies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Agency A (reference) 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Agency B 
1.232 
0.925 
 
1.381 
1.280 
 
1.792 
1.275 
       Agency C 
-0.883 
1.253 
 
0.189 
1.758 
 
0.735 
1.219 
       Agency D 
0.125 
1.152 
 
0.377 
1.397 
 
0.467 
1.348 
       Agency E 
-0.280 
0.738 
 
0.257 
0.819 
 
0.355 
0.959 
       Agency F 
-1.838* 
0.669 
 
-1.331 
0.904 
 
-1.269 
0.872 
       Agency G 
-0.211 
0.881 
 
1.826 
1.304 
 
1.597 
1.411 
   Time to control event 
0.056 
0.048 
 
0.076 
0.061 
 
0.066 
0.063 
   No control event (1=Yes) 
2.558* 
1.217 
 
3.605* 
1.525 
 
3.183* 
1.462 
   Missing data 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Missing Soc. Netwk (1=Yes) 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
 
-1.630 
2.139 
       Missing NFC score (1=Yes) 
15.299*** 
1.380 
 
14.194*** 
1.608 
 
14.853*** 
1.758 
       Missing age (1=Yes) 
----- 
----- 
 
15.488*** 
1.439 
 
16.379*** 
1.431 


 
153 
 
Table 11a.  Continued. 
 
Model 1: 
Personality & 
Cognitive Factors 
 
Model 2: 
Demographic & 
Experience Factors 
 
Model 3:  
Social Network 
Factors 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
 
b 
SE 
Additional Demographics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Education 
 
 
 
-0.127 
0.136 
 
-0.102 
0.140 
   Employment Status 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Work >=40 hrs. (reference) 
 
 
 
----- 
----- 
 
----- 
----- 
       Work <40 hrs. 
 
 
 
1.095 
0.682 
 
1.140+ 
0.670 
       Unemployed 
 
 
 
0.426 
0.749 
 
0.369 
0.757 
       Retired 
 
 
 
0.888 
0.854 
 
0.934 
0.851 
   Prior Military (1=Yes) 
 
 
 
-0.608 
0.607 
 
-0.524 
0.794 
Additional Professional 
Experiences (Officers Only) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Ever used force (1=Yes) 
 
 
 
0.160 
0.730 
 
-0.092 
0.802 
   Force ever used on you (1=Yes) 
 
 
 
-0.520 
0.764 
 
-0.724 
0.827 
Civilian Experiences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Ever stopped by officer (1=Yes) 
 
 
 
0.221 
0.537 
 
0.247 
0.534 
   Ever arrested (1=Yes) 
 
 
 
0.158 
0.583 
 
0.228 
0.571 
Model Characteristics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Constant 
-5.333+ 
3.004 
 
-7.466+ 
4.221 
 
-7.198+ 
4.369 
   Log Pseudolikelihood 
-455.696 
 
-417.695* 
 
-410.324 
   Pseudo R-squared 
0.324 
 
0.380 
 
0.391 
+=p<.10, *=p<.05, **=p<.01, ***=p<.001 
Likelihood ratio tests are computed to compare Model 2 to Model 1 and Model 3 to Model 2. Significant results 
indicate improved model fit relative to the simpler comparison model. 


 
154 
 
APPENDIX J: 
DISSEMINATION ARTIFACTS 
This work will be disseminated to the academic community through traditional venues 
(e.g., academic journals, conference presentations, etc.), where scholars and practitioners alike 
can begin to incorporate the findings into use of force training practices for officers. Datafiles 
containing participants’ anonymized responses to survey questions and video coding measures 
will be archived with NIJ for other researchers to review.  
This work will also be disseminated with the study’s participating law enforcement 
agencies. The research team believes that the findings regarding the citizen education programs 
and attitudes toward the police can be used by these agencies (and can be shared with other 
agencies) to help establish/grow educational opportunities for the citizens in the community to 
help spark dialogue and rebuild trust between police officers and the citizens they serve.   
The above dissemination efforts are being developed for the future. To date, information 
about this project has been disseminated through local/national media outlets, as shown below. 
 
Media Citation 
Source Link 
Audience 
UNC Charlotte researchers, 
Waxhaw Police using ‘use of 
force’ simulator to study officer 
responses. WJZY Fox 46 
Charlotte. September 15, 2021 
 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3-
oHzg9cYCw 
 
General public 
North Carolina police department 
to study how officers make use-of-
force decisions. FoxNews.com. 
October 28, 2021 
https://www.foxnews.com/us/psycholog
y-behind-officers-decision-making-
studies 
 
General public