1 
 
The Rainbow of Credit: 
Same-sex Mortgage Discrimination and Two-sided Spillover Effect * 
 
Lei Gao                                         Hua Sun 
College of Business                       College of Business 
Iowa State University                    Iowa State University 
lgao@iastate.edu                             hsun@iastate.edu 
(515) 294-7860                             (515) 294-8112 
 
April 2017 
 
Abstract 
 
Using the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) national data from 1990 to 2015, we propose a 
method to identify potentially homosexual borrowers without requiring any self-disclosure on sexual 
orientation.  Augmenting the HMDA data with the classical 1990 Boston Fed data and Fannie Mae 
Loan Performance data, we test whether their perceived homosexual status affects the approval, cost, 
and performance of the mortgages for which they apply. The results reveal that, in contrast with 
otherwise comparable loan applicants, the average approval rate for potentially homosexual applicants 
is about 3% to 8% lower. Furthermore, conditional on being approved, their financing cost is about 
0.02% to 0.2% higher. This is equivalent to an annual total of $8.6 million to $86 million in additional 
interest/fees paid by same-sex borrowers nationwide. Meanwhile, we find no evidence that 
homosexual status is associated with higher default risk.  Finally, we document evidence of a two-
sided spillover effect. That is, holding other factors constant, when a neighborhood’s same-sex 
population increases, although same-sex applicants still experience lower approval rate and higher 
financing cost, the treatment discrepancy between same-sex and straight applicants narrows from both 
sides.   
Key words: Credit Rationing, Discrimination, Mortgage, LGBT 
JEL Class: G21, J1 
                                                          
 


2 
 
1.  Introduction 
In the U.S, owning a home has long been associated with achieving the American Dream. 
Based on the U.S. Bureau of the Census, as of 2016, the national homeownership rate is 63.7%, despite 
the decline since its peak value of 69.2% in 2004. One important vehicle that makes it possible for 
Americans to become homeowners is through a mortgage. As of 2016, the total U.S. residential loan 
balance is $11.45 trillion,1 in contrast to $19.98 trillion2 of the national debt at the same time.  Due to 
the heavy involvement of and reliance on U.S households on the mortgage market, an economically 
sound and fair lending mechanism is crucial to sustaining and promoting the welfare of society.  
One disturbing concern in the credit market is the likely practice by some lenders of 
denying loans to selected groups of people for non-economic reasons. Since the influential seminal 
work of Black et al. (1978), many researchers have studied lending discrimination based on skin color, 
gender, and race over the last four decades. For instance, minority lending discrimination has been 
extensively studied in consumer markets, such as the mortgage market (Ladd, 1982; Munnell et al., 
1996; Ross and Yinger, 2002; Cheng et al., 2011; Bayer et al., 2016), rental housing market (Ahmed 
and Hammarstedt, 2008; Ahmed et al., 2008), and auto loan market (Ayres, 1991; Ayres and Siegelman, 
1995; Goldberg, 1996; Morton et al., 2003).  
The above studies on discrimination are echoed by many high-profile cases reported to the 
general public. For example, there have been numerous lawsuits alleging discrimination by auto loan 
lenders (and the affiliated auto manufactures, if any) against minority borrowers for overcharging them on 
interests. Most of these bias suits ended with multi-million dollar settlements. An incomplete list of the auto 
loan minority bias suit settlements includes GM (1989), Nissan (2003), Ford (2006), Ally (2013), 
Honda (2015), and Toyota (2016)3.    
       Potentially discriminatory practices are also found in the labor market. In 2009, Walmart agreed 
to an $11.7 million settlement in response to an accusation of denying jobs to female applicants from 
                                                          
1 Source: Federal Reserve (https://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/releases/mortoutstand/current.htm). 
2 Source: U.S. Department of the Treasury (https://treasurydirect.gov/govt/reports/pd/pd_debttothepenny.htm). 
3 Sources: GM (1989) http://articles.latimes.com/1989-09-06/business/fi-1773_1_gm-suit-settlement; Nissan (2003) 
http://www.nytimes.com/2003/02/21/business/nissan-settles-bias-suit-by-minority-buyers.html; Ford (2006) 
http://articles.latimes.com/2006/nov/09/business/fi-ford9; Ally (2013) 
https://dealbook.nytimes.com/2013/12/20/ally-in-98-million-settlement-on-bias-in-auto-loans; Honda (2015) 
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-07-14/honda-finance-unit-agrees-to-pay-25-million-in-u-s-loan-case; 
Toyota (2016) http://www.latimes.com/business/la-fi-toyota-settlement-20160202-story.html.  


3 
 
1998 through February 2005.4 Costco also settled an $8 million bias suit in 2013 for the claim of 
discriminating against women in promotions to management jobs.5 
        Despite the ample archival evidence on discrimination regarding race and gender in consumer 
and labor markets, fewer cases of potential discrimination on sexual orientation have been reported. 
According to Washington Blade, a popular LGBT news outlet, it was not until 2016 that the U.S. 
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) reached its first settlement in history in an 
anti-gay bias case, 6 which was against Pallet Companies for firing a lesbian employee after she 
complained about being harassed by her supervisor due to her sexual orientation.7  
                Motived by the huge stake that U.S. households have on the mortgage market and the lack 
of systematic investigations on sexual orientation-based discrimination, this paper examines potential 
lending discrimination on homosexual mortgage applicants. Although the federal Fair Housing Act 
(FHA) of 1968 and the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA) of 1974 prohibit any lending 
discrimination based on a borrower’s race, gender, marital status, religion, and so on, they do not 
specifically include sexual orientation as a prohibited basis. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, 
there is no previous academic study examining whether mortgage lenders systematically provide less 
access to credit (e.g., higher denial rates) or unfavorable terms (e.g., charging higher interest) for 
lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) borrowers, possibly due to the difficulty of identifying 
these types of borrowers. 8 Accompanying the wake of human rights equality for the LGBT 
community in recent decades, study of this specific topic of mortgage lending discrimination for 
LGBT borrowers is very timely. 
          Our study begins by investigating whether mortgage lenders are more likely to deny applicants 
who are potentially homosexual than other applicants with similar backgrounds. Following past 
research, such as Munnell et al.’s (1996) Boston Fed study and Ross and Yinger (2002), we first apply 
the settings similar to previously studied racial- and gender-based discrimination to our research 
question. This way, our results are as robust as those from previous literature and the discrimination 
level is contextualized. We start our test with a national sample of data from the Home Mortgage 
                                                          
4 See https://www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/newsroom/release/3-1-10.cfm. 
5 See http://www.sfgate.com/nation/article/Costco-to-pay-8-million-to-settle-gender-bias-5083273.php. 
6 See http://www.washingtonblade.com/2016/06/29/eeoc-reaches-first-ever-settlement-anti-gay-discrimination-case/.  
7 Walmart also settled a bias suit with a $7.5 million in 2016, after being claimed for denied spousal health insurance 
benefits to same-sex employees between 2011 and 2013. See 
http://money.cnn.com/2016/12/02/news/companies/walmart-discrimination-settlement/. 
8 Sexual orientation disclosure is not required for mortgage applications. 


4 
 
Disclosure Act (HMDA) from 1990 to 2015, and we confirm the homosexual discrimination results 
within the large dataset. What is more, the longer period and wider scope of the national level data 
allows us to study the trend of homosexual mortgage discrimination over time and geographic 
variation. We find that the pattern of potential lending discrimination is persistent over time. 
          However, due to the limited coverage of borrower information in HMDA, it misses some 
important information such as a borrower’s credit worthiness, employment history, and other factors. 
As a result, we cross-validate our findings by using the classical Boston Fed dataset, which includes an 
extensive list of property, neighborhood, borrower, and lender characteristics for a random sample of 
borrowers in Boston in 1990. Our results are qualitatively consistent and quantitatively stronger when 
we use the Boston Fed data, indicating the lack of borrower’s characteristic controls in HMDA data 
is unlikely to bias us toward finding a pseudo discrimination pattern. Instead, much the opposite seems 
to be true. That is, HMDA estimation without extensive controls on borrower’s characteristics seems 
to provide a conservative lower bound on the magnitude of lending discrimination to same-sex 
borrowers.  
Overall, when compared with otherwise similar loan applicants, we find the gross approval 
rate for potentially homosexual applicants to be from 3% (HMDA) to 8% (Boston Fed) lower. The 
results based on the Boston Fed data further show that homosexual applicants are about 73.12% more 
likely to be denied a mortgage application than heterosexual applicants with similar characteristics. In 
contrast, using the same data and a similar methodology, Munnell et al.’s (1996) find that compared 
to similar white applicants, minority applicants are about 40% more likely to be denied a mortgage. 
        However, studying loan approval rates alone does not establish a complete, convincing case for 
lending discrimination. As Gary Becker points out in his 1993 Nobel Prize speech, while commenting 
on minority lending discrimination, “If banks discriminate against minority applicants, they should 
earn greater profits on the loans actually made to them than on those to whites.” Inspired by this 
observation, we further merge the HMDA data with Fannie Mae Single-Family Loan Performance 
data, which provides us more information on borrower characteristics, mortgage terms, and 
performance. Our results show that, after controlling for a list of loan and borrower characteristics, 
lenders charge 0.02% to 0.2% higher interest expenses to potentially homosexual borrowers. Based 
on our inferred loan balance of $43 billion from same-sex borrowers in the U.S., this is equivalent to 
about $8.6 million to $86 million more interest/fees paid by homosexual borrowers nationwide every 


5 
 
year. Finally, we find no evidence that borrowers’ homosexual status is associated with higher default 
risk. 
         Another striking finding from this study is a two-sided spillover effect. We use a county’s (or 
tract’s) percentage of same-sex population each year as a proxy for the friendliness of the 
neighborhood to LGBT people. Compared to neighborhoods of low LGBT presence and ceteris 
paribus, same-sex loan applicants living in more LGBT-friendly neighborhood are treated less 
“unfairly,” as evidenced by lower approval rate drop and narrower financing cost markup. Surprisingly, 
hetero-sex loan applicants living in more LGBT-friendly neighborhood are treated more “unfairly,” 
as their loan approval rates decline and financing costs increase.  
          Over the course of this study, we make several contributions to discrimination study literature. 
First, we find significant evidence that there is discrimination against LGBT group mortgage 
applications, and we quantify the degree of the discrimination. This important mortgage loan 
discrimination problem has been overlooked in the existing literature and has led to erroneous 
assumptions on the financial equality among groups based upon their sexual orientation.  Hence our 
study fills in the gap by testing same-sex applicants to shed light on the existence and degree of lending 
discrimination against the homosexual group.  
        Second, our findings have strong implications for policy makers. There is no term in federal fair 
lending laws that explicitly forbids mortgage discrimination based on sexual orientation.  We provide 
empirical evidence that the buyers’ perceived homosexuality is an under-investigated factor in 
monitoring creditors’ lending practices.  
        Last but not least, using the free and publicly available HMDA data, we propose a straightforward 
method to identify potentially homosexual borrowers (households) without self-disclosure 
requirement. As shown in section 4.1, when we compare our measured state-level percentage of 
homosexual borrowers with the 2012 Gallup survey on the adult LGBT population percentage, the 
correlation is remarkably high at 0.76. A further demonstration using Washington D.C data shows 
that, up to the tract level, our measure accurately matches the LGBT population percentage survey 
released by the U.S. Bureau of Census. As HMDA data is compiled and released annually, we can 
construct accurate measures of LGBT population distribution across the country every year, in 
contrast to 10-year release of similar information from the census data. Although this study focuses 
on lending discrimination against homosexual borrowers, our method suggests that researchers can 


6 
 
also merge HMDA with other data sets, such as the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), to 
study a wider range of topics regarding LGBT society at the individual level that can be otherwise 
difficult to identify.  
We proceed as follows: in section 2, we provide literature background on mortgage lending, 
discrimination in credit and labor markets, and relevant regulations; in sections 3 and 4, we describe 
the data and our research design; in section 5, we summarize our results; and in section 6, we offer 
conclusions. 
2. Literature Review and Hypothesis Development 
          Though the federal Fair Housing Act (FHA) of 1968 and Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA) 
of 1974 are in place to regulate lenders against discriminations, researchers have found strong evidence 
of lending discriminations against gender, racial, or ethnic groups. Using Boston Fed data, Munnell et 
al. (1996) reveal that minority applicants face significant discrimination on lending approval decisions. 
Colman (2000), using National Survey of Small Business (NSBF) data, finds that female applicants are 
more likely to be asked to pledge collateral and pay high interest rates than males. Cavalluzoo et al. 
(2002) finds that with a lack of lender competition, female-owned businesses tend to be denied credit 
applications more often than businesses owned by males. Such gender-based discrimination evidence 
has also been documented internationally; Bellucci et al. (2010) and Alesian et al. (2013) both report 
supportive evidence that banks discriminate against female credit applicants in Italy. In field studies, 
Hanson et al. (2015) finds that lenders offer more information and assistance in response to borrower 
inquiries and are more likely to follow up on initial contact from white borrowers. 
In contrast, existing literature is silent about lending discrimination based on sexual orientation. 
We suspect this is mostly because of a data availability issue. Unlike gender, race, etc., a loan applicant’s 
sexual orientation is not required to be disclosed and hence is impossible to be measured directly.  
           Despite the vacuum in literature on lending discrimination by sexual orientation, there is some 
research in other markets/fields on LGBT community that may shed light on the possible existence 
of such discrimination in mortgage market. Using experimental data of faked resumes with listed 
sexual orientation, Weichselbaumer (2003) shows that lesbians are less likely to be hired. Using 
questionnaires to 119 LGBT students, Schneider and Dimmito (2010) find that majority of the 
respondents experienced anti-LGBT discrimination in the past.  Almeida et al. (2009) use survey data 


7 
 
to show LGBT youth experience more depression, higher tendency to self-harm, or to commit suicide. 
The authors find that perceived discrimination is a significant contributor to the observed pattern.  
         The LGBT community faces discrimination in many different aspects for complex historical 
reasons. Notably, in the United States, the majority of citizens support the legal recognition of same-
sex marriage in the recent decade.9 This support has increased steadily for more than a decade, and 
has consistently remained above 50% in opinion polls since 2010.10 However, there is significant 
opposition to same-sex marriage in different groups and states. This homophobia is especially 
associated with conservatives, many members of the Tea Party movement, people with religious 
beliefs conflicting with homosexuality, people who attend religious services at least weekly, some 
members of the Republican Party, and many people living in the Southern United States and the Bible 
Belt. On June 26, 2015, the U.S. Supreme Court held, in Obergefell v. Hodges, that the Fourteenth 
Amendment requires states to offer same-sex marriage and recognize same-sex marriages performed 
elsewhere in the country, and that state-level bans on same-sex marriage are unconstitutional. 
However, officials of fourteen counties in three states were still unwilling to issue licenses to same-sex 
couples as of October 2015.11 
          Due to the significant opposition to same-sex marriage, we should not be surprised to find 
discrimination against homosexual couples in mortgage applications. However, little research is 
available on this topic in academia. This paper attempts to fill the void. In particular, we construct a 
reliable proxy for homosexual orientation based on publicly available dataset to shed light on this 
important topic. Overall, anecdotal evidence and other results suggest lending discrimination against 
homosexuals is very likely to exist, and this hypothesis is the precise focus of this study. 
3. Data 
The Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA), a federal law enacted in 1975, requires certain 
financial institutions to provide mortgage data to the public. HMDA data covers information such as 
the applicant’s race, gender, income, loan purpose, loan approval, and so on.12 We collect HMDA 
                                                          
9 http://www.pewforum.org/2016/05/12/changing-attitudes-on-gay-marriage/  
10 http://www.gallup.com/poll/162398/sex-marriage-support-solidifies-above.aspx  
11Alabama judges use segregation-era law to avoid gay marriage 
http://www.al.com/news/index.ssf/2015/10/alabama_judges_use_segregation.html#incart_river_home , and 
https://ballotpedia.org/Local_government_responses_to_Obergefell_v._Hodges#tab=Alabama  
12 The details of the data can be found at the FDIC website (https://www.fdic.gov/regulations/laws/rules/6500-
3030.html#6500hmda1975).   


8 
 
national data from 1990 to 2015. The data from 1990 to 2012 is available from the National Archives’ 
website. HMDA national data from 2013 to 2015 is likewise available from Federal Financial 
Institutions Examination Council's (FFIEC) website. We also collect the matching census data from 
these sources.   
One significant limitation of the original HMDA data is their omission of important 
information on loan applicants, which is crucial to lenders’ approval decisions and to any credible 
investigation of lending discrimination.13 In response, in 1990, the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 
conducted a survey of a sample of lenders in Boston Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) and collected 
detailed information on the borrowers’ financial and credit strength, employment, other demographic 
and property characteristics. The data were later used by Munnell et al. (1996) to generate the famous 
Boston Fed Study, which is classic research on minority lending discrimination. The Boston Fed data 
was made public by the authors and have since been used by numerous researchers.     
        Although our major loan analysis findings are derived from HMDA national data, we cross-
validate our results by using Boston Fed data. Because the public use version of the Boston Fed data 
does not include lender identification information, Ross and Yinger (2002) merge it with the HMDA 
data, and correct some coding errors in the original data. The details of the merging process are 
available in the data appendix of Ross and Yinger (2002).14 The adjusted sample size from Boston Fed 
data is 2,316. To be consistent with the Boston Fed study and to facilitate understanding of the degree 
of homosexual discrimination compared to other discrimination found in earlier literature, for HMDA 
data we follow Munnell et al. (1996) by omitting incomplete or withdrawn loan applications. We also 
omit all observations from borrowers who have missing values for the variables we use in this analysis; 
see Table 1 for a complete list of these variables. Furthermore, as identifying same-sex borrowers 
requires gender information for both the main applicant and co-applicant, we drop observations that 
have only the main applicant on record for ease of comparison.15 Because our HMDA data covers 
1990 to 2015 and is for the whole nation––a very large sample size––we draw a 20% random sampling 
                                                          
13 Lenders with information advantage practice price discrimination by charging high prices in residential mortgage 
market, see Gan and Riddiough  (2008). 
14 The cleanup version of the Boston Fed data is downloadable from John Yinger’s website 
(http://faculty.maxwell.syr.edu/jyinger/datasets/index.html). 
15 In an earlier draft, we also include the main applicant only observations and add a dummy control, and the findings are 
similar. The results are available upon request.   


9 
 
from the full data. The total number of observations that we use for loan approval analysis from 
HMDA national data is 28,988,939. 
         To investigate loan costs and performances, we merge HMDA’s full sample with Fannie Mae 
Loan Performance data. This public-use Fannie Mae data includes all 30-year, fully amortizing, full 
documentation, single-family, conventional fixed-rate mortgages that Fannie Mae purchased since 
2000. In addition to the loan performance record, the Fannie Mae data provide crucial information 
that is not reported in HMDA, such as borrowers’ credit scores, contractual interest rates, loan-to-
value ratios, debt-to-income ratios, and mortgage insurance premiums, if any, etc. Regarding the 
HMDA data, since 2004, HMDA has included additional information on approved loan characteristics, 
such as property type (e.g., single-family, manufactured homes, etc.), lien status (first, second, or non-
secured), and rate spread. To take advantage of the expanded information in HMDA, we use 2004 as 
the starting point for our cost and performance analysis. When merging this data with Fannie Mae 
data, we keep all HMDA approval records regarding conventional loans that are secured by a first lien 
and are sold to Fannie Mae. We then merge these observations with Fannie Mae data based on the 
common variables available.16 To minimize matching errors, we only retain the matched pairs that are 
unique from both ends. As all identified same-sex applicants from HMDA have a co-applicant present 
by construction, to make a meaningful comparison, we only keep the merged non-same-sex applicants 
that also have a co-applicant on record. After the merge, we omit the unusual observations that have 
loan-to-value ratios over 80% but lack any mortgage insurance policy. 17 Finally, we drop the 
observations that are missing information on any baseline control variables in the loan performance 
analysis. The list of the variables in the baseline analysis is found in model 1 of Table 10. Our final 
sample in the cost and performance analysis consists of 425,239 loans acquired by Fannie Mae since 
2004.  
        A list of the key variables used in this study is reported in Table 1.           
[Insert Table 1 Here] 
      The summary statistics is reported in Table 2. 
                                                          
16 We merge by state, MSA, county, year, loan amount, loan purpose (e.g. purchase, refinancing, etc), owner-occupancy, 
property type, and the presence of co-borrower. County information is inferred from Fannie Mae data via the first three 
digits of the reported zip codes.  
17 It accounts for less than 0.005% of the matched observations.  


10 
 
[Insert Table 2 Here] 
 
4. Research Design 
4.1 Identifying potentially homosexual loan applicants  
Because sexual orientation is not a required disclosure item, it is impossible to identify 
homosexual loan applicants directly from the available data. A fair concern, therefore, is how to 
attribute any findings to homosexual discrimination if we cannot identify homosexual applicants. 
However, the definition of “discrimination” from the Cambridge Dictionaries Online is, “discrimination is 
treatment or consideration of, or making a distinction in favor of or against, a person or thing based 
on the group, class, or category to which that person or thing is perceived to belong to rather than on 
individual merit.”  Hence, it is the external perception, instead of the authenticity of an identity, which 
matters in discrimination identification. Fortunately, measuring such perception is possible. Almeida 
(2009) actually finds it is very likely perceived discrimination is a contributor to emotional distress 
among LGBT 9th–12th grade students. To comply with the FHA and ECOA, disclosing gender 
information of the applicant and the co-applicant, if available, is mandatory. Therefore, based on 
HMDA data, whenever we observe a joint presence of a loan applicant and co-applicant with the same 
gender, we identify them as a potential pair of homosexual applicants, and assign one on a dummy 
variable called “same-sex.” 
          To verify we propose a sensible identification strategy for identifying homosexual loan 
applicants, for each state in 2012, we calculate the percentage of same-sex pairs out of all identifiable 
applicant-pairs from the full HMDA dataset and compare this percentage with the Gallup estimate of 
state-level adult LGBT population percentage of the same year. 18 The correlation between our 
measure and the Gallup LGBT estimate is 0.76. We plot this data in Figure 1a below. Given the 
remarkably high correlation between these two aggregate estimates, we are confident that our measure 
covers a significant portion of homosexual loan applicants.  
[Insert Figure 1a Here] 
                                                          
18 See http://www.gallup.com/poll/160517/lgbt-percentage-highest-lowest-north-dakota.aspx.  


11 
 
As the HMDA dataset allows us to map each observation up to the census tract level, we 
further choose Washington D.C. and calculate the percentage of same-sex applicants in each census 
tract, using post 2010 data. We then compare our measure with a well-known LGBT population survey 
from the Williams institute at UCLA which is based on recent 2010 U.S census data, and common 
sense with news and other anecdotal evidence on LGBT communities in Washington D.C. For 
example, Logan Circle and DuPont Circle areas are considered as the neighborhoods with the highest 
gay population.19 We include the survey results of the Williams Institute in Figure 1b, and we plot the 
heat map of our estimated same-sex percentage in Figure 1c.  We can see our measure is consistent 
with both the Williams institute survey and anecdotal evidence that the commonly perceived same-
sex neighborhoods are the Logan Circle and DuPont Circle areas.  
[Insert Figure 1b Here] 
 
 
[Insert Figure 1c Here] 
However, we acknowledge our measure has its flaws. For example, it is certainly possible that 
some of the identified pairs in our sample are merely family members. As a result, in section 5.3, a 
series of robustness checks are conducted to address the concern of potential measurement errors.           
4.2 Model development 
          There is a vast literature for studies on lending discrimination, although the literature focuses 
primarily on racial-based discrimination. Ross and Yinger (2002) provide a comprehensive review on 
this literature. As pointed out by Ross and Yinger (2002), the key challenge facing scholars as they try 
to understand lending discrimination is that different lenders may use different underwriting standards. 
As a result, it is possible that at the individual lender level, there is a common underwriting standard 
for everybody and, therefore, no “discrimination”. However, due to the fact that applicants might be 
sorted disproportionally to different lenders, the sorting might lead to the case that certain types of 
applicants are more (or less) likely to have their applications approved. 
To address this concern, we follow the methodology used by Ross and Yinger (2002) by 
examining several kinds of variations of lenders’ underwriting models. The logit model, seen in 
                                                          
19 See https://www.borderstan.com/2012/05/30/the-winner-is-dcs-gay-neighborhood/.  


12 
 
equation 1, is the baseline model in which we assume all lenders share a common underwriting model. 
The details on variable definitions can be found at Table 1.  
𝐴𝑝𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑣𝑒= 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝑆𝑎𝑚𝑒‐ 𝑆𝑒𝑥 + 𝛽2𝑀𝑎𝑙𝑒+ 𝛽3𝑅𝑎𝑐𝑒𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦+ 𝛽4𝑂𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑝𝑖𝑒𝑑+ 𝛽5𝐿𝑇𝐼
+ 𝛽6 log
𝐼𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑒+ 𝛽7𝑝𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑒𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦+ 𝛽8𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑛𝑇𝑦𝑝𝑒𝐷𝑢𝑚𝑚𝑦
+ 𝛽9𝐷𝑒𝑚𝑜𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑝ℎ𝑖𝑐𝐶𝑡𝑟𝑙+ 𝐹. 𝐸. +𝜖 
1 
To examine the potential spillover effect, we further expand our analysis from equation 1 by 
adding  LG_𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑦𝑃𝑐𝑡 and 𝑆𝑎𝑚𝑒‐ 𝑆𝑒𝑥 × LG_𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑦𝑃𝑐𝑡 interaction term, as well as various 
lender/state fixed effects to account for varied lenders’ underwriting models in a simple, systematic 
way. 
With the additional characteristics from the Boston Fed data, we next add a comprehensive 
list of variables that measure loan applicants’ financial, employment, educational, and demographic 
backgrounds. This model is shown in equation 2. Similar to equation 1, we do not include 
the LG_𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑃𝑐𝑡  dummy in the baseline equations: 
𝐴𝑝𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑣𝑒= 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝑆𝑎𝑚𝑒‐ 𝑆𝑒𝑥+ 𝛽2𝑀𝑖𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦+ 𝛽3𝐻𝐸𝑇𝐼+ 𝛽4𝑇𝐷𝑇𝐼+ 𝛽5𝑁𝑒𝑡𝑊𝑜𝑟𝑡ℎ
+ 𝛽6𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑈𝑛𝑒𝑚𝑝+ 𝛽7𝑆𝑒𝑙𝑓‐ 𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑜𝑦𝑒𝑑+ 𝛽8𝑃𝑀𝐼 𝐷𝑒𝑛𝑖𝑎𝑙
+ 𝛽9𝑀𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑖 𝐹𝑎𝑚𝑖𝑙𝑦+ 𝛽10𝐹𝑖𝑥𝑒𝑑 𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒+ 𝛽11𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑙 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑚+ 𝛽12𝐿𝑜𝑎𝑛 𝑇𝑒𝑟𝑚
+ 𝛽13𝐺𝑖𝑓𝑡+ 𝛽14𝐶𝑜‐ 𝑎𝑝𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑡+ 𝛽15𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑔𝑛𝑒𝑟+ 𝛽16𝐴𝑡 𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑡 50 + 𝛽17𝑀𝑎𝑙𝑒
+ 𝛽18𝑀𝑎𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑑+ 𝛽19𝑂𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑝𝑖𝑒𝑑+ 𝛽20𝑃𝑜𝑜𝑟 𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡+ 𝛽21𝐵𝑎𝑛𝑘𝑟𝑢𝑝𝑐𝑦
+ 𝛽22𝐶𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑡 𝐻𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑦+ 𝛽23𝐿𝑇𝑉+ 𝛽24𝑆ℎ𝑜𝑟𝑡 𝑊𝑜𝑟𝑘 𝐸𝑥𝑝. +𝛽25𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ 𝑆𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑙
+ 𝛽26𝐷𝑒𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠+ 𝑂𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑠+ 𝐹. 𝐸. +𝜖 
2 
In addition to the lender/state fixed effects and the added control variables regarding 
applicants’ characteristics, we further allow for variations in underwriting based on loan terms. That 
is, we allow lenders to put different underwriting weights on various loan and borrower characteristics 
depending upon the nature of the loan.  Ross and Yinger (2002) provide a clear example that 
demonstrates the importance of controlling for this type of variation: 


13 
 
Consider, for example, a lender that specializes in high LTV loans and a common 
underwriting process in which the weight placed on the debt-to-income ratio is higher 
for loans with a high LTV. Under these circumstances, this lender will appear to place 
a higher weight on the debt to income ratio than do other lenders, even though this is 
not the case. (p. 194) 
In order to combat this potential problem, we first identify a list of key underwriting variables 
(i.e., house expense-to-income ratio, total debt expense-to-income ratio, loan-to-value ratio, 
bankruptcy history, and borrower’s consumer and mortgage credit history). We then construct pair-
wise interaction terms for these variables and add them into our model.  
As discussed in Ross and Yinger (2002), if lenders indeed differ on their underwriting 
standards, and these variations are legitimate reflections of their perceived business necessity (hence, 
not indicative of discrimination), these variations should reflect either differences in the applications 
lenders receive or differences in lenders’ past experiences. As a result, conformation that potential 
“discrimination” in loan approval disappears after accounting for the link between a lender’s 
underwriting standards and their portfolio will satisfy a necessary condition for the business’ necessity 
defense (Ross and Yinger, 2002). To address this and to further control for lender underwriting 
standard variations, we identify a list of key lender portfolio variables, which Ross and Yinger (2002) 
also use. These variables are the percentage of conventional loans sold to the secondary market, 
average loan size, average applicant’s income, and average loan-to-income ratio; we also included the 
pair-wise interactions of the previously identified key underwriting variables and the lender portfolio 
variables. The resulting model is our most comprehensive model using Boston Fed data. 
At this point, we have formed models to test the likelihood of loan approval for same-sex 
borrowers, controlling for other social economics features. To ensure convincing findings on lending 
discrimination, we go one step further to check the loan cost and performance for approved applicants, 
because if same-sex borrowers are not discriminated against due to perceptions of their homosexual 
orientation, we should not expect any significant difference from the average cost and loan 
performance for the approved loans. However, if discrimination is found within the results, aside from 
individual deviations due to fundamental economic reasons, we should expect that same-sex 
borrowers’ loans are more profitable because same-sex borrowers are more qualified for the loans 
with comparable terms. Other evidence of discrimination might be if, in business practice, same-sex 


14 
 
borrowers are charged extra fees to get a similar loan. We test the following situations for approved 
loans: the loan spread disclosure, the rate spread, the contractual rate, and the likelihood of a default.  
 After 2004, a rate spread for a loan must be reported if it is above a certain threshold as 
defined by HMDA. Between January 2004 and September 2010, a loan’s rate spread is defined as the 
difference between the APR on a loan and the prevalent rate on treasury securities of comparable 
maturity. HMDA mandates disclosure of rate spread if it is at least 3%, for a loan secured by a first 
lien. To check if it is more likely that same-sex borrowers experience a higher spread than hetero-sex 
borrowers, meaning same-sex borrowers probably pay higher interest, we define a dummy variable as 
set to 1 if a loan has a reported spread, and 0 otherwise. We run the following logit model as in 
equation 3.  
𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒= 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝑆𝑎𝑚𝑒‐ 𝑆𝑒𝑥+ 𝛽2𝑀𝑎𝑙𝑒+ 𝛽3𝐻𝑖𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑛𝑖𝑐+ 𝛽4𝐵𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑘+ 𝛽5𝐴𝑠𝑖𝑎𝑛
+ 𝛽6𝑂𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑒+ 𝛽7𝑂𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝐿𝑜𝑎𝑛 𝑡𝑜 𝑉𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒+ 𝛽8 log
𝐼𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑒
+ 𝛽9𝐵𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟 𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒+ 𝛽10𝐶𝑜‐ 𝐵𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟 𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒+ 𝛽11𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑠𝑡 𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒
+ 𝛽12𝑁𝑢𝑚𝑢𝑛𝑖𝑡+ 𝛽13𝑀𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑔𝑎𝑔𝑒 𝐼𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑝𝑐𝑡+ 𝛽14𝐿𝑜𝑎𝑛_𝑃𝑢𝑟𝑝
+ 𝛽15𝑂𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑝𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑦 𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑠+ 𝑂𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑠+ 𝐹. 𝐸. +𝜖 
3  
Alternatively, we can test the rate spread directly by regressing the rate spread on loan and 
borrower characteristics as the following Tobit model in equation 4. 
𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑆𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑= 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝑆𝑎𝑚𝑒‐ 𝑆𝑒𝑥+ 𝛽2𝑀𝑎𝑙𝑒+ 𝛽3𝐻𝑖𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑛𝑖𝑐+ 𝛽4𝐵𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑘+ 𝛽5𝐴𝑠𝑖𝑎𝑛
+ 𝛽6𝑂𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑒+ 𝛽7𝑂𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝐿𝑜𝑎𝑛 𝑡𝑜 𝑉𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒+ 𝛽8 log
𝐼𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑒
+ 𝛽9𝐵𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟 𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒+ 𝛽10𝐶𝑜‐ 𝐵𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟 𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒+ 𝛽11𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑠𝑡 𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒
+ 𝛽12𝑁𝑢𝑚𝑢𝑛𝑖𝑡+ 𝛽13𝑀𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑔𝑎𝑔𝑒 𝐼𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑝𝑐𝑡+ 𝛽14𝐿𝑜𝑎𝑛_𝑃𝑢𝑟𝑝
+ 𝛽15𝑂𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑝𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑦 𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑠+ 𝑂𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑠+ 𝐹. 𝐸. +𝜖 
4 
Although the Tobit model handles censored data better, the extremely high rate of censoring 
might concern econometricians, given the strong normality assumption that the model makes. We use 
data from Fannie Mae to further analyze the original contractual rate using equation 5. 


15 
 
𝐶𝑡𝑟𝑡𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒= 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝑆𝑎𝑚𝑒‐ 𝑆𝑒𝑥+ 𝛽2𝑀𝑎𝑙𝑒+ 𝛽3𝐻𝑖𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑛𝑖𝑐+ 𝛽4𝐵𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑘+ 𝛽5𝐴𝑠𝑖𝑎𝑛
+ 𝛽6𝑂𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑒+ 𝛽7𝑂𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝐿𝑜𝑎𝑛 𝑡𝑜 𝑉𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒+ 𝛽8 log
𝐼𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑒
+ 𝛽9𝐵𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟 𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒+ 𝛽10𝐶𝑜‐ 𝐵𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟 𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒+ 𝛽11𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑠𝑡 𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒
+ 𝛽12𝑁𝑢𝑚𝑢𝑛𝑖𝑡+ 𝛽13𝑀𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑔𝑎𝑔𝑒 𝐼𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑝𝑐𝑡+ 𝛽14𝐿𝑜𝑎𝑛_𝑃𝑢𝑟𝑝
+ 𝛽15𝑂𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑝𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑦 𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑠+ 𝑂𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑠+ 𝐹. 𝐸. +𝜖 
5 
 
After checking the contractual rates, we check the likelihood of a default on the loans for 
same-sex borrowers with the following logit model in equation 6.  
𝐷𝑒𝑓𝑎𝑢𝑙𝑡= 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝑆𝑎𝑚𝑒‐ 𝑆𝑒𝑥+ 𝛽2𝑀𝑎𝑙𝑒+ 𝛽3𝐻𝑖𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑛𝑖𝑐+ 𝛽4𝐵𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑘+ 𝛽5𝐴𝑠𝑖𝑎𝑛
+ 𝛽6𝑂𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑒+ 𝛽7𝑂𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝐿𝑜𝑎𝑛 𝑡𝑜 𝑉𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒+ 𝛽8 log
𝐼𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑒
+ 𝛽9𝐵𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟 𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒+ 𝛽10𝐶𝑜‐ 𝐵𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟 𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒+ 𝛽11𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑠𝑡 𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒
+ 𝛽12𝑁𝑢𝑚𝑢𝑛𝑖𝑡+ 𝛽13𝑀𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑔𝑎𝑔𝑒 𝐼𝑛𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑝𝑐𝑡+ 𝛽14𝐿𝑜𝑎𝑛_𝑃𝑢𝑟𝑝
+ 𝛽15𝑂𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑝𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑦 𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑠+ 𝑂𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑠+ 𝐹. 𝐸. +𝜖 
6 
Finally, conditional on the loans that are already in default, we employ a Cox proportional 
hazard model on the duration before the default to check if it same-sex borrowers tend to default later 
than other comparable borrowers. Making more mortgage payments still mean less risk to the banks 
when we compare two defaults.  
5. Results 
5.1 Loan approval decision 
5.1.1 Main results with HMDA data 
We first use the 20% random sample of HMDA data from 1990 to 2015 to test lending 
discrimination on sexual orientation. Before we conduct the loan approval analysis, we calculate the 
raw distribution of hetero and same-sex applicants based on different loan types and programs. The 
results are reported in Table 3.  
Table 3 reveals that applications filed by same-sex borrowers account for 4.03% of the total 
received. However, based on the approved loans, this percentage drops to 3.75%. Given the total 


16 
 
residential loan balance of $11.45 trillion as of 2016, we infer that about $43 billion are borrowed by 
same-sex applicants. The raw approval rate for hetero-sex applicants is 82.74%, in contrast to only 
76.82% for same-sex applicants. The lower approval rate for same-sex applicants is persistent among 
various loan purposes and programs, although the margins are smaller for government sponsored 
programs.  
[Insert Table 3 Here] 
  The lower raw approval rate is not enough to establish a case of potentially unfair treatment 
to same-sex applicants, as we do not control for other confounding factors that affect lender’s 
approval decision. As a result, we follow equation 1 in section 4.2 and run a serious of logit and linear 
probability models with available controls from the HMDA and census data. We report the results in 
Table 4. Column (1) reports the baseline results. The coefficient for same-sex applicants is -0.147 (at 
1% level of significance), which indicates that the log odds are 14.7 % lower for homosexual applicants 
to be approved for a mortgage loan after controlling for a whole set of basic mortgage loan control 
variables, such as property type, natural log of applicants’ income, loan purpose, and so on. We also 
find that the coefficients for minorities are negative and significant: Hispanic (-0.390), Black (-0.809), 
and Asian (-0.172), which are qualitatively consistent with previous studies, such as Munnell et al. 
(1996). The coefficient for county level market share of each lender (Lendershare_County), measured 
yearly, is positive but insignificant. Hence the relative size of lenders in local market does not play a 
significant role on their approval decision.  
          A consumer’s mortgage lending approval and interest rates are impacted by neighborhoods. 
Bayer, Ferreira, and Ross (2016) find the cohort of the most recent purchase or refinancing is 
influential in predicting defaults. Before the subprime mortgage crisis, lenders targeted geographic 
areas with historically low rates of home ownership where loan sellers identified many underserved 
consumers. In Column (3), we include county-level percentages of same-sex applicants each year 
(LG_countypct), and its interaction with same-sex dummy as control variables, and the results become 
more negative for the main effects; we also report the average marginal effect in Column (4). The 
same-sex coefficient is -0.312, at a 1% significance level. The margin coefficient of -0.042 suggests 
that, relative to an otherwise similar hetero-sex applicant, the approval rate for a same-sex applicant is 
4.2% lower on average. The coefficient of LG_Countypct is -0.0619, at 1% significance level. Its 
margin of -0.08 indicates that, when the share of a county’s same-sex population increases by 1%, the 
loan approval rate to hetero-sex applicants reside in that county drops by 0.8%.  The interaction term 


17 
 
between same-sex dummy and LG_Countypct is 0.0343, at 1% significance level. The corresponding 
margin of 0.005 suggests that homosexual applicants’ loan approval rate is increased by 0.5% if they 
choose to live in a county that has 1% higher same-sex population. It appears that in more LGBT 
presented neighborhoods, same-sex applicants are treated less unfavorably, in contrast to higher loan 
rejection rates for straight applicants. This finding hence suggests a two-sided spillover effect when a 
county’s LGBT population density changes.   
         As we control for the census tract demographics plus county and year fixed effects, our findings 
in Column (3) are unlikely to be driven by the unobserved county-specific economic characteristics. 
This is further confirmed in Column (5), where we run a linear probability model with additional 
lender*county fixed effect plus other controls in Column (3). A nice feature of the linear probability 
model is the simple probabilistic interpretation on coefficients. The findings are qualitatively 
unchanged from Column (3). We again find significant evidence of lower approval rate for same-sex 
applicants, and the two-sided spillover effect as discussed above. In Column (6), we go one step further 
to include lender*county*year fixed effect. Under this specification, we can no longer estimate the 
spillover effect from LG_Countypct, but the other findings are otherwise consistent with earlier 
columns.  
 [Insert Table 4 Here] 
5.1.2 Main results for the Boston Fed data 
Due to lack of some important control variables on loan and borrower characteristics, HMDA 
data may suffer from biased estimates. Therefore, we further tested the Boston Fed data for sexual 
orientation discrimination. The results are reported in Table 5. 
Table 5, Column (1) is the baseline result for which we assumed all lenders share a common 
underwriting model. Its coefficient for same-sex is -1.159 (with a standard error of 0.404), which 
indicates homosexual applicants are much less likely to be approved for a mortgage loan application 
after controlling for a rich set of variables from the Boston Fed data. 
Because of the much narrower geographic coverage, we calculate the percentage of same-sex 
applicant at the census tract level (LG_Tractpct) using HMDA data in 1990, and include it in column 


18 
 
(2).20  The result is about the same for the same-sex coefficient. We then introduce lender fixed effects 
to allow different lenders to vary in a simple, systematic way, and report the results in Column (3). 
The coefficient is actually lower than the coefficient of Column (1); it is -1.190 with a standard error 
of 0.415. 
In Column (4), in addition to lender fixed effect, we also include variations in underwriting 
based on loan terms. That is, the model allows lenders to put different underwriting weights on various 
loan and borrower characteristics, depending upon the nature of the loan. Ross and Yinger (2002) 
provide a clear example to demonstrate the importance of controlling this type of variation. We first 
identify a list of key underwriting variables (i.e., house expense to income ratio, total debt expense to 
income ratio, loan to value ratio, bankruptcy history, and borrowers’ consumer and mortgage credit 
history). We then construct pair-wise interaction terms for these variables, and add them into our 
model. After controlling for these variables, the approval rates further decrease, with a coefficient of 
-1.296 (standard error 0.487). 
Column (5) is the result for our final attempt to control for variations on lenders’ underwriting 
standards. We also report its average marginal effect in Column (6). To address the problem, we 
identify a list of key lender portfolio variables, including the percentage of conventional loans sold to 
secondary market, average loan size, average applicant’s income, and average loan-to-income ratio. 
We also include the pair-wise interactions of the previously identified key underwriting variables and 
the lender portfolio variables. This model is our most comprehensive model. The coefficients for 
same-sex, however, fall even further than those of our previous tests (-1.285 with a standard error of 
0.544). Its margin of -0.084 suggests that, ceteris paribus, the loan approval rate for homosexual 
applicant is 8.4% lower than straight applicant on average. Consistent with HMDA based findings 
from Table 4, we again find strong evidence of the negative spillover effect in more LGBT dense 
neighborhoods. The margin for LG_Tractpct is -0.002, suggesting that when the same-sex population 
percentage in a census tract increases by 1%, the straight applicant’s loan approval rate declines by 
0.2%.  
[Insert Table 5 Here] 
                                                          
20 Due to the small sample size with only 56 same-sex applicants, we do not add the interaction term between same-sex 
dummy and LG_Tractpct.  


19 
 
It is important to clarify that we have a limited focus in this analysis. It abstracts from 
discrimination that may occur in different areas of the economy. For example, if homosexual 
individuals are subject to discrimination in labor markets (see Weichselbaumer, 2003), they will have 
lower incomes and their higher denial ratio may actually reflect higher obligation ratios, greater loan-
to-value ratios, or poorer credit histories. We did not try to study these discriminations. However, our 
results are robust, even when controlled for these social economic characteristics. Similarly, if 
homosexual couples are discouraged from moving into predominantly heterosexual areas, they will 
limit their search to neighborhoods sanctioned for homosexual families. These neighborhoods tend 
to be older central cities with high-density housing, and high-density housing might be associated with 
higher denial rates (see Black et al. [2002] for some potential reasons that why gay men like cities like 
San Francisco). Given the extensive controls of borrower’s characteristics, census tract demographics, 
and county and lender fixed effects, it is unlikely our findings related to same-sex applicants are 
spuriously driven by the above factors.  
5.1.3 Robustness check  
          One concern for the main findings is that the results might be driven by observations of early 
years or a few extreme years. We run the regressions year by year using the full sample of national 
HMDA data and report the estimates and confidence interval in Figure 2.  The pattern of lower 
approval rate to same-sex applicants is persistent over time, except in 1996 and 2000, in which the 
coefficient is not significant from zero at 5%. Surprisingly, the extent of discrimination seems 
unmitigated in the last decade, when the Democratic Party is in power.   
[Insert Figure 2 Here] 
To rule out other explanations of the results such as the potentially inaccurate proxy for sexual 
orientation and estimation bias, we conduct a robustness check on both the HMDA and Boston Fed 
data. Table 6 reports the robustness check on the HMDA national data. Although it is very rare that 
fathers and sons or brothers/sisters will buy a house together, we still need to rule out such cases to 
check if our results hold. We further restrict our sample for same-sex co-applicants to different races. 
The results are essentially the same. For Column (1), the same-sex coefficient is -0.159 at 1% 
significant level, which is essentially the same as Column (1) of Table 4. 
[Insert Table 6 Here] 


20 
 
         In Table 7, we address the concern that same-sex borrowers are more likely to live in multi-
family units than single-family units, and are more likely to have a cosigner than not. We restrict our 
sample to applicants for single-family units without a cosigner. The results are still similar to those 
results without the constraints (i.e., the results in Table 5). The Table 7 Column (1) same-sex 
coefficient is -1.525 at 1% significant level, which is very similar to Column (1) of Table 5. The 
following four columns are also very similar.  
[Insert Table 7 Here] 
          To address the concern that same-sex mortgage applicants are younger on average, and to rule 
out potential parent-kid pairs, we restrict our Boston Fed sample to applicants over 50 years old and 
with no dependents. The finding of lower approval rate is even stronger when we compare them to 
the same-sex coefficients in Table 8. The Column (1) same-sex coefficient is -2.196 (standard error 
0.708). The coefficients in the other four columns are also lower than corresponding coefficients in 
Table 5. 
[Insert Table 8 Here] 
          Finally, following a process first suggested by Munnell et al. (1996), we first run a full logit 
regression (Logit (5) in table 5, but excluding same-sex as control variable, with Boston Fed Data) 
on non-same-sex observations.  Then for the same-sex applicants, we plug in their attributes to the 
model pretending they are hetero-sexual, and compare the average predicted denial probability with 
the actual denial rate observed in data. Compared to otherwise similar non-same-sex applicants, 
same-sex applicant are 73.12% more likely to be rejected. The results are reported in Table 9. 
[Insert Table 9 Here] 
5.2 Mortgage cost  
     Measuring mortgage costs to borrowers can be tricky. One obvious choice is to use the 
contractual rate. Nevertheless, we shall be aware that the contractual rate is often not an accurate 
measure of the effective borrowing cost. Unlike annual percentage rate (APR), the contractual rate 
ignores the impact of loan fees and other closing costs charged by lender. As a simple example, 
consider a 30-year fixed rate mortgage for $200,000. Suppose a lender offers a 4.5% contractual rate 


21 
 
with two discount points.21 The terms observed from the merged HMDA-Fannie Mae data will have 
loan amount of $200,000 and a contractual rate of 4.5%. The monthly mortgage payment is $1013.37. 
Nevertheless, because of the two discount points, lenders will charge $4,000 fees upon closing. 
Assuming the borrower chooses to amortize the fees over the loan term, the actual monthly payment 
will be $1033.64, which is based on the principal value of $204,000. In another word, this borrower 
only receives $200,000 from the lender, but her mortgage payment will be calculated as if she had 
borrowed $204,000. The effective borrowing cost (hence the APR) is 4.67%, which is 0.17% higher 
than its contractual rate. This example demonstrates why contractual rate often underestimates the 
true financing cost when loan fees are present.  In practice, lenders tend to maintain “sticky” mortgage 
rates and use loan fees and points to achieve the desired yield. Brueggeman and Fisher (2016) offer an 
excellent discussion on why lenders often prefer to use loan fee, rather than contractual rate, to adjust 
yield. Because APR measures the effective borrowing cost more accurately than contractual rates, we 
first conduct our mortgage cost analysis using APR measure in the next subsection.   
5.2.1 Rate spread analysis 
         Under HMDA, since 2004, a rate spread for a loan must be reported if it is above a certain 
threshold. Between January 2004 and September 2010, the rate spread is defined as the difference 
between the APR on a loan and the prevalent rate for treasury securities of comparable maturity. 
HMDA mandates disclosure of such rate spread if it is at least 3% for a loan secured by a first lien. 
Due to this high threshold, only 3.89% of the loans in our usable sample have reported rate spreads. 
Since October 2010, HMDA changed its definition of rate spread as the difference between a loan’s 
APR and a survey-based estimate of prevalent APR (instead of treasure rate) for comparable loans. 
Given this new definition, disclosure is required if a rate spread is above 1.5%. The new disclosure 
threshold is even higher than before, as only 1.01% of the loans in our sample are above this threshold, 
and hence, have reported spreads.  
      Because only loans with APRs well above average have disclosed rate spreads, we define a dummy 
variable called “Disclosure,” which is set to 1 if a loan has a reported spread, and 0 otherwise. We 
then run a logit model by controlling an extensive set of loan and borrower characteristics. The results 
are reported in Table 10. Model 1 reports the baseline result, and we gradually add LG_Countypct, its 
interaction with same-sex dummy, and more fixed effects in subsequent models. We find consistently 
                                                          
21 One point means a 1% upfront charge of a loan discount fee, applicable to the contractual loan amount.  


22 
 
across models that, compared with loans that are otherwise similar, loans granted to same-sex 
borrowers are more likely to have a reported rate spread. The same-sex coefficient in Model 3 is 0.112 
(standard error 0.00411), which suggests that, holding other factors constant, same-sex borrowers are 
more likely to have a loan with a reported rate spread, and thus, a higher APR.  
[Insert Table 10 Here] 
As an alternative test for higher APRs for same-sex borrowers, we regress the rate spread 
directly on loan and borrower characteristics. One restriction, as discussed above, is that our sample 
is censored below by the threshold that triggers the rate spread disclosure. We therefore adopt a Tobit 
model to address the data censoring issue. Due to the 2010 change to the reporting threshold and the 
definition of rate spread, we split our sample into periods before and after 2010,22 and report the Tobit 
regression results in Table 11. Models 1 and 4 correspond to the baseline model for pre- and post-
2010 periods separately, and Models 3 and 6 are full models after controlling the interaction terms 
between same-sex and county level same-sex percentage variable, and additional fixed effects for the 
corresponding periods. We find significant evidence that same-sex borrowers are charged higher rate 
spreads. For example, the coefficient of same-sex borrowers for the full model before 2010 (Model 3) 
is 0.202 at a 1% significance level, which implies that, compared with otherwise similar borrowers, the 
base group same-sex borrowers, on average, pay 0.202% more on their mortgages, which is both 
statistically and economically significant. The same coefficient for post-2010 (Model 6) is smaller at 
0.111, although it is still highly significant. However, we read this result with great caution; as for the 
post-2010 period, due to the higher reporting threshold, the rate spread information of almost 99% 
of the observations are censored out. This leaves us with only 115 reported rate spreads from same-
sex borrowers out of 237,197 total observations and, thus, with little information to extract.  
[Insert Table 11 Here] 
5.2.2 Contractual rate analysis 
Although the Tobit model is suitable to handle censored data, the extremely high censoring 
rate in our sample and the strong normality assumption made by the Tobit model can still be of 
                                                          
22 Here we drop the loans originated in the last quarter of 2009 as it is the transitional period of the changing reporting 
rules.  


23 
 
concern. In response, in this section we examine the original contractual rate, which is available for all 
observations thanks to Fannie Mae data.  
           With the caveat that contractual rate tends to be sticky and usually underestimates the effective 
financing cost, we report the OLS regression results using it as our cost measure in Table 12. The 
model specifications are otherwise identical to Table 11. As the changing disclosure rule is no longer 
relevant, we first report the full sample result in Columns (1) to (3). Then, to facilitate comparison 
with Table 11, we break our sample into the same pre and post 2010 periods in Columns (4) and (5). 
The findings from contractual rate are qualitatively consistent with the previous APR based rate spread 
analysis. For example, in Colum (1), the coefficient for same-sex is 0.0195 (standard error 0.00298), 
which suggests same-sex borrowers on average pay 1.95 more basis points on contractual rate 
compared with otherwise similar hetero-sex borrowers. The pattern is persistent across different sub-
periods, hence suggesting that overpricing to same-sex borrowers is a common business practice. 
Finally, the larger coefficient for same-sex after 2010 in Column (5) echoes the trend of increasing 
approval discrimination to same-sex applicants since 2004, as shown in Figure 2.   
   As far as the spillover effects, the coefficient for LG_Countypct is at least 10% significant 
across all model specifications, suggesting some evidence on rate markup to straight borrowers living 
in more LGBT dense counties. On the other hand, for same-sex borrowers living in these counties, 
there is evidence that rate markup for them tend to decline. Overall, consistent with loan approval 
analysis, we are able to find evidence of two-sided spillover effect on financing costs as well.  
[Insert Table 12 Here] 
5.3 Mortgage default 
Our findings so far suggest same-sex borrowers are more likely to be rejected when they apply 
for loans, and, conditional on being approved, lenders tend to charge them higher financing costs, 
primarily through upfront fees. Although we have controlled for an extensive list of characteristics on 
both borrowers and their loans, it may still be plausible that there could be some unobserved 
characteristics that cause same-sex borrowers riskier and, therefore, more likely to default. In this case, 
the higher APRs charged to same-sex borrowers could simply reflect the premium of their higher 
default risk. To investigate whether the higher financing costs to same-sex borrowers can be justified 
by the risk premium and, hence, a reflection of financial necessity, we look at the loan performance 
using our merged HMDA-Fannie Mae samples.   


24 
 
We first estimate logit models for the mortgage defaults. The dependent variable is a dummy 
variable indicating when a mortgage becomes delinquent for at least 60 days within 5 years since its 
origination date. As the most recent performance updates in our data were from the end of 2015, we 
restrict our sample to loans originated before 2010 in order to generate a five-year observation window. 
The results are shown in Table 13.  Model 1 is our baseline model. In Model 2 we add LG_Countypct. 
In Model 3, we add the interaction between same-sex and the LG_Countypct. Although there is no 
reason to associate subsequent loan performance with the original lender after loan characteristics are 
controlled, we still include the annually measured lender’s county-level market share measured yearly 
and lender fixed effects in model 4. The coefficient of same-sex borrowers across all four models is 
highly insignificant. Hence we feel comfortable saying that same-sex status exhibits no greater risk of 
default.  
[Insert Table 13 Here] 
Finally, we investigate loan performance conditioning on loans that have experienced default. 
In particular, for all loans that have a record of at least 60 days’ delinquency, we measure how long it 
has been since origination before they are in default. We then run a Cox proportional hazard model 
on the duration before default with a standard list of control variables. Our model specifications are 
identical to the previous logit analysis on default. The results are reported in Table 14. Interestingly, 
the coefficient for the same-sex is negative, although insignificant. A negative coefficient implies that, 
conditional on the loan’s already default status, same-sex borrowers tend to postpone default from 
happening more often than non-same-sex borrowers. Obviously, conditional on loans being in default, 
lenders prefer to see default happening later than sooner. The lack of significance makes it 
unwarranted to claim that same-sex borrowers perform better. However, we shall not forget that our 
control of financing cost, i.e., contractual rate, is likely to underestimate the true cost markup for same-
sex borrowers. It is obvious from Table 14 that financing cost exhibits a significant impact on 
triggering default. So once again, there is certainly no evidence that same-sex borrowers are riskier for 
lenders, and the findings from the duration model weakly suggest that it may be the opposite if we 
have better measures on borrowers’ financing costs.  
[Insert Table 14 Here] 
5.4 The types of lending discrimination 


25 
 
We present evidence that, compared with otherwise similar loan applicants, same-sex 
borrowers are more likely to have their applications turned down by lenders and, conditional on being 
approved, they tend to be charged with higher interest rates. One issue that is yet to be investigated is 
the type of lending discrimination that our findings reveal. The courts implementing the federal fair 
lending laws broadly recognize two types of lending discrimination evidence: disparate treatment and 
disparate impact.23 
Evidence on disparate treatment can be established by showing that during the lending 
practice, lenders explicitly use either prohibitory factors (overt evidence) or factors that are not 
justified by legitimate nondiscriminatory factors (comparative evidence).  
Disparate impact, on the other hand, happens when a lender applies a factor “neutral” policy 
to all credit applicants, but the policy or practice disproportionately excludes or burdens certain group 
of people on a prohibited basis. One example, provided by the Federal Fair Lending Regulations and 
Statutes Overview,24 states, “A lender’s policy is to deny loan applications for single-family residences 
for less than $60,000. The policy has been in effect for ten years. This minimum loan amount policy 
is shown to disproportionately exclude potential minority applicants from consideration because of 
their income levels or the value of the houses in the areas in which they live.” This type of 
discrimination is much harder to prove because, at the lender level of the decision model, 
discriminatory factor coefficients, such as sexuality or minority status, will be insignificant. Practically, 
the courts will then determine whether the policy or practice can be justified by “business necessity.” 
To begin to address this issue of discrimination type, we first examine whether same-sex 
applicants are distributed unevenly in lenders’ customer pools, which can potentially lead to disparate 
impact. In particular, using HMDA 20% data, we computed the proportion of same-sex applicants 
within each lender-state pair. We then regressed the proportion based on lenders’ overall size ranking 
in percentile and average loan characteristics for each lender, plus the state fixed effects. Please note 
that our definition of a “lender,” which is identified by a unique combination of  HMDA respondent 
ID and agency code, is somewhat narrower in scope due to data; because HMDA allows affiliated 
subsidiaries to use different respondent IDs, it is possible that multiple identified lenders actually 
belong to one parental financial institution. This is especially relevant for large financial institutions. 
                                                          
23 See Ross and Yinger (2002) for a comprehensive discussion on this matter. 
24 https://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/supmanual/cch/fair_lend_over.pdf. 


26 
 
Based on a report25 from Mortgage Bankers Association (MBA), for 2010, 8,124 “lenders” reported 
data to HMDA. After adjusting for their parent companies, the list was narrowed down to 6,700 
financial institutions.  
We report the results in Table 15. The overall findings do provide evidence for disproportional 
clustering. It seems that same-sex applicants are more likely to choose lenders that also have a bigger 
share of minority applicants. Furthermore, the summary statistics in Table 2 reveal that same-sex 
applicants tend to have higher loan-to-income ratios (LTI). Hence, it is no surprise to see from Table 
15 that same-sex applicants are more likely to choose a lender who is willing to offer larger LTI loans. 
Another notable difference from the summary statistics is that same-sex applicants tend to have higher 
income. Interestingly, Table 15 shows that same-sex borrowers are more likely to apply for a loan 
from a lender whose average customer has lower income. Shopping this way, the comparative income 
advantage for same-sex borrowers becomes bigger, which could strengthen their profiles in competing 
for a loan. Finally, there is no evidence that lender size matters when same-sex borrowers decide from 
whom to borrow.  
[Insert Table 15 Here] 
  
Next, to distinguish disparate treatment from disparate impact, we re-run the loan approval 
and credit cost regression at the lender level. A significant coefficient for our key variable, “same-sex,” 
would support the conclusion of disparate treatment; an insignificant coefficient would suggest either 
no discrimination from that lender, or it can be subject to potential disparate impact investigation. To 
minimize the noise from the many small lenders, and for economic significance, we restrict our 
attention to the top 100 lenders identified in the merged HMDA-Fannie Mae data when we run the 
lender level OLS regression on mortgage cost in section 5.2. For the same lenders, we also refer back 
to the HMDA 20% sample and run the lender-level loan approval linear probability regression for all 
loans those lenders processed. Our model specifications are similar to the models used in Table 4 
(Column 5) and Table 12 (Column 1), with the exception that we now use state fixed effect to maintain 
the degree of freedom. Because now we run lender-level regressions, we also remove all lender-related 
fixed effects. Given our primary interest on the coefficient of “same-sex,” we plot its values for all top 
100 lenders in Figure 3, in which lender size 1 is the largest.  
                                                          
25 http://apps.mba.org/files/Research/HMDAFAQ.pdf. 


27 
 
[Insert Figure 3 Here] 
We find significant evidence that many lenders internally treat “same-sex” status unfavorably. 
This is particularly true when lenders come to loan approval decisions. With respect to the mortgage 
cost, although we see fewer lenders “overcharge” same-sex borrowers on their interest rates upon 
approval, the incidence of this kind of business practice is still noticeable, especially among large 
lenders on the market.  
Finally, for lenders with either 10% insignificant or unexpected signs on the “same-sex” 
coefficient, we pool them together to investigate whether unfavorable outcomes to same-sex 
borrowers emerge again. We adopt the full models used in Table 4 (Model 4) and Table 12 (Model 1). 
Although the results do not appear here to save space, for the coefficient on “same-sex,” we again 
find negative 1% significant result in the loan approval model and positive 1% significant result in the 
mortgage rate model. Hence, for lenders who pass the individual disparately treatment test, there is 
collective evidence that same-sex borrowers are subject to unfavorable credit outcomes. This suggests 
that there is also potential disparate impact, due to the disproportional clustering of same-sex loan 
applicants among lenders.  
6. Conclusion 
 
This study examines avenues through which differential treatment could affect same-sex 
applicants’ access to credit and opportunities for homeownership. The results indicate that 
homosexual mortgage applicants in the United States are more likely to be turned down than other 
applicants with similar characteristics. Following traditional approaches of estimating mortgage loan 
discrimination based on race, we study two samples—one from national loan applications from 
HMDA originating between 1990 and 2015, and one from classical Boston Fed loan application data 
with more extensive borrower characteristics in 1990. The results provide empirical evidence of 
lending discrimination concerning sexual orientation in U.S. loan applications. Homosexual applicants 
are 73.12% more likely than otherwise similar straight applicants to be denied a loan.  
We further check the cost and performance of the approved loans, and we find lenders tend 
to charge higher financing costs to homosexual borrowers, primarily through upfront fees. After we 
merge the HMDA data with Fannie Mae data, we find no evidence that same-sex borrowers exhibit 
more risk of default.  


28 
 
         Our analysis also provides evidence of a two-sided spillover effect. That is, holding other factors 
constant, when a neighborhood’s same-sex population increases, although same-sex applicants still 
experience lower approval rate and higher financing cost, the treatment discrepancy between same-
sex and straight applicants narrows from both sides.   
Our research might suffer from omitted variable bias. For example, the original HMDA data 
suggest that differential treatment by sexual orientation is occurring in the mortgage market. There 
might be important confounding variables related to both loan approval and sexual orientation that 
are missing from the HMDA data. To cross-validate the reliability of our findings, we employ Boston 
Fed data that cover in detail on lenders’ information set, including essentially all of the information 
the lenders use in their decision-making process, and find that sexual orientation still played a 
significant role in mortgage lending decisions. 
Furthermore, our investigation on mortgage performance doesn’t find that homosexual 
applicants default more often, or that their defaults are costlier to lenders. Given the absence of hard 
evidence suggesting sexual orientation may be a reliable signal for loan performance, this suggests that 
a serious discrimination problem may exist in the mortgage market. As a result, our findings have 
strong policy implications. Lenders, LGBT community groups, and regulators must work together to 
guarantee homosexual applicants are treated fairly. 
 
 


29 
 
References 
Ahmed A M, Hammarstedt M. “Discrimination in the Rental Housing Market: A Field Experiment 
on the Internet.” Journal of Urban Economics, 64 no. 2 362-372. (2008). 
Ahmed, Ali M., Lina Andersson, and Mats Hammarstedt. “Are Lesbians Discriminated Against in the 
Rental Housing Market? Evidence from a Correspondence Testing Experiment.” Journal of 
Housing Economics 17, no. 3. 234-238. (2008). 
Alesina, Alberto F., Francesca Lotti, and Paolo Emilio Mistrulli. “Do Women Pay More for Credit? 
Evidence from Italy.” Journal of the European Economic Association 11, no. s1 45-66. (2013). 
Almeida, Joanna, et al. "Emotional Distress among LGBT Youth: The Influence of Perceived 
Discrimination Based on Sexual Orientation." Journal of Youth and Adolescence 38.7 1001-
1014. (2009). 
Ayres, Ian. “Fair Driving: Gender and Race Discrimination in Retail Car Negotiations.” Harvard Law 
Review 817-872. (1991). 
Bayer, Patrick, Fernando Ferreira and Stephen L. Ross. The Vulnerability of Minority Homeowners 
in the Housing Boom and Bust. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 8 (1), 1-30. 
(2016). 
Bayer, Patrick, Fernando Ferreira, and Stephen L. Ross. What Drives Racial and Ethnic Differences 
in High Cost Mortgages? The Role of High Risk Lenders. Review of Financial Studies, 
forthcoming. (2017) 
Becker, Gary. “Nobel Lecture: The Economic Way of Looking at Behavior.” Journal of Political 
Economy, 101 No 3. 385-409. (1993). 


30 
 
Bellucci, Andrea, Alexander Borisov, and Alberto Zazzaro. “Does Gender Matter in Bank–Firm 
Relationships? Evidence from Small Business Lending.” Journal of Banking & Finance 34, no. 
12 2968-2984. (2010). 
Black, Dan, et al. "Why do Gay Men Live in San Francisco?." Journal of Urban Economics 51.1 54-
76. (2002). 
Black, Harold, Robert L. Schweitzer, and Lewis Mandell. "Discrimination in Mortgage Lending." The 
American Economic Review 68, no. 2 186-191. (1978). 
Brueggeman W B, Fisher J D. “Real Estate Finance & Investments”. McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2016. 
Cavalluzzo, Ken S., John D. Wolken, and Linda C. Cavalluzzo. “Competition, Small Business 
Financing, and Discrimination: Evidence from a New Survey.” Journal of Business 641-679. 
(2002). 
Cheng, Ping, Zhenguo Lin, and Yingchun Liu. “Racial Discrepancy in Mortgage Interest Rates.” The 
Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics 1-20. (2014). 
Coleman, Susan. "Access to capital and terms of credit: A comparison of men-and women-owned 
small businesses." Journal of Small Business Management 38.3. 37. (2000). 
Demyanyk, Yuliya and Otto Van Hemert. Understanding the Subprime Mortgage Crisis. Review of 
Financial Studies, 24 (6) 1848-1880. (2011). 
Gan, Jie, and Timothy J. Riddiough. "Monopoly and Information Advantage in the Residential 
Mortgage Market." Review of Financial Studies 21 (6) 2677-2703. (2008). 
Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou. “Dealer Price Discrimination in New Car Purchases: Evidence from 
the Consumer Expenditure Survey.” Journal of Political Economy 622-654. (1996). 


31 
 
Hanson, A., Hawley, Z., Martin, H., & Liu, B. Discrimination in mortgage lending: Evidence from a 
correspondence experiment. Journal of Urban Economics, 92, 48-65. (2016). 
Kau, James B., Donald C. Keenan, Walter J. Muller III, and James F. Epperson. “The Valuation at 
Origination of Fixed-Rate Mortgages with Default and Prepayment.” The Journal of Real 
Estate Finance and Economics 11, no. 1 5-36. (1995). 
Ladd, Helen F. “Equal Credit Opportunity: Women and Mortgage Credit.” The American Economic 
Review 166-170. (1982). 
Morton, Fiona Scott, Florian Zettelmeyer, and Jorge Silva-Risso. “Consumer Information and 
Discrimination: Does the Internet Affect the Pricing of New Cars to Women and Minorities?” 
Quantitative Marketing and Economics 1, no. 1 65-92. (2003). 
Munnell, Alicia H., Geoffrey MB Tootell, Lynn E. Browne, and James McEneaney. "Mortgage lending 
in Boston: Interpreting HMDA data." The American Economic Review 25-53. (1996). 
Ross S, Yinger J. The Color of Credit. Cambridge, Mass: The MIT Press. (2002). 
Schneider, Margaret S., and Anne Dimito. "Factors Influencing the Career and Academic Choices of 
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender People." Journal of Homosexuality 57.10 1355-1369. 
(2010). 
Weichselbaumer, Doris. “Sexual Orientation Discrimination in Hiring.” Labour Economics 10.6 629-
642. (2003). 
Zhang, Yan. “Fair Lending Analysis of Mortgage Pricing: Does Underwriting Matter?” The Journal 
of Real Estate Finance and Economics 46, no. 1 131-151. (2013). 
 


32 
 
Table 1: Variable Definitions 
Part A: Loan information 
Variable Name 
Meaning 
Used at 
Approve 
Dummy if loan application is approved 
HMDA&Boston 
Fed 
Occupied 
Dummy if Occupied as a principal dwelling 
HMDA&Boston 
Fed 
Loan Amount 
Loan Amount on contract 
HMDA 
Loan Purpose 
1: Home purchase 2: Home Improvement 3: Refinancing 
HMDA 
Loan Type 
1: Conventional 2: FHA 3: VA 4: FSA/RHS 
HMDA 
Loan to Income 
Loan to Income Ratio 
HMDA 
PMI Denial 
Dummy if applicant applied PMI and was denied 
Boston Fed 
LTV 
Loan to Value Ratio 
Boston Fed 
High LTV 
Dummy if LTV is above 1 
Boston Fed 
Extreme LTV 
Dummy if LTV is above 2 
Boston Fed 
Loan Term 
Term in years 
Boston Fed 
Fixed Rate 
Fixed rate mortgage dummy 
Boston Fed 
Multi-family 
Dummy for multi-family unit 
Boston Fed 
Special Program 
Dummy for special program loan 
Boston Fed 
Lendershare_County 
Lenders’ market share in a county 
HMDA 
 
Part B: Borrower information 
Variable Name 
Meaning 
Used at 
Same-Sex 
Dummy, equals 1 if applicant and co-applicant are of the same sex 
HMDA&Boston 
Fed 
Annual Income 
Total annual income (applicant + co-applicant) 
HMDA&Boston 
Fed 
Co-applicant 
Dummy if co-applicant is present 
HMDA&Boston 
Fed 
LG_CountyPct 
Percentage of Same Sex borrowers in a county 
HMDA 
LG_TractPct 
Percentage of Same Sex borrowers in a tract 
HMDA 
Male 
Dummy for Male Applicant 
HMDA 
Black 
Dummy for Black applicant 
HMDA 
Hispanic 
Dummy for Hispanic/Latino applicant 
HMDA 
Asian 
Dummy for Asian applicant 
HMDA 
Other race 
Dummy for other minority applicant 
HMDA 
Minority 
Dummy for all minority applicant 
Boston Fed 
HETI 
Housing expense-to-income ratio 
Boston Fed 
TDTI 
Total debt expense-to-income ratio 
Boston Fed 
Net Worth 
Net worth of applicant (in thousands) 
Boston Fed 
Cosigner 
Dummy for Cosigner (other than co-applicant) 
Boston Fed 
Married 
Dummy if applicant is married 
Boston Fed 
Consumer Credit 
History 
Applicant’s consumer credit history 
(See Boston Fed study for definition) 
Boston Fed 
Mortgage Credit 
History 
Applicant’s mortgage credit history 
(See Boston Fed study for definition) 
Boston Fed 
Bankruptcy 
Dummy if applicant has public recorded bankruptcy 
Boston Fed 
Gift 
Dummy for  gift is used in down payment 
Boston Fed 
Predicted Unemp 
Predicted unemployment probability for applicant 
(See Boston Fed Study) 
Boston Fed 
Short Work 
Experience 
Dummy if applicant has less than two year’s job experience 
Boston Fed 
Self-employed 
Dummy if applicant is self-employed 
Boston Fed 
At Least 50 
Dummy if applicant is over 50 
Boston Fed 
High School 
Dummy if applicant has finished at least high school 
Boston Fed 
public records 
 
Boston Fed 


33 
 
Dependent 
# of dependent of applicant 
Boston Fed 
 
Part C:  Census tract information 
Variable Name 
Meaning 
Used at 
Poor Tract 
Dummy for poor tract (income below area median) 
HMDA&Boston 
Fed 
Minority Tract 
Dummy if tract has over 30% Minority 
HMDA&Boston 
Fed 
LnPOP_tract 
Log of total population in tract 
HMDA 
FMI_tract 
Median family income in tract 
HMDA 
Unit/Pop 
# of Occupied units per capital in tract 
HMDA 
Age_tract 
Median age of residents in tract 
HMDA 
Houseage_tract 
Median house age in tract 
HMDA 
Male_tract 
Proportion of male in tract 
HMDA 
LnHV_tract 
Log  of median house vale in tract 
HMDA 
 
Part D: Lender’s mortgage portfolio information (all in 1990) 
Variable Name 
Meaning 
Used at 
CONVshare 
Percent of conventional loans sold at secondary market by lender 
Boston Fed 
Loansize_lender 
Average loan size made by lender 
Boston Fed 
Income_lender 
Average applicant’s income by lender 
Boston Fed 
LTI_lender 
Average loan to income ratio by lender 
Boston Fed 
 
 
 
Part E: Loan Cost and performance information 
Variable Name 
Meaning 
Used at 
Original rate 
Original Interest Rate 
Fannie Mae 
Original Loan to 
value 
Original Combined Loan-to-Value 
Fannie Mae 
Income 
Log Income 
Fannie Mae 
Borrower Score 
Borrower Credit Score 
Fannie Mae 
Co-Borrower Score 
Co-Borrower Credit Score 
Fannie Mae 
First Time 
First-Time Home Buyer Indicator 
Fannie Mae 
Num_unit 
Number of Units,  
Fannie Mae 
Mortgage 
Insurance_pct 
Mortgage Insurance Percentage,  
Fannie Mae 
Loan_purp 
Loan Purpose,  
Fannie Mae 
Occupancy Status 
Occupancy Status 
Fannie Mae 
 
 
 
Debt to Income 
Debt-to-income Ratio 
Fannie Mae 
 
 


34 
 
Table 2: Summary Statistics for Key Variables (Mean, Std) 
Variables 
Full Sample 
(STD) 
Same-sex=0 
(STD) 
Same-sex=1 
(STD) 
Two Sample t test 
(p-level) 
Approve 
(HMDA) 
0.8250 
(0.3800) 
08274 
(0.3779) 
0.7682 
(0.4220) 
*** 
(0.0000) 
Same-Sex 
(HMDA) 
0.0403 
(0.1966) 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
LG_CountyPct 
(HMDA) 
4.1523 
(1.8226) 
4.1177 
(1.7914) 
4.9746 
(2.3030) 
*** 
(0.0000) 
Lendershare_County 
(HMDA) 
3.7578 
(4.8558) 
3.7690 
(4.8642) 
3.4903 
(4.6414) 
*** 
(0.0000) 
Loan to Income 
(HMDA) 
1.8523 
(1.2774) 
1.8514 
(1.2717) 
1.8747 
(1.4065) 
*** 
(0.0000) 
Loan Amount ( $000s) 
(HMDA) 
159.3674 
 (165.2771) 
159.6204 
(165.6286) 
153.3385  
(156.5490) 
*** 
(0.0000) 
Annual Income ($000s) 
(HMDA) 
97.7372 
(125.5848) 
97.4595 
(123.2398) 
104.3517 
(172.1206) 
*** 
(0.0000) 
Occupied 
(HMDA) 
0.9233 
(0.2661) 
0.9250 
(0.2634) 
0.8834 
(0.3209) 
*** 
(0.0000) 
Approve 
(Boston Fed) 
0.8549 
(0.3523) 
0.8567 
(0.3505) 
0.7971 
(0.4051) 
 
(0.1663) 
Income ($000s) 
(Boston Fed) 
76.1072 
(67.3506) 
75.9923  
(67.4778) 
79.8398  
(63.4164) 
 
(0.6403) 
HEI 
(Boston Fed) 
25.2734 
 (9.7264) 
25.3116 
(9.7274) 
24.0310 
(9.6804) 
 
(0.2815) 
TDTI 
(Boston Fed) 
33.1560  
(11.0951) 
33.1569  
(10.9940) 
33.1274 
(14.0955) 
 
(0.9826) 
Net Worth ($000s) 
(Boston Fed) 
0.2298 
(0.9873) 
0.2311 
(0.9999) 
0.1863 
(0.3972) 
 
(0.7105) 
Predicted Unemp 
(Boston Fed) 
3.7876 
(2.0366) 
3.7853 
(2.0342) 
3.8623 
(2.1279) 
 
(0.7571) 
Self Employed 
(Boston Fed) 
0.1231 
(0.3286) 
0.1246 
(0.3304) 
0.0725 
(0.2612) 
 
(0.1942) 
LTV 
(Boston Fed) 
0.7653 
(0.2807) 
0.7650 
(0.2827) 
0.7773 
(0.2063) 
 
(0.7194) 
PMI Denial (Boston 
Fed) 
0.0194 
(0.1381) 
0.0200 
(0.1401) 
0 
(0) 
 
(0.2354) 
Multi-family 
(Boston Fed) 
0.1403 
(0.3474) 
0.1366 
(0.3435) 
0.2609 
(0.4423) 
*** 
(0.0034) 
Fixed Rate  
(Boston Fed) 
0.6576 
(0.4746) 
0.6573 
(0.4747) 
0.6667 
(0.4749) 
 
(0.8720) 
Special Program 
(Boston Fed) 
0.1718 
(0.3773) 
0.1700 
(0.3757) 
0.2319 
(0.4251) 
 
(0.1797) 
Loan Term 
(Boston Fed) 
28.7244 
(5.1376) 
28.7694 
(5.0478) 
27.2899 
(7.4065) 
** 
(0.0185) 
Gift 
(Boston Fed) 
0.1861 
(0.3893) 
0.1918 
(0.3938) 
0 
(0) 
*** 
(0.0001) 
Cosigner 
(Boston Fed) 
0.0358 
(0.1859) 
0.0338 
(0.1808) 
0.1014 
(0.3041) 
*** 
(0.0029) 
At Least 50 
(Boston Fed) 
0.4642 
(0.4988) 
0.4747 
(0.4993) 
0.2174 
(0.4155) 
*** 
(0.0000) 
Male 
(Boston Fed) 
0.7794 
(0.4148) 
0.7859 
(0.4103) 
0.5652 
(0.4994) 
*** 
(0.0000) 
Married 
(Boston Fed) 
0.5920 
(0.4916) 
0.6101 
(0.4878) 
0 
(0) 
*** 
(0.0000) 
Occupied 
(Boston Fed) 
0.9598 
(0.1964) 
0.9595 
(0.1972) 
0.9710 
(0.1690) 
 
(0.6315) 
Bankruptcy 
(Boston Fed) 
0.0812 
(0.2732) 
0.0801 
(0.2715) 
0.1159 
(0.3225) 
 
(0.2832) 
Mortgage Credit History 
(Boston Fed) 
1.7453 
(0.5330) 
1.7468 
(0.5350) 
1.6957 
(0.4635) 
 
(0.4327) 
Consumer Credit 
History 
2.1706 
(1.7161) 
2.1709 
(1.7151) 
2.1594 
(1.7625) 
 
(0.9546) 


35 
 
(Boston Fed) 
High School 
(Boston Fed) 
0.7409 
(0.4382) 
0.7414 
(0.4379) 
0.7246 
(0.4500) 
 
(0.7539) 
Short Work Experience 
(Boston Fed) 
0.0885 
(0.2841) 
0.0859 
(0.2803) 
0.1739 
(0.3818) 
** 
(0.0112) 
 Dependent 
(Boston Fed) 
0.7845 
(1.1114) 
0.8042 
(1.1193) 
0.1449 
(0.4933) 
*** 
(0.0000) 
Original Loan-to-Value 
(Fannie Mae) 
74.2732 
(15.6316) 
74.3010 
(15.6324) 
73.6033 
(15.5973) 
*** 
(0.0000) 
Borrower Score 
(Fannie Mae) 
753.8248 
(48.4005) 
753.9804 
(48.3368) 
750.0820 
(49.7632) 
*** 
(0.0000) 
Co-Borrower Score 
(Fannie Mae) 
756.3145 
(47.9988) 
756.3955  
(47.9335) 
754.3646 
(49.5047) 
*** 
(0.0000) 
First Time 
(Fannie Mae) 
0.1169 
(0.3213) 
01144 
(0.3182) 
0.1774 
(0.3820) 
*** 
(0.0000) 
Num_unit 
(Fannie Mae) 
1.0778 
(0.3798) 
1.0738 
(0.3706) 
1.1740 
(0.5487) 
*** 
(0.0000) 
Mortgage Insurance_pct  
(Fannie Mae) 
5.5181 
(10.7624) 
5.5490 
(10.7870) 
4.7733 
(10.1243) 
*** 
(0.0000) 
 
 
 
 
 


36 
 
Table 3: Loan Applications Sort by Purpose and Program 
Panel A. Loan Applications sort by Purpose 
# of Received Applicants 
Same-Sex 
Purchase 
Improvement 
Refinancing 
 
Row Total 
 
 
No 
10,372,452 
(94.57%) 
2,453,051 
(96.51%) 
14,995,533 
(96.88%) 
27,821,036 
(95.97%) 
 
Yes 
595,487 
(5.43%) 
88,833 
(3.49%) 
483,583 
(3.12%) 
1,167,903 
(4.03%) 
 
Column Total 
10,967,939 
(37.83%) 
2,541,884 
(8.77%) 
15,479,116 
(53.40%) 
28,988,939 
(100%) 
# of Approved Applications 
Same-Sex 
Purchase 
Improvement 
Refinancing 
 
Row Total 
 
 
No 
9,005,866  
(94.95%) 
1,814,448  
(97.10%) 
12,197,951  
(97.10%) 
23,018,265 
(96.25%) 
 
Yes 
479,279  
(5.05%) 
54,218 
(2.90%) 
363,702  
(2.90%) 
897,199 
(3.75%) 
 
Column Total 
9,485,145 
(39.66%) 
1,868,666 
(7.81%) 
12,561,653 
(52.53%) 
23,915,464 
(100%) 
Raw Approval Rate 
Same-sex 
Purchase 
Improvement 
Refinancing 
 
Row Total 
 
 
No 
86.82% 
73.97% 
81.34% 
82.74% 
 
Yes 
80.48% 
61.03% 
75.21% 
76.82% 
 
Panel B: Loan Applications sort by Loan Program 
# of Received Applications 
Same-Sex 
Conventional 
FHA 
VA 
 
Row Total 
 
 
No 
25,116,803 
(96.22%) 
1,931,534 
(91.95% ) 
685,816 
(98.75%) 
27,821,036 
(95.97%) 
 
Yes 
987,633 
(3.78%) 
169,101 
(8.05%) 
8,698 
(1.25%) 
1,167,903 
(4.03%) 
 
Column Total 
26,104,436 
(90.05%) 
2,100,635 
(7.25%) 
694,514 
(2.40%) 
28,988,939 
(100%) 
# of Approved Applications 
Same-Sex 
Conventional 
FHA 
VA 
 
 
No 
20,729,860  
(96.52%) 
1,619,381 
(92.00% ) 
595,654 
 (98.80%) 
23,018,265 
(96.25%) 
 
Yes 
747,153  
(3.48%) 
140,847  
(8.00%) 
7,211  
(1.20%) 
897,199 
(3.75%) 
 
Column Total 
21,477,013 
(89.80%) 
1,760,228 
(7.36%) 
602,865 
(2.52%) 
23,915,464 
(100%) 
Raw Approval Rate 
Same-Sex 
Conventional 
FHA 
VA 
 
 
No 
82.53% 
83.84% 
86.85% 
82.74% 
 
Yes 
75.65% 
83.08% 
82.90% 
76.82% 
Note: calculated based on 20% HMDA national data.


37 
 
 
Table 4: HMDA National 20% Result (1990-2015) 
 
Logit  
(1) 
Logit  
(2) 
Logit  
(3) 
Average 
Marginal  
Effect 
Linear 
Probability 
(4) 
Linear 
Probability 
(5) 
 
Approve 
Approve 
Approve 
Logit (3) 
Approve 
Approve 
Same-Sex 
-0.147*** 
-0.140*** 
-0.312*** 
-0.042 
-0.0300*** 
-0.0296*** 
 
(0.0243) 
(0.0245) 
(0.0281) 
 
(0.00248) 
(0.00218) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LG_CountyPct 
 
-0.0593*** 
-0.0619*** 
-0.008 
-0.00223*** 
N/A 
 
 
(0.00942) 
(0.00953) 
 
(0.000515) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Same*LG_CountyPct 
 
 
0.0343*** 
0.005 
0.00136*** 
0.000939*** 
 
 
 
(0.00523) 
 
(0.000424) 
(0.000256) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lendershare_County 
0.00935 
0.00945 
0.00942 
0.001 
0.00164* 
N/A 
 
(0.00959) 
(0.00936) 
(0.00936) 
 
(0.000870) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LTI 
-0.0631*** 
-0.0629*** 
-0.0630*** 
-0.008 
-0.0188*** 
-0.0213*** 
 
(0.0166) 
(0.0166) 
(0.0166) 
 
(0.00103) 
(0.00119) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Log Income 
0.458*** 
0.457*** 
0.457*** 
0.061 
0.0290*** 
0.0223*** 
 
(0.0513) 
(0.0510) 
(0.0509) 
 
(0.00299) 
(0.00314) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Male 
0.431*** 
0.430*** 
0.429*** 
0.057 
0.0325*** 
0.0285*** 
 
(0.0231) 
(0.0231) 
(0.0231) 
 
(0.00186) 
(0.00170) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Occupied 
0.0198 
0.0191 
0.0185 
0.003 
0.0274*** 
0.0299*** 
 
(0.0480) 
(0.0479) 
(0.0479) 
 
(0.00304) 
(0.00308) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hispanic 
-0.390*** 
-0.389*** 
-0.389*** 
-0.052 
-0.0503*** 
-0.0500*** 
 
(0.0218) 
(0.0218) 
(0.0218) 
 
(0.00442) 
(0.00449) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Black 
-0.809*** 
-0.805*** 
-0.806*** 
-0.107 
-0.0934*** 
-0.0908*** 
 
(0.0219) 
(0.0223) 
(0.0222) 
 
(0.00320) 
(0.00304) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Asian 
-0.172*** 
-0.172*** 
-0.172*** 
-0.023 
-0.0210*** 
-0.0222*** 
 
(0.0213) 
(0.0214) 
(0.0214) 
 
(0.00141) 
(0.00168) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Other race 
-0.624*** 
-0.624*** 
-0.624*** 
-0.083 
-0.0581*** 
-0.0506*** 
 
(0.0621) 
(0.0621) 
(0.0621) 
 
(0.00531) 
(0.00299) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Purpose: Improvement 
-0.793*** 
-0.798*** 
-0.798*** 
-0.111 
-0.0825*** 
-0.0789*** 
 
(0.114) 
(0.113) 
(0.113) 
 
(0.0151) 
(0.0133) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Purpose: Refinancing 
-0.479*** 
-0.482*** 
-0.482*** 
-0.061 
-0.0337*** 
-0.0305*** 
 
(0.101) 
(0.1000) 
(0.0999) 
 
(0.00486) 
(0.00459) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Type: FHA 
0.272*** 
0.270*** 
0.270*** 
0.034 
-0.00755 
-0.0136*** 
 
(0.0787) 
(0.0782) 
(0.0781) 
 
(0.00485) 
(0.00418) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Type: VA 
0.308*** 
0.303*** 
0.302*** 
0.038 
0.00947** 
0.00339 
 
(0.112) 
(0.112) 
(0.112) 
 
(0.00439) 
(0.00405) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Type: FSA/RHS 
0.326*** 
0.322*** 
0.322*** 
0.040 
-0.00723 
-0.0140 
 
(0.110) 
(0.109) 
(0.109) 
 
(0.0108) 
(0.0109) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Census Tract Demographic 
Controls   
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
Y 
Y 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
County Fixed Effect 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
N 
N 


38 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Year Fixed Effect 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
Y 
N 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lender*County Fixed 
Effect 
N 
N 
N 
 
Y 
N 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lender*County*Year Fixed 
Effect 
N 
N 
N 
 
N 
Y 
Constant 
-3.344*** 
-3.074*** 
-3.054*** 
 
0.320*** 
0.329*** 
 
(0.562) 
(0.526) 
(0.524) 
 
(0.0392) 
(0.0256) 
N 
28988939 
28988939 
28988939 
 
28988939 
28988939 
Adj. R2 
 
 
 
 
0.200 
0.251 
Model 1: logit with basic control variables only. 
Model 2: model 1 plus lg_countypct. 
Model 3: model 2 plus samsex and lg_county pct interaction effect. 
Model 4: model 2 plus samsex and lg_county pct interaction effect and with lender * county fixed effects. 
Model 5: linear probability model with model 2 plus lender*state*year fixed effects. 
Note: standard errors in parentheses is robust and clustered at lender level 
* P < 0.1, ** P < 0.05, *** P < 0.01 
 
 


39 
 
Table 5: Result Using Boston Fed Data 
 
Logit 
(1) 
Logit 
(2) 
Logit 
(3) 
Logit 
(4) 
Logit 
(5) 
Average 
Marginal  
Effect 
 
Approve 
Approve 
Approve 
Approve 
Approve 
Logit (5) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Same-Sex 
-1.159*** 
-1.030*** 
-1.190*** 
-1.296*** 
-1.285** 
-0.084 
 
(0.404) 
(0.394) 
(0.415) 
(0.487) 
(0.544) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LG_Tractpct 
 
-0.0245 
-0.0254 
-0.0295* 
-0.0330** 
-0.002 
 
 
(0.0159) 
(0.0170) 
(0.0167) 
(0.0151) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Minority 
-0.506** 
-0.500** 
-0.525** 
-0.381 
-0.377 
-0.025 
 
(0.204) 
(0.205) 
(0.253) 
(0.284) 
(0.279) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Co-applicant 
0.576* 
0.552* 
0.589* 
0.639* 
0.634* 
0.042 
 
(0.302) 
(0.304) 
(0.344) 
(0.371) 
(0.363) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HETI 
0.000194 
0.000536 
-0.00268 
-0.0251 
0.122 
0.002 
 
(0.0126) 
(0.0126) 
(0.0153) 
(0.108) 
(0.186) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TDTI 
-0.0603*** 
-0.0604*** 
-0.0750*** 
0.0370 
0.0899 
-0.006 
 
(0.0167) 
(0.0167) 
(0.0203) 
(0.0758) 
(0.144) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Net worth 
-0.0721 
-0.0761* 
-0.0638 
-0.0546 
-0.00239 
0.000 
 
(0.0458) 
(0.0462) 
(0.0560) 
(0.0647) 
(0.0721) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Predicted Unemp 
-0.0740** 
-0.0726* 
-0.0583 
-0.0538 
-0.0450 
-0.003 
 
(0.0374) 
(0.0387) 
(0.0464) 
(0.0468) 
(0.0493) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Self-employed 
-0.475** 
-0.491** 
-0.831*** 
-0.889*** 
-1.014*** 
-0.066 
 
(0.203) 
(0.206) 
(0.225) 
(0.236) 
(0.254) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LTV 
-0.541 
-0.521 
-0.618 
4.783** 
-14.21** 
-0.221 
 
(0.380) 
(0.370) 
(0.434) 
(2.116) 
(6.487) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Denied PMI 
-5.267*** 
-5.262*** 
-5.684*** 
-5.815*** 
-5.918*** 
-0.388 
 
(0.660) 
(0.654) 
(0.821) 
(0.873) 
(0.878) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Multi-Family 
-0.427* 
-0.398* 
-0.450* 
-0.344 
-0.310 
-0.020 
 
(0.222) 
(0.217) 
(0.268) 
(0.282) 
(0.279) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fixed Rate 
-0.158 
-0.173 
-0.229 
-0.322 
-0.414 
-0.027 
 
(0.213) 
(0.217) 
(0.288) 
(0.298) 
(0.315) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Special Program 
0.599** 
0.589** 
0.878*** 
0.873** 
0.978** 
0.064 
 
(0.271) 
(0.258) 
(0.334) 
(0.362) 
(0.415) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Loan Term 
-0.00857 
-0.00907 
0.000221 
-0.0000882 
0.0111 
0.001 
 
(0.0200) 
(0.0201) 
(0.0240) 
(0.0239) 
(0.0271) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gift 
-0.0292 
-0.0292 
-0.0784 
-0.217 
-0.175 
-0.011 
 
(0.226) 
(0.225) 
(0.259) 
(0.270) 
(0.264) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cosigner 
0.745* 
0.698* 
0.710 
0.656 
0.449 
0.029 
 
(0.397) 
(0.394) 
(0.477) 
(0.477) 
(0.451) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Age 
-0.272 
-0.275 
-0.194 
-0.259 
-0.225 
-0.015 
 
(0.181) 
(0.180) 
(0.193) 
(0.212) 
(0.227) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Male 
-0.338* 
-0.347* 
-0.313 
-0.250 
-0.187 
-0.012 
 
(0.187) 
(0.188) 
(0.205) 
(0.199) 
(0.202) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


40 
 
Married 
-0.0429 
-0.0384 
0.0585 
0.0379 
-0.00339 
0.000 
 
(0.229) 
(0.231) 
(0.269) 
(0.276) 
(0.279) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Owner Occupied 
1.073*** 
1.054*** 
1.152*** 
0.985** 
0.869** 
0.057 
 
(0.297) 
(0.297) 
(0.382) 
(0.460) 
(0.429) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Log Income 
-0.194 
-0.252 
-0.340 
-0.439* 
-0.481* 
-0.032 
 
(0.222) 
(0.223) 
(0.251) 
(0.254) 
(0.270) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Minority tract 
-0.370 
-0.342 
-0.282 
-0.459 
-0.389 
-0.025 
 
(0.279) 
(0.272) 
(0.289) 
(0.286) 
(0.291) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Public Records 
-1.338*** 
-1.335*** 
-1.498*** 
-3.117 
0.617 
-0.076 
 
(0.218) 
(0.218) 
(0.261) 
(2.776) 
(3.560) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mortgage payments 
-0.441*** 
-0.439*** 
-0.421*** 
1.407* 
2.637 
-0.029 
 
(0.139) 
(0.138) 
(0.154) 
(0.819) 
(1.932) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consumer payments 
-0.351*** 
-0.354*** 
-0.416*** 
0.112 
-0.583 
-0.028 
 
(0.0320) 
(0.0313) 
(0.0367) 
(0.334) 
(0.652) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
High LTV 
-2.694*** 
-2.724*** 
-3.121*** 
-2.735*** 
-2.859*** 
-0.187 
 
(0.389) 
(0.407) 
(0.740) 
(0.723) 
(0.812) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Extreme LTV 
2.658 
2.706 
3.383* 
4.382*** 
4.018* 
0.263 
 
(1.940) 
(1.917) 
(1.999) 
(1.589) 
(2.303) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Short Work Experience 
0.103 
0.131 
-0.0211 
0.160 
0.210 
0.014 
 
(0.282) 
(0.287) 
(0.333) 
(0.346) 
(0.327) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
High School 
-0.00529 
0.00688 
0.233 
0.279 
0.273 
0.018 
 
(0.205) 
(0.203) 
(0.217) 
(0.216) 
(0.218) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dependents 
-0.0632 
-0.0642 
-0.0960 
-0.0883 
-0.0930 
-0.006 
 
(0.0796) 
(0.0802) 
(0.0910) 
(0.0837) 
(0.0794) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
County Fixed Effect 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lender Fixed Effect 
N 
N 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Key Underwriting 
Variable Interactions 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
Y 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Key Underwriting 
Variable And Lender 
Portfolio Interactions 
N 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
 
Constant 
6.689*** 
6.859*** 
24.16*** 
18.69*** 
22.62*** 
 
 
(1.221) 
(1.260) 
(1.859) 
(2.332) 
(3.015) 
 
N 
2316 
2316 
2316 
2316 
2316 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Model 1: logit with basic control variables and county fixed effects. 
Model 2: logit is model 1 plus lg_countypct. 
Model 3: logit with lender and county fixed effect.   
Model 4: logit with lender and county fixed effect, key lending variable interactions.   
Model 5: logit with lender and county fixed effect, key lending variable interactions, and key underwriting variable and 
lender portfolio interactions.   
Standard errors in parentheses is robust and clustered at lender level 
* P < 0.1, ** P < 0.05, *** P < 0.01 
 
 


41 
 
Table 6: Robustness Check with HMDA National Data (1990-2015) 
 
Logit  
(1) 
Logit  
(2) 
Logit  
(3) 
Linear 
Probability (4) 
Linear 
Probability (5) 
 
Approve 
Approve 
Approve 
Approve 
Approve 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Same-Sex 
-0.159*** 
-0.146*** 
-0.410*** 
-0.0341*** 
-0.0253*** 
 
(0.0498) 
(0.0507) 
(0.0838) 
(0.00843) 
(0.00652) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LG_Countypct 
 
-0.0607*** 
-0.0611*** 
-0.00212*** 
N/A 
 
 
(0.00960) 
(0.00961) 
(0.000513) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Same * LG_County 
 
 
0.0498*** 
0.00301** 
0.000819 
 
 
 
(0.0137) 
(0.00140) 
(0.000898) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lendershare_County 
0.00978 
0.00986 
0.00985 
0.00167** 
N/A 
 
(0.00960) 
(0.00936) 
(0.00936) 
(0.000849) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LTI 
-0.0661*** 
-0.0659*** 
-0.0659*** 
-0.0191*** 
-0.0216*** 
 
(0.0167) 
(0.0167) 
(0.0167) 
(0.00103) 
(0.00120) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Log Income 
0.459*** 
0.459*** 
0.459*** 
0.0286*** 
0.0219*** 
 
(0.0518) 
(0.0515) 
(0.0515) 
(0.00298) 
(0.00314) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Male 
0.469*** 
0.468*** 
0.468*** 
0.0362*** 
0.0321*** 
 
(0.0236) 
(0.0235) 
(0.0235) 
(0.00205) 
(0.00189) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Occupied 
0.0233 
0.0226 
0.0225 
0.0276*** 
0.0301*** 
 
(0.0483) 
(0.0483) 
(0.0483) 
(0.00307) 
(0.00311) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hispanic 
-0.387*** 
-0.386*** 
-0.386*** 
-0.0497*** 
-0.0494*** 
 
(0.0214) 
(0.0215) 
(0.0215) 
(0.00438) 
(0.00447) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Black 
-0.818*** 
-0.815*** 
-0.815*** 
-0.0931*** 
-0.0905*** 
 
(0.0216) 
(0.0220) 
(0.0220) 
(0.00320) 
(0.00307) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Asian 
-0.166*** 
-0.166*** 
-0.166*** 
-0.0202*** 
-0.0215*** 
 
(0.0211) 
(0.0211) 
(0.0211) 
(0.00141) 
(0.00169) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Other race 
-0.630*** 
-0.629*** 
-0.629*** 
-0.0580*** 
-0.0504*** 
 
(0.0629) 
(0.0629) 
(0.0629) 
(0.00533) 
(0.00305) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Purpose: Improvement 
-0.797*** 
-0.802*** 
-0.802*** 
-0.0816*** 
-0.0780*** 
 
(0.115) 
(0.114) 
(0.114) 
(0.0148) 
(0.0131) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Purpose: Refinancing 
-0.490*** 
-0.493*** 
-0.492*** 
-0.0339*** 
-0.0308*** 
 
(0.102) 
(0.101) 
(0.101) 
(0.00484) 
(0.00459) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Type: FHA 
0.248*** 
0.246*** 
0.246*** 
-0.00895* 
-0.0148*** 
 
(0.0789) 
(0.0784) 
(0.0784) 
(0.00482) 
(0.00418) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Type: VA 
0.302*** 
0.297*** 
0.297*** 
0.00938** 
0.00336 
 
(0.113) 
(0.112) 
(0.112) 
(0.00439) 
(0.00406) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Type: FSA/RHS 
0.313*** 
0.309*** 
0.308*** 
-0.00774 
-0.0143 
 
(0.111) 
(0.110) 
(0.110) 
(0.0110) 
(0.0110) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Census Tract 
Demographic Controls 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
 
 
 
 
 
County Fixed Effect 
Y 
Y 
Y 
N 
N 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Year Fixed Effect 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
N 
 
 
 
 
 
 


42 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lender*County Fixed 
Effect 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
N 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lender*County*Year 
Fixed Effect 
N 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
Constant 
-3.344*** 
-3.074*** 
-3.054*** 
0.320*** 
0.329*** 
 
(0.562) 
(0.526) 
(0.524) 
(0.0392) 
(0.0256) 
N 
28988939 
28988939 
28988939 
28988939 
28988939 
Adj. R2 
 
 
 
0.200 
0.251 
In this table, to rule out dad-son or brothers like same-sex pairs, we restrict same sex==1 only if race~=co applicant race. 
And then we re-run the regressions similar to table 4. 
Standard errors in parentheses is robust and clustered at lender level 
* P < 0.1, ** P < 0.05, *** P < 0.01 
 
 


43 
 
Table 7: Robustness Check With Boston Fed Data: A 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
 
Approve 
Approve 
Approve 
Approve 
Approve 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Same-sex 
-1.525*** 
-1.409*** 
-1.682*** 
-1.872*** 
-1.714** 
 
(0.466) 
(0.465) 
(0.502) 
(0.601) 
(0.687) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LG_Tractpct 
 
-0.0177 
-0.0254* 
-0.0279* 
-0.0244 
 
 
(0.0151) 
(0.0152) 
(0.0155) 
(0.0160) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Minority 
-0.540** 
-0.536** 
-0.529* 
-0.358 
-0.291 
 
(0.222) 
(0.224) 
(0.281) 
(0.298) 
(0.306) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Co-applicant 
0.819** 
0.800** 
0.903** 
0.966** 
1.039** 
 
(0.361) 
(0.365) 
(0.427) 
(0.456) 
(0.423) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HETI 
-0.0107 
-0.00997 
-0.0127 
-0.0405 
-0.0877 
 
(0.0148) 
(0.0148) 
(0.0193) 
(0.125) 
(0.180) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TDTI 
-0.0494*** 
-0.0499*** 
-0.0674*** 
0.0120 
0.195 
 
(0.0175) 
(0.0177) 
(0.0220) 
(0.0763) 
(0.146) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Net worth 
-0.0562 
-0.0598 
-0.0371 
-0.0446 
0.00514 
 
(0.0551) 
(0.0556) 
(0.0636) 
(0.0811) 
(0.0833) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Predicted Unemp 
-0.0806* 
-0.0805* 
-0.0640 
-0.0483 
-0.0344 
 
(0.0434) 
(0.0432) 
(0.0518) 
(0.0528) 
(0.0489) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Self-employed 
-0.465** 
-0.479** 
-0.879*** 
-0.969*** 
-1.032*** 
 
(0.228) 
(0.229) 
(0.264) 
(0.275) 
(0.300) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LTV 
-0.697 
-0.690 
-0.946 
3.655 
-10.47 
 
(0.845) 
(0.835) 
(0.878) 
(2.803) 
(9.059) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Denied PMI 
-5.158*** 
-5.139*** 
-5.396*** 
-5.449*** 
-5.874*** 
 
(0.741) 
(0.732) 
(0.912) 
(0.971) 
(0.964) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fixed Rate 
-0.123 
-0.134 
-0.259 
-0.347 
-0.499 
 
(0.232) 
(0.234) 
(0.296) 
(0.292) 
(0.308) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Special 
0.649** 
0.629** 
0.757* 
0.753* 
0.836** 
 
(0.276) 
(0.264) 
(0.395) 
(0.407) 
(0.415) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Loan term 
-0.0141 
-0.0144 
-0.0194 
-0.0208 
-0.0155 
 
(0.0235) 
(0.0237) 
(0.0289) 
(0.0316) 
(0.0307) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gift 
0.0200 
0.0174 
0.00254 
-0.110 
-0.0425 
 
(0.220) 
(0.219) 
(0.233) 
(0.238) 
(0.256) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Age 
-0.335 
-0.334 
-0.212 
-0.308 
-0.244 
 
(0.208) 
(0.211) 
(0.243) 
(0.270) 
(0.290) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Male 
-0.644*** 
-0.640*** 
-0.600** 
-0.600** 
-0.542** 
 
(0.226) 
(0.224) 
(0.262) 
(0.260) 
(0.241) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Married 
-0.123 
-0.126 
-0.0717 
-0.138 
-0.116 
 
(0.264) 
(0.263) 
(0.305) 
(0.326) 
(0.348) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Owner Occupied 
1.375*** 
1.348*** 
1.430*** 
1.265** 
1.162** 
 
(0.355) 
(0.360) 
(0.469) 
(0.508) 
(0.459) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Log Income 
-0.429* 
-0.478** 
-0.660** 
-0.724** 
-0.829** 


44 
 
 
(0.239) 
(0.244) 
(0.267) 
(0.294) 
(0.337) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Minority tract 
-0.565* 
-0.548* 
-0.362 
-0.612 
-0.622 
 
(0.306) 
(0.307) 
(0.330) 
(0.402) 
(0.476) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Public Records 
-1.332*** 
-1.334*** 
-1.574*** 
-1.802 
5.448 
 
(0.250) 
(0.252) 
(0.285) 
(2.965) 
(4.645) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mortgage 
payments 
-0.375** 
-0.374** 
-0.411** 
1.465 
7.375*** 
 
(0.163) 
(0.164) 
(0.185) 
(0.953) 
(2.440) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consumer 
payments 
-0.356*** 
-0.357*** 
-0.432*** 
-0.152 
-2.069** 
 
(0.0410) 
(0.0407) 
(0.0517) 
(0.388) 
(0.857) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
High LTV 
-2.485*** 
-2.496*** 
-2.752*** 
-2.251*** 
-2.071*** 
 
(0.517) 
(0.515) 
(0.930) 
(0.775) 
(0.642) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Extreme LTV 
2.238 
2.263 
2.913 
3.428* 
4.087* 
 
(1.872) 
(1.811) 
(2.466) 
(1.792) 
(2.356) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Short Work 
Experience 
0.0309 
0.0305 
-0.187 
-0.0210 
0.0237 
 
(0.389) 
(0.390) 
(0.456) 
(0.465) 
(0.436) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
High School 
0.117 
0.125 
0.449** 
0.433** 
0.512** 
 
(0.200) 
(0.202) 
(0.203) 
(0.199) 
(0.207) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dependents 
-0.00222 
-0.00180 
-0.0392 
-0.0344 
-0.0388 
 
(0.105) 
(0.105) 
(0.119) 
(0.106) 
(0.101) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
County Fixed 
Effect 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lender Fixed 
Effect 
N 
N 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Key Underwriting 
Variable 
Interactions 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
Y 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Key Underwriting 
Variable And 
Lender Portfolio 
Interactions 
N 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
Constant 
6.948*** 
7.106*** 
24.79*** 
22.48*** 
23.65*** 
 
(1.493) 
(1.540) 
(2.102) 
(2.826) 
(3.252) 
N 
1935 
1935 
1935 
1935 
1935 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To address the concern that same-sex borrowers have more presence in multi-family units, and are more likely to have a 
cosigner, we now restrict our sample to those applicants for single-family units and without cosigner. Standard errors in 
parentheses, and they are robust and clustered at lender level 
* P < 0.1, ** P < 0.05, *** P < 0.01 
 


45 
 
Table 8: Robustness Check With Boston Fed Data: B 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
 
Approve 
Approve 
Approve 
Approve 
Approve 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Same-sex 
-2.196*** 
-1.963*** 
-2.152* 
-2.546** 
-2.810** 
 
(0.708) 
(0.755) 
(1.099) 
(1.045) 
(1.165) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LG_Tractpct 
 
-0.0296* 
-0.0281 
-0.0323 
-0.0494* 
 
 
(0.0175) 
(0.0226) 
(0.0221) 
(0.0258) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Minority 
-0.286 
-0.274 
-0.436 
-0.284 
-0.0333 
 
(0.269) 
(0.263) 
(0.334) 
(0.386) 
(0.474) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Co-applicant 
0.466 
0.443 
0.710* 
0.583 
0.803 
 
(0.388) 
(0.387) 
(0.427) 
(0.497) 
(0.489) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HETI 
-0.0121 
-0.0118 
-0.0144 
-0.160 
-0.655** 
 
(0.0156) 
(0.0155) 
(0.0181) 
(0.146) 
(0.283) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TDTI 
-0.0510** 
-0.0513** 
-0.0866*** 
-0.0162 
0.848*** 
 
(0.0228) 
(0.0228) 
(0.0308) 
(0.0996) 
(0.241) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Net worth 
0.0908 
0.0918 
0.205 
0.332 
0.512* 
 
(0.152) 
(0.147) 
(0.254) 
(0.262) 
(0.294) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Predicted Unemp 
-0.0773 
-0.0721 
-0.0188 
-0.0235 
0.0419 
 
(0.0601) 
(0.0609) 
(0.0728) 
(0.0818) 
(0.0981) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Self-employed 
-0.411 
-0.430 
-1.012** 
-1.339*** 
-1.658*** 
 
(0.295) 
(0.301) 
(0.413) 
(0.373) 
(0.465) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LTV 
0.0465 
0.0604 
-1.244 
2.695 
-52.04** 
 
(0.399) 
(0.389) 
(1.143) 
(5.077) 
(22.54) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Denied PMI 
-17.57*** 
-17.56*** 
-34.74*** 
-36.01*** 
-40.24*** 
 
(0.606) 
(0.601) 
(1.541) 
(2.236) 
(7.512) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Multi family 
-0.549 
-0.515 
-0.443 
-0.249 
-0.490 
 
(0.345) 
(0.342) 
(0.458) 
(0.512) 
(0.524) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fixed Rate 
0.300 
0.291 
0.169 
0.0625 
-0.117 
 
(0.238) 
(0.242) 
(0.361) 
(0.393) 
(0.443) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Special 
0.312 
0.302 
1.108** 
1.117** 
1.096 
 
(0.399) 
(0.389) 
(0.484) 
(0.566) 
(0.719) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Loan term 
-0.0122 
-0.0136 
0.0255 
0.0119 
0.00987 
 
(0.0245) 
(0.0249) 
(0.0422) 
(0.0403) 
(0.0448) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gift 
-0.323 
-0.330 
-0.159 
-0.300 
-0.374 
 
(0.342) 
(0.336) 
(0.410) 
(0.470) 
(0.566) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cosigner 
1.218** 
1.143** 
2.021** 
1.929** 
2.051* 
 
(0.521) 
(0.522) 
(0.942) 
(0.820) 
(1.067) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Age 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
 
(.) 
(.) 
(.) 
(.) 
(.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Male 
-0.757*** 
-0.817*** 
-1.133*** 
-1.032*** 
-1.150*** 
 
(0.281) 
(0.284) 
(0.348) 
(0.358) 
(0.426) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Married 
0.0295 
0.0445 
0.235 
0.287 
-0.0426 
 
(0.347) 
(0.350) 
(0.489) 
(0.530) 
(0.563) 


46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Owner Occupied 
0.333 
0.282 
0.522 
0.385 
0.104 
 
(0.439) 
(0.432) 
(0.634) 
(0.726) 
(0.583) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Log Income 
-0.568* 
-0.679** 
-0.884** 
-0.983** 
-1.362** 
 
(0.291) 
(0.288) 
(0.419) 
(0.467) 
(0.580) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Minority tract 
-0.984*** 
-0.983*** 
-1.251*** 
-1.564*** 
-1.975*** 
 
(0.333) 
(0.326) 
(0.393) 
(0.483) 
(0.546) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Public Records 
-1.092*** 
-1.091*** 
-1.198*** 
-2.149 
26.35** 
 
(0.294) 
(0.294) 
(0.434) 
(4.040) 
(12.82) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mortgage payments 
-0.371** 
-0.369** 
-0.408* 
1.678 
7.574* 
 
(0.178) 
(0.177) 
(0.240) 
(1.347) 
(4.227) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consumer payments 
-0.349*** 
-0.349*** 
-0.468*** 
0.292 
-0.172 
 
(0.0442) 
(0.0442) 
(0.0606) 
(0.540) 
(1.711) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
High LTV 
-2.502*** 
-2.596*** 
-1.863* 
-1.940* 
-1.904 
 
(0.585) 
(0.583) 
(1.083) 
(1.088) 
(1.461) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Extreme LTV 
0.916 
1.074 
-13.12*** 
-12.59*** 
-10.95 
 
(1.729) 
(1.686) 
(1.630) 
(2.686) 
(.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Short Work Experience 
0.395 
0.358 
0.333 
0.513 
0.551 
 
(0.540) 
(0.551) 
(0.626) 
(0.794) 
(1.026) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
High School 
-0.221 
-0.201 
0.241 
0.299 
0.255 
 
(0.311) 
(0.311) 
(0.417) 
(0.449) 
(0.434) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dependents 
-0.0495 
-0.0551 
-0.0902 
-0.0796 
-0.133 
 
(0.0932) 
(0.0950) 
(0.119) 
(0.121) 
(0.144) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
County Fixed Effect 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lender Fixed Effect 
N 
N 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Key Underwriting Variable 
Interactions 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
Y 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Key Underwriting Variable 
And Lender Portfolio 
Interactions 
N 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Constant 
8.205*** 
8.541*** 
25.94*** 
23.40 
28.39*** 
 
(1.690) 
(1.745) 
(2.895) 
(2539.9) 
(5.422) 
N 
1072 
1072 
1072 
1072 
1072 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To address the concern that same-sex borrowers are younger, and the possible dad-son pairs, here we restrict sample to be 
over 50 years and with no dependent. And re-run regressions similar to table 5. 
Standard errors in parentheses, and they are robust and clustered at lender level 
* P < 0.1, ** P < 0.05, *** P < 0.01 
 
 
 
 


47 
 
 
Table 9: Plug In Same-Sex Attributes to Non-Same-sex Regression. 
Boston Fed Data 
Characteristics And Experience 
Rates 
Actual Denial Rate For Same-Sex Borrowers In Sample (N=69) 
20.29% 
Predicted Denial Rate For Same-Sex Borrowers With Their Characteristics But 
Non-Same-sex Experience 
11.72% 
Odds Ratio 
1.7312 
Our treatment here is similar to Munnell et al., (1996). We first run a full logit regression (Logit (5) in table 5, but excluding 
Same-sex as control variable) on non-same-sex observations.  Then for the same-sex applicants, we plug in their attributes 
to the model, and compare the average predicted denial probability with the actual denial rate observed in data. Compared 
to otherwise similar non-same-sex applicants, same-sex applicant are 73.12% more likely to be rejected! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


48 
 
Table 10: High Rate Spread Disclosure 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
 
Premium_Report 
Premium_Report 
Premium_Report 
Same-sex 
0.00702*** 
0.00708*** 
0.0112*** 
 
(0.00205) 
(0.00205) 
(0.00411) 
 
 
 
 
LG_Countypct 
 
-0.000398 
-0.000343 
 
 
(0.000314) 
(0.000307) 
 
 
 
 
Same * LG_County 
 
 
-0.000801 
 
 
 
(0.000557) 
 
 
 
 
Lendershare_County 
0.000922* 
0.000916* 
0.000917* 
 
(0.000483) 
(0.000483) 
(0.000483) 
 
 
 
 
Male 
-0.00437*** 
-0.00439*** 
-0.00437*** 
 
(0.000956) 
(0.000959) 
(0.000960) 
 
 
 
 
LTV 
-0.0000642** 
-0.0000656** 
-0.0000654** 
 
(0.0000326) 
(0.0000328) 
(0.0000328) 
 
 
 
 
Log Income 
-0.00922*** 
-0.00920*** 
-0.00920*** 
 
(0.000970) 
(0.000967) 
(0.000967) 
 
 
 
 
Borrower Score 
-0.000112*** 
-0.000112*** 
-0.000112*** 
 
(0.0000134) 
(0.0000134) 
(0.0000135) 
 
 
 
 
Co-borrower Score 
-0.0000782*** 
-0.0000782*** 
-0.0000783*** 
 
(0.0000114) 
(0.0000114) 
(0.0000114) 
 
 
 
 
First Time 
-0.00468** 
-0.00462** 
-0.00463** 
 
(0.00205) 
(0.00204) 
(0.00204) 
 
 
 
 
Num_Unit 
-0.00303*** 
-0.00299*** 
-0.00298*** 
 
(0.00109) 
(0.00109) 
(0.00109) 
 
 
 
 
Mortgage insurance_Pct 
0.00132*** 
0.00132*** 
0.00132*** 
 
(0.000250) 
(0.000250) 
(0.000250) 
 
 
 
 
Hispanic 
0.0132*** 
0.0133*** 
0.0133*** 
 
(0.00188) 
(0.00189) 
(0.00189) 
 
 
 
 
Black 
0.0400*** 
0.0402*** 
0.0402*** 
 
(0.00412) 
(0.00413) 
(0.00413) 
 
 
 
 
Asian 
-0.00344*** 
-0.00335*** 
-0.00335*** 
 
(0.00110) 
(0.00109) 
(0.00109) 
 
 
 
 
Other race 
0.00422 
0.00424 
0.00424 
 
(0.00303) 
(0.00303) 
(0.00303) 
 
 
 
 
Loan Purpose 
-0.00830*** 
-0.00831*** 
-0.00831*** 
 
(0.00233) 
(0.00233) 
(0.00233) 
 
 
 
 
Loan Occupancy 
0.0350*** 
0.0350*** 
0.0350*** 
 
(0.00497) 
(0.00497) 
(0.00497) 
 
 
 
 
Census Tract Demographic 
Controls 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
 
 
 
Loan Month Fixed Effect 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
 
 
 
Lender*County Fixed Effect 
Y 
Y 
Y 


49 
 
 
 
 
 
Constant 
0.526*** 
0.524*** 
0.523*** 
 
(0.0520) 
(0.0514) 
(0.0514) 
N 
425239 
425239 
425239 
Adj. R2 
0.078 
0.078 
0.078 
Standard errors in parentheses are robust and clustered at lender level 
* P < 0.1, ** P < 0.05, *** P < 0.01 
 
 


50 
 
Table 11: Tobit Regression on Rate Spread  
 
Model 1 
(Pre-2010) 
Model 2 
(Pre-2010) 
Model 3 
(Pre-2010) 
Model 4 
(Post-2010) 
Model 5 
(Post-2010) 
Model 6 
(Post-2010) 
 
Rate Spread 
Rate Spread 
Rate Spread 
Rate Spread 
Rate Spread 
Rate Spread 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Same-sex 
0.176*** 
0.177*** 
0.202*** 
0.0388*** 
0.0397*** 
0.111*** 
 
(0.0113) 
(0.0113) 
(0.0158) 
(0.00944) 
(0.00947) 
(0.0142) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LG_Countypct 
 
-0.00367 
-0.00320 
 
-0.00394 
-0.00276 
 
 
(0.00425) 
(0.00426) 
 
(0.00334) 
(0.00334) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Same*LG_County 
 
 
-0.00505* 
 
 
-0.0159*** 
 
 
 
(0.00273) 
 
 
(0.00278) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lendershare_County 
0.0430*** 
0.0429*** 
0.0429*** 
-0.00195** 
-0.00204** 
-0.00199** 
 
(0.00161) 
(0.00161) 
(0.00161) 
(0.000974) 
(0.000975) 
(0.000975) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Male 
-0.155*** 
-0.155*** 
-0.155*** 
-0.0295** 
-0.0297** 
-0.0295** 
 
(0.0208) 
(0.0208) 
(0.0208) 
(0.0148) 
(0.0148) 
(0.0148) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LTV 
-0.00180*** 
-0.00182*** 
-0.00182*** 
0.00326*** 
0.00324*** 
0.00325*** 
 
(0.000279) 
(0.000280) 
(0.000280) 
(0.000197) 
(0.000197) 
(0.000197) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Log Income 
-0.296*** 
-0.295*** 
-0.295*** 
-0.167*** 
-0.167*** 
-0.167*** 
 
(0.00515) 
(0.00516) 
(0.00517) 
(0.00365) 
(0.00366) 
(0.00366) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Borrower score 
-0.00164*** 
-0.00164*** 
-0.00164*** 
-0.00294*** 
-0.00294*** 
-0.00293*** 
 
(0.0000322) 
(0.0000323) 
(0.0000323) 
(0.0000229) 
(0.0000229) 
(0.0000229) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Co-borrower Score 
-0.000830*** 
-0.000831*** 
-0.000831*** 
-0.00274*** 
-0.00274*** 
-0.00274*** 
 
(0.0000321) 
(0.0000322) 
(0.0000322) 
(0.0000228) 
(0.0000229) 
(0.0000229) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
First Time 
-0.165*** 
-0.164*** 
-0.164*** 
0.160*** 
0.160*** 
0.160*** 
 
(0.0154) 
(0.0154) 
(0.0154) 
(0.00983) 
(0.00990) 
(0.00991) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Num_Units 
-0.0446** 
-0.0441** 
-0.0440** 
-0.0530*** 
-0.0527*** 
-0.0525*** 
 
(0.0176) 
(0.0176) 
(0.0176) 
(0.0132) 
(0.0133) 
(0.0133) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mortgage 
Insurance_Pct.  
0.0246*** 
0.0246*** 
0.0246*** 
0.0148*** 
0.0148*** 
0.0148*** 
 
(0.000531) 
(0.000532) 
(0.000532) 
(0.000369) 
(0.000369) 
(0.000369) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hispanic 
0.201*** 
0.202*** 
0.202*** 
0.107*** 
0.107*** 
0.107*** 
 
(0.0118) 
(0.0119) 
(0.0119) 
(0.00926) 
(0.00930) 
(0.00929) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Black 
0.509*** 
0.511*** 
0.511*** 
0.240*** 
0.242*** 
0.242*** 
 
(0.0133) 
(0.0134) 
(0.0134) 
(0.01000) 
(0.0100) 
(0.0100) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Asian 
-0.164*** 
-0.163*** 
-0.163*** 
-0.00934 
-0.00833 
-0.00805 
 
(0.0107) 
(0.0107) 
(0.0107) 
(0.0103) 
(0.0103) 
(0.0103) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Other race 
0.152*** 
0.152*** 
0.152*** 
0.0676*** 
0.0675*** 
0.0679*** 
 
(0.0137) 
(0.0137) 
(0.0137) 
(0.00937) 
(0.00938) 
(0.00937) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Loan purpose 
-0.320*** 
-0.320*** 
-0.320*** 
0.0743*** 
0.0741*** 
0.0740*** 
 
(0.0192) 
(0.0192) 
(0.0192) 
(0.0135) 
(0.0136) 
(0.0136) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Loan Occupancy 
0.649*** 
0.649*** 
0.649*** 
0.615*** 
0.615*** 
0.614*** 
 
(0.0146) 
(0.0146) 
(0.0146) 
(0.0150) 
(0.0150) 
(0.0150) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Census Tract 
Demographic 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 


51 
 
Controls 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Loan Month Fixed 
Effect 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lender*County 
Fixed Effect 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Constant 
5.354*** 
5.318*** 
5.273*** 
4.513*** 
4.496*** 
4.520*** 
 
(0.0239) 
(0.0240) 
(0.0240) 
(0.0170) 
(0.0170) 
(0.0170) 
Sigma 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Constant 
1.143*** 
1.143*** 
1.143*** 
0.710*** 
0.710*** 
0.710*** 
 
(0.0108) 
(0.0109) 
(0.0109) 
(0.00707) 
(0.00710) 
(0.00709) 
N 
181460 
181460 
181460 
237197 
237197 
237197 
Adj. R2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Standard errors in parentheses are robust and clustered at lender level 
* P < 0.1, ** P < 0.05, *** P < 0.01 
 
 
 
 


52 
 
Table 12: Linear Regression on Contractual Rate  
 
Ols 1 
(Full Sample) 
Ols 2 
(Full Sample) 
Ols 3 
(Full Sample) 
Ols 4 
(Pre 2010) 
Ols 5 
(Post 2010) 
 
Contractual 
Rate 
Contractual 
Rate 
Contractual 
Rate 
Contractual 
Rate 
Contractual 
Rate 
Same-sex 
0.0195*** 
0.0193*** 
0.0285*** 
0.0182** 
0.0302*** 
 
(0.00298) 
(0.00297) 
(0.00526) 
(0.00872) 
(0.00613) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LG_Countypct 
 
0.00130* 
0.00142* 
0.00282** 
0.00171** 
 
 
(0.000775) 
(0.000766) 
(0.00134) 
(0.000799) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Same * LG_County 
 
 
-0.00182** 
0.000860 
-0.00271** 
 
 
 
(0.000875) 
(0.00134) 
(0.00107) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lendershare_County 
-0.000940 
-0.000921 
-0.000919 
-0.00202 
0.00104 
 
(0.000851) 
(0.000852) 
(0.000852) 
(0.00154) 
(0.00110) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Male 
-0.00433*** 
-0.00425*** 
-0.00419*** 
-0.00118 
-0.00686*** 
 
(0.00162) 
(0.00162) 
(0.00162) 
(0.00208) 
(0.00216) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LTV 
0.00165*** 
0.00165*** 
0.00165*** 
0.000847*** 
0.00242*** 
 
(0.000104) 
(0.000103) 
(0.000103) 
(0.000124) 
(0.000100) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Log Income 
-0.0597*** 
-0.0598*** 
-0.0598*** 
-0.0642*** 
-0.0556*** 
 
(0.00166) 
(0.00166) 
(0.00166) 
(0.00328) 
(0.00218) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Borrower score 
-0.00115*** 
-0.00115*** 
-0.00115*** 
-0.000889*** 
-0.00146*** 
 
(0.0000450) 
(0.0000450) 
(0.0000450) 
(0.0000565) 
(0.0000258) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Co-borrower Score 
-0.000846*** 
-0.000846*** 
-0.000846*** 
-0.000596*** 
-0.00120*** 
 
(0.0000452) 
(0.0000452) 
(0.0000452) 
(0.0000433) 
(0.0000255) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
First Time 
-0.00377 
-0.00396 
-0.00396 
-0.00757 
-0.00346 
 
(0.00346) 
(0.00346) 
(0.00346) 
(0.00476) 
(0.00393) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Num_Units 
0.0657*** 
0.0656*** 
0.0656*** 
0.0427*** 
0.0822*** 
 
(0.00453) 
(0.00454) 
(0.00454) 
(0.00727) 
(0.00331) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mortgage Insurance_Pct  
0.00114*** 
0.00114*** 
0.00114*** 
0.00377*** 
-0.000701*** 
 
(0.000348) 
(0.000348) 
(0.000348) 
(0.000446) 
(0.000130) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hispanic 
0.0110*** 
0.0107*** 
0.0107*** 
-0.00759 
0.0226*** 
 
(0.00337) 
(0.00337) 
(0.00337) 
(0.00474) 
(0.00416) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Black 
0.0199*** 
0.0194*** 
0.0194*** 
0.0139** 
0.0261*** 
 
(0.00386) 
(0.00387) 
(0.00387) 
(0.00646) 
(0.00476) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Asian 
-0.00502* 
-0.00531** 
-0.00531** 
-0.00595 
-0.00639* 
 
(0.00270) 
(0.00266) 
(0.00266) 
(0.00390) 
(0.00341) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Other race 
0.00384 
0.00376 
0.00375 
0.00645 
0.000738 
 
(0.00731) 
(0.00730) 
(0.00730) 
(0.0116) 
(0.00877) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Loan purpose 
0.0318*** 
0.0319*** 
0.0319*** 
0.0121 
0.0500*** 
 
(0.00668) 
(0.00668) 
(0.00668) 
(0.00811) 
(0.00853) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Occupancy 
0.305*** 
0.305*** 
0.305*** 
0.324*** 
0.284*** 
 
(0.00705) 
(0.00704) 
(0.00704) 
(0.0117) 
(0.00481) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Census Tract Demographic 
Controls 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Loan Month Fixed Effect 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 


53 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lender*County Fixed Effect 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Constant 
8.288*** 
8.297*** 
8.295*** 
8.587*** 
7.637*** 
 
(0.0662) 
(0.0652) 
(0.0651) 
(0.125) 
(0.0768) 
N 
425239 
425239 
425239 
181460 
237197 
Adj. R2 
0.909 
0.909 
0.909 
0.748 
0.744 
Standard errors in parentheses are robust and clustered at lender level 
* P < 0.1, ** P < 0.05, *** P < 0.01 
 
 
 


54 
 
Table 13: Logit Model on Mortgage Default 
 
Logit (1) 
Logit (2) 
Logit (3) 
Logit (4) 
 
Default 
Default 
Default 
Default 
 
 
 
 
 
Same-Sex 
-0.000850 
-0.000253 
0.0735 
0.0612 
 
(0.0548) 
(0.0550) 
(0.149) 
(0.146) 
 
 
 
 
 
LG_Countypct 
 
-0.0157 
-0.0150 
-0.0102 
 
 
(0.0377) 
(0.0382) 
(0.0366) 
 
 
 
 
 
Same*LG_County 
 
 
-0.0137 
-0.0132 
 
 
 
(0.0291) 
(0.0281) 
 
 
 
 
 
Contractual Rate 
0.388*** 
0.388*** 
0.388*** 
0.369*** 
 
(0.0294) 
(0.0294) 
(0.0294) 
(0.0296) 
 
 
 
 
 
Lendershare_County 
 
 
 
-0.0235*** 
 
 
 
 
(0.00483) 
 
 
 
 
 
Male 
-0.0112 
-0.0113 
-0.0110 
-0.0132 
 
(0.0287) 
(0.0287) 
(0.0287) 
(0.0290) 
 
 
 
 
 
LTV 
0.0368*** 
0.0368*** 
0.0368*** 
0.0366*** 
 
(0.00145) 
(0.00146) 
(0.00146) 
(0.00148) 
 
 
 
 
 
Log Income 
-0.214*** 
-0.214*** 
-0.214*** 
-0.213*** 
 
(0.0242) 
(0.0243) 
(0.0243) 
(0.0249) 
 
 
 
 
 
Borrower score 
-0.00940*** 
-0.00940*** 
-0.00940*** 
-0.00943*** 
 
(0.000296) 
(0.000296) 
(0.000295) 
(0.000298) 
 
 
 
 
 
Co-borrower Score 
-0.00716*** 
-0.00716*** 
-0.00716*** 
-0.00728*** 
 
(0.000259) 
(0.000259) 
(0.000259) 
(0.000260) 
 
 
 
 
 
First Time 
-0.259*** 
-0.259*** 
-0.259*** 
-0.262*** 
 
(0.0463) 
(0.0462) 
(0.0460) 
(0.0461) 
 
 
 
 
 
Num_Units 
0.128*** 
0.128*** 
0.128*** 
0.132*** 
 
(0.0307) 
(0.0307) 
(0.0307) 
(0.0311) 
 
 
 
 
 
Mortgage Insurance_Pct  
0.00218* 
0.00217 
0.00216 
0.00243* 
 
(0.00132) 
(0.00132) 
(0.00132) 
(0.00135) 
 
 
 
 
 
Hispanic 
0.177*** 
0.176*** 
0.176*** 
0.179*** 
 
(0.0427) 
(0.0427) 
(0.0427) 
(0.0434) 
 
 
 
 
 
Black 
0.208*** 
0.208*** 
0.208*** 
0.209*** 
 
(0.0482) 
(0.0482) 
(0.0482) 
(0.0484) 
 
 
 
 
 
Asian 
0.00729 
0.00746 
0.00757 
0.0132 
 
(0.0590) 
(0.0590) 
(0.0589) 
(0.0592) 
 
 
 
 
 
Other race 
0.181 
0.181 
0.180 
0.189* 
 
(0.111) 
(0.111) 
(0.111) 
(0.112) 
 
 
 
 
 
Loan purpose 
0.538*** 
0.538*** 
0.538*** 
0.524*** 
 
(0.0254) 
(0.0254) 
(0.0254) 
(0.0260) 
 
 
 
 
 
Occupancy 
-0.0153 
-0.0154 
-0.0157 
-0.0233 
 
(0.0373) 
(0.0372) 
(0.0375) 
(0.0380) 
 
 
 
 
 
Census Tract 
Demographic Controls 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 


55 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Loan Month Fixed Effect 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
 
 
 
 
County Fixed Effect 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
 
 
 
 
Lender Fixed Effect 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
 
 
 
 
 
Constant 
5.965*** 
6.017*** 
6.006*** 
7.113*** 
 
(0.836) 
(0.868) 
(0.875) 
(1.062) 
N 
214934 
214934 
214934 
214934 
 
 
 
 
 
Standard errors in parentheses are robust and clustered at MSA level 
* P < 0.1, ** P < 0.05, *** P < 0.01 
 
 
 


56 
 
Table 14: Cox Proportional Hazard Model on Duration before Default 
 
Hazard (1) 
Hazard (2) 
Hazard (3) 
Hazard (4) 
 
Duration 
Duration 
Duration 
Duration 
Same-sex 
-0.0581 
-0.0580 
-0.132 
-0.131 
 
(0.0417) 
(0.0417) 
(0.105) 
(0.105) 
 
 
 
 
 
LG_Countypct 
 
-0.0276 
-0.0282 
-0.0205 
 
 
(0.0332) 
(0.0332) 
(0.0354) 
 
 
 
 
 
Same * LG_County 
 
 
0.0139 
0.0145 
 
 
 
(0.0186) 
(0.0185) 
 
 
 
 
 
Lendershare_County 
 
 
 
-0.00417 
 
 
 
 
(0.00433) 
 
 
 
 
 
Contractual Rate 
0.160*** 
0.160*** 
0.160*** 
0.147*** 
 
(0.0232) 
(0.0232) 
(0.0232) 
(0.0251) 
 
 
 
 
 
Male 
-0.00176 
-0.00175 
-0.00181 
0.00382 
 
(0.0246) 
(0.0246) 
(0.0246) 
(0.0257) 
 
 
 
 
 
LTV 
0.00499*** 
0.00498*** 
0.00497*** 
0.00483*** 
 
(0.00112) 
(0.00112) 
(0.00112) 
(0.00121) 
 
 
 
 
 
Log Income 
0.0649*** 
0.0650*** 
0.0652*** 
0.0652*** 
 
(0.0179) 
(0.0179) 
(0.0179) 
(0.0188) 
 
 
 
 
 
Borrower score 
-0.00161*** 
-0.00161*** 
-0.00161*** 
-0.00171*** 
 
(0.000234) 
(0.000235) 
(0.000235) 
(0.000256) 
 
 
 
 
 
Co-borrower Score 
-0.00118*** 
-0.00118*** 
-0.00118*** 
-0.00128*** 
 
(0.000259) 
(0.000257) 
(0.000256) 
(0.000265) 
 
 
 
 
 
First Time 
-0.101*** 
-0.101*** 
-0.101*** 
-0.105*** 
 
(0.0326) 
(0.0325) 
(0.0325) 
(0.0345) 
 
 
 
 
 
Num_Units 
-0.0254 
-0.0258 
-0.0263 
-0.0347 
 
(0.0273) 
(0.0271) 
(0.0272) 
(0.0283) 
 
 
 
 
 
Mortgage Insurance_Pct  
0.000249 
0.000258 
0.000278 
0.000337 
 
(0.00104) 
(0.00104) 
(0.00104) 
(0.00112) 
 
 
 
 
 
Hispanic 
0.0607* 
0.0603* 
0.0603* 
0.0567 
 
(0.0334) 
(0.0332) 
(0.0332) 
(0.0352) 
 
 
 
 
 
Black 
-0.0259 
-0.0252 
-0.0254 
-0.0310 
 
(0.0378) 
(0.0376) 
(0.0376) 
(0.0382) 
 
 
 
 
 
Asian 
0.0156 
0.0140 
0.0134 
0.0248 
 
(0.0626) 
(0.0631) 
(0.0628) 
(0.0633) 
 
 
 
 
 
Other race 
-0.0348 
-0.0319 
-0.0317 
-0.0345 
 
(0.123) 
(0.122) 
(0.122) 
(0.116) 
 
 
 
 
 
Loan purpose 
0.0610*** 
0.0612*** 
0.0614*** 
0.0542*** 
 
(0.0198) 
(0.0198) 
(0.0198) 
(0.0201) 
 
 
 
 
 
Occupancy 
-0.127*** 
-0.127*** 
-0.127*** 
-0.117*** 
 
(0.0256) 
(0.0257) 
(0.0258) 
(0.0284) 
 
 
 
 
 
Census Tract Demographic 
Controls 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
 
 
 
 


57 
 
Loan Month Fixed Effect 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
 
 
 
 
County Fixed Effect 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
 
 
 
 
 
Lender Fixed Effect 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
 
 
 
 
 
N 
17137 
17137 
17137 
17137 
 
 
 
 
 
Standard errors in parentheses are robust and clustered at MSA level 
* P < 0.1, ** P < 0.05, *** P < 0.01 
 
 
 


58 
 
Table 15: OLS Model On the Same-Sex Percentage across Lenders 
 
(1) 
(2) 
 
Same_Pct 
Same_Pct 
Lendersize_100pct 
-0.00287 
-0.00511 
 
(0.00362) 
(0.00352) 
 
 
 
Male_Pct 
-0.116*** 
-0.117*** 
 
(0.0208) 
(0.0209) 
 
 
 
Hispan_Pct 
0.0184** 
0.0180** 
 
(0.00842) 
(0.00884) 
 
 
 
Black_Pct 
0.0539*** 
0.0429*** 
 
(0.0131) 
(0.0132) 
 
 
 
Asian_Pct 
0.0269*** 
0.0194* 
 
(0.0102) 
(0.0105) 
 
 
 
Otherrace_Pct 
0.0844 
0.0856 
 
(0.0595) 
(0.0595) 
 
 
 
Occup_Pct 
-0.116*** 
-0.122*** 
 
(0.0216) 
(0.0219) 
 
 
 
Lti_Avg 
0.562** 
0.553** 
 
(0.244) 
(0.248) 
 
 
 
Lincome_Avg 
-1.919*** 
-2.230*** 
 
(0.537) 
(0.541) 
 
 
 
State Fixed Effect 
N 
Y 
 
 
 
Constant 
31.59*** 
33.56*** 
 
(4.953) 
(4.939) 
N 
112206 
112206 
Adj. R2 
0.021 
0.031 
Standard errors in parentheses are robust and clustered at lender level 
* P < 0.1, ** P < 0.05, *** P < 0.01 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


59 
 
Figure 1a: Percentage of State Level Same-sex Borrowers and Gallup 2012 LGBT Estimate 
 
 
 
Gallup estimate can be found at http://www.gallup.com/poll/160517/lgbt-percentage-highest-lowest-north-dakota.aspx 


60 
 
Figure 1b: The Williams Institute 2010 DC Same-sex Couples Estimate (Based on Census Data) 
 
The Williams Institute http://williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/ 


61 
 
Figure 1c: The Heat Map of DC Same-sex Borrowers (Based on HMDA Implied) 
 


62 
 
 
Figure 2: Graph of the “same-sex” Coefficient and Associated 5% Confidence Interval using HMDA 100% National Data 
from 1990 to 2015 
 
 


63 
 
Figure 3: Graph of the “same-sex” Coefficient from Lender Level Loan Approval and Cost Regressions