Equal Access for 
Transgender People 
Supporting Inclusive Housing and Shelters 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
Shelter for All Genders, created by the Massachusetts Transgender Political Coalition (MTPC) 
served as an excellent resource for the authors. Content is re-used with permission by MTPC. 
The authors express our gratitude for allowing us to incorporate the lessons of MTPC as they 
continue their work building inclusive policy in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 
The authors have also beneftted from the insight and expertise of many housing and shelter 
operators and experienced policy makers. Creating resources to support a diverse group of 
families and individuals who experience homelessness is necessary and could not be done 
without subject matter experts to assist and review materials. These subject matter experts 
include: 
• Nzingha “Ziggy” Keyes 
• Angel VanStark 
• Michelle Farley, Birmingham AL Continuum of Care 
• Nicole Giannone, Ali Forney Center, New York City 
• Eva Thibaudeau, Houston TX Continuum of Care 
• Bre Kidman, National Center for Transgender Equality 
• Lisa Mottet, National Center for Transgender Equality 
• Tone Lee-Bias 
• Harper Jean Tobin, National Center for Transgender Equality 
• Kristyn Carrillo, NStreet Village, Washington DC 
• Meradith Alspaugh, Cincinnati OH Continuum of Care 
• Lindsay McDaniel Mapp, National Network to End Domestic Violence 
• Shaina Goodman, National Resource Center on Domestic Violence 
• Ez Cukor, NYC Human Rights Commission 
This report was prepared for the US Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) by Canavan Associates and The Cloudburst Group. 
The primary authors are David Canavan and Fran Ledger with support from Britton Gibson. 
This document was developed under HUD contract #M-11-TA-MD-2004 and FY 18 McKinney-Vento - M-18-TA-MD-0006. 
The authors are solely responsible for the accuracy of the statements and interpretation contained in this publication. Such interpretations do not necessarily 
refect the views of the Government. The substance and fndings of the work are dedicated to the public. 
All materials in this work are in the public domain and may be reproduced or copied without permission from the US Department of Housing and Urban 
Development. Citation of the source is appreciated. However, this publication may not be reproduced or distributed for a fee without the specifc written 
authorization of the Offce of Special Needs Assistance Programs, Community Planning and Development, US Department of Housing and Urban Development. 


1 
Equal Access Expectations Toolkit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Requirements of the Equal Access Rule 
Individuals and families seeking services from HUD funded homeless projects have 
nowhere else to go. In fact, this is one of several criteria HUD established for individuals 
and families in need. Too many LGBT youth and adults meet this standard and have 
nowhere to turn other than a HUD funded project. Acknowledging their need for assistance 
and seeking help is often its own struggle for those who have sacrifced much simply to 
recognize themselves. Among homeless youth, a population estimated annually somewhere 
between 400,000 and 2.8 million, LGBT youth are signifcantly overrepresented, 
accounting for up to 40% of the population1. 
Transgender individuals in particular are impacted by violence and discrimination in 
ways that both contribute to their homelessness and keep them from accessing necessary 
shelter and services. One in ten transgender individuals reports being evicted based on 
their gender expression. One in fve reports being denied an apartment or home based on 
gender expression. Even when seeking shelter, transgender individuals are at signifcant 
risk of harassment and physical and sexual assault. Nearly 30% of homeless transgender 
individuals report being turned away from a shelter due to their transgender status and 
22% report experiencing sexual assault perpetrated by staff or other shelter residents2. 
The Equal Access Rule clearly prohibits these discriminatory actions. HUD funds welcoming 
and inclusive housing programs open to all eligible individuals; the requirements of Equal 
Access Rule and follow-up guidance ensure that local projects know how to implement and 
enforce this requirement. 
HUD programs are built on a strong foundation of partnerships with both national and 
local organizations. HUD has worked with partners that are leading the effort to ensure 
individuals receive fair treatment when accessing HUD funded programs, from providing 
mortgages to accessing emergency shelter. Locally, the Continuums of Care (CoCs) and 
government partners target HUD resources to meet the unique needs in each community. 
These training materials provide CoCs and projects with the framework to create 
welcoming and inclusive projects for transgender and gender non-conforming people and 
to be in compliance with the requirements of the Equal Access Rule. Transgender and 
gender non-conforming people sometimes face different issues of discrimination, so this 
sourcebook sometimes addresses transgender-specifc topics, and at other times, addresses 
transgender and gender non-conforming topics. 
1 
Grant, Jaime M., Lisa A. Mottet, Justin Tanis, Jack Harrison, Jody L. Herman, and Mara Keisling, Injustice at Every Turn: A Report of the National Transgender 
Discrimination Survey, Washington: National Center for Transgender Equality and National Gay and Lesbian Task Force, 2011, Page 107. 
2 
Ibid, Page 106. 
Check out the work of 
NCTE in developing 
policies across 
the social service, 
criminal justice and 
healthcare industries. 
Get up-to-date 
information on the 
work True Colors is 
doing to understand 
the extent and nature 
of homelessness 
among LGBT youth 
and how to end it. 


2 
Equal Access Expectations Toolkit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Check out the full 
Equal Access Toolkit 
developed for HUD 
funded projects here. 
Introduction to the Equal Access Rule in Shelters 
This section provides an overview of the US Department of Housing and Urban Development’s 
(HUD) Equal Access Rule requirements related to accessing emergency shelter services. This 
section covers: 
• Suggested language for transgender-inclusive projects to use in discussions and written materials; 
• What to include in a project site’s anti-discrimination policy; and 
• How to request technical assistance or additional guidance from HUD. 
Announced in January 2012, the Equal Access Rule codifed HUD’s commitment to the fair 
administration of its funded projects “regardless of marriage status, sexual orientation or 
gender identity.” Following that announcement, in September 2016, HUD further required that 
decisions related to placement and accommodations in single-sex shelters and facilities must 
be made in accordance with the resident’s gender identity. 


3 
Equal Access Expectations Toolkit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This sourcebook familiarizes project staff with best practices consistent with HUD’s Equal 
Access Rule requirements in order to establish and support transgender-inclusive projects. 
It also provides projects with a framework for policies and practices that foster inclusive 
projects. Readers can fnd information about how project staff and facilitators can: 
• Employ transgender-inclusive language in discussions and written materials; 
• Intervene in conficts to promote the safety of all residents while upholding expectations of appropriate behavior; and 
• Hold staff and residents consistently accountable regarding standards of behavior within HUD-funded shelters and projects. 
Few situations are more fraught with anxiety and fear than an individual seeking lifesaving 
services, shelter or food from service providers. Transgender and gender non-conforming 
people have the added anxiety of wondering whether they will face discrimination when 
they seek help. Concern that a miscommunication with a staff member could result in their 
expulsion, or that a misunderstanding with another resident may escalate to threaten their 
safety, are heavy burdens. 
To best support these individuals during such critical times, gender identity must and gender 
expression should be included in a shelter’s non-discrimination policy so that transgender 
residents and gender non-conforming residents are explicitly covered by the policy. Related 
policies and procedures that support non-discrimination should be developed with input 
from all of a provider’s stakeholders and should promote practices that respect the diverse 
range of people seeking shelter at HUD-funded projects. State and municipal laws may also 
require providers to incorporate additional specifc protections into an anti-discrimination 
policy. Every provider must be aware of and in compliance with their state and municipal 
anti-discrimination regulations. This document focuses on developing, communicating, and 
enforcing policies and procedures that support transgender and gender non-conforming 
inclusiveness, as well as creating spaces that support these residents to begin the process of 
re-establishing their self-suffciency. 
As a beginning step in creating transgender and gender non-conforming inclusive 
environments, subject matter experts, members of the transgender community, advocates and 
service providers have identifed terms that convey respect when discussing diverse gender 
identities and expressions. Using respectful language communicates that a project welcomes 
all eligible residents. However, it is important to remember that clients make the fnal decision 
about how to identify and express themselves, including their gender pronouns. 
Links to NCTE 
National Transgender 
Discrimination Survey. 
HUD maintains a list 
of state fair housing 
authorities. Look 
here to fnd your 
state. 
Gender Non-Conforming clients may not identify as either male or female. A spectrum of gender expression 
exists that is a mix of attributes traditionally considered male or female. Gender non-conforming individuals 
express their internal gender identity through characteristics from across the gender spectrum. 


4 
Equal Access Expectations Toolkit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introducing Transgender-Inclusive Language 
If your project does 
provide healthcare, 
check out the Health 
Care for the Homeless 
Report “Seeing 
People as They See 
Themselves”. 
Provider Goal: To use appropriate, inclusive language in communication, publications and 
training that affrms the provider’s commitment to serving residents in accordance with the 
Equal Access Rule. 
Problem: When entering a HUD-funded project many transgender and gender non-conforming 
residents report fearing that staff may be shocked, hostile or rude. 
Discriminating/Affrming Language 
This document discusses some terms commonly used among members of the LGBTQ 
community. However, if a resident reports that a term is offensive to them, reasonable efforts 
should be made to respect their wishes and use their preferred terms. 
First, understanding gender transition is important. “Transition” refers to the time period that 
many transgender people go through to live according to their gender identity, instead of 
their sex assigned at birth. A signifcant part of transitioning is the social aspect: going by a 
new name, pronoun, and changing one’s outer appearance (clothing, hairstyle, etc.) so that 
their gender expression matches their gender identity. For some, this process includes medical 
treatments, like hormones or surgery. 
Pronouns. Staff should always refer to residents by the name and pronouns they request (this 
may be fuid depending on the individual’s perception of safety at the time). Some residents 
may choose to be referred to using the pronouns they, them and their instead of gendered 
pronouns, such as he or she. While traditionally thought of as plural pronouns, these 
terms have been adopted by members of the community as a comfortable way to identify 
themselves. 
Personal Questions. As a general standard, staff should avoid asking personal questions 
unrelated to the provision of housing or shelter, especially regarding medical treatment. 
Questions like: “have you had surgery?” are not appropriate. 
Additionally, staff should avoid using language such as “transgendered” or “a transgender,” 
which reduces an individual to a single defning attribute and fails to respect the entire 
individual. Diminishing an individual in this manner, intentional or not, can convey disrespect. 


5 
Equal Access Expectations Toolkit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Glossary of Gender Identifying Terms and Defnitions 
Below are some common respectful terms and their defnitions along with links to other resources. 
Assigned/Designated Sex at Birth: 
• Frequently a binary designation of “male” or 
“female”. 
• Based on the person’s internal or external anatomy 
at birth. 
• Assigned at birth, typically by a medical professional 
(e.g., sex listed on birth certifcate). 
• May or may not correspond to one’s gender identity. 
Cisgender 
• Refers to a non-transgender person. 
• The prefx “cis” means “matches”. So, cisgender 
means that one’s sex assigned at birth “matches” 
one’s gender identity. 
Gender Identity 
• Internal or innate sense of being male, female, or 
another gender. 
• May or may not match their assigned sex at birth. 
• May not be visible based on outward appearance. 
Gender Expression: 
• External expression of gender identity (note that 
many times people do not feel they can safely 
express their gender identity). 
• Exhibited through: behavior, clothing, hairstyle, 
body language, and voice. 
• Does not always correspond to a person’s gender 
identity. 
• May change over time or even day-to-day. 
Sexual Orientation: 
• Describes who an individual experiences physical or 
emotional attraction to. 
• Distinct from one’s gender expression or identity. 
Gender Non-Conforming 
• Someone who does not conform to traditional 
gender roles or stereotypes. 
• Traditional roles and stereotypes vary based on 
different cultural and societal ideals. 
• Individuals may be perceived as having a different 
gender than their outward appearances (behavior, 
clothing, hairstyle, body language, voice). 
NCTE maintains a 
primer on trans issues 
and information 
about respectful, 
inclusive language. 
MTPC produced 
a guide for 
shelter providers 
that includes 
incorporating 
inclusive language. 


6 
Equal Access Expectations Toolkit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Remember, the Equal 
Access Rule prohibits 
discrimination on both 
actual and perceived 
gender identity. 
Non-Binary Person 
• A person who does not identify as male or female 
(male/female are the two ends of the gender 
spectrum). 
Gender-Neutral 
• Language used to describe “all gender” or 
unisex spaces, (i.e., gender-neutral or all gender 
bathrooms), language about relationships (spouse 
or partner, instead of wife/husband or boyfriend/ 
girlfriend), etc. 
Transitioning (Gender Transition): 
• Process that some (but not all) transgender people 
go through to begin living as the gender with which 
they identify, rather than the sex assigned to them 
at birth. 
• Transitioning does not require medical treatment. 
Transgender 
• Umbrella term for people whose gender identity is 
different from their assigned sex at birth. 
• Occasionally, an individual may determine they no 
longer identify as transgender after they transition. 
Trans Woman 
• Someone who lives or identifes as a woman, even 
though they were assigned male at birth may or 
may not have undergone medical treatments. 
• Sometimes referred to as “Male-to-Female” or 
“MTF,” but these terms may not be preferred as they 
can over-emphasize that the person was born male 
rather than her current identity. 
Trans Man 
• Someone who lives or identifes as a man, but was 
assigned female at birth. May or may not have 
undergone medical treatments. 
• Sometimes referred to as “Female-to-Male” or 
“FTM,” but these terms may not be preferred as 
they can over-emphasize that the person was born 
female rather than his current identity. 


7 
Equal Access Expectations Toolkit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fair Housing and Anti Discrimination Policies 
The federal Fair Housing Act prohibits discrimination because of gender identity in housing. 
The Fair Housing Act covers nearly all housing and housing-related services, including shelter 
programs. Under the Act, it is unlawful for a housing or shelter provider to deny access, 
impose different terms or conditions, or harass a person because of they are transgender 
or because of their actual or perceived gender identity. In creating transgender-inclusive 
environments, providers must document clear standards in personnel handbooks and other 
policy documents, and publicly post policies where residents, volunteers, visitors and staff can 
view them. Each of the subsequent sections reviews elements of a comprehensive policy. This 
sourcebook does not articulate every aspect of fair housing and anti-discrimination policy. 
States and many local communities have established their own rules and regulations related to 
fair housing in addition to those established by HUD. Check out HUD’s Offce of Fair Housing 
and Equal Opportunity. 
Many states have developed resources for shelter and housing providers to use in complying 
with state fair housing laws. Many states and cities have also established additional 
regulations and statutes to create enhanced protections and consequences for discriminatory 
actions. Contact your state fair housing enforcement authority for additional information 
related to comprehensive fair housing practices and incorporate them into your internal policy 
and personnel handbooks. 
Once staff and contractors are up to date on the required policy changes, the next logical 
step is communicating them to residents. 
New York City has established a law to describe precisely what actions constitute harassment. This is an 
example of a community implementing protections that exceed those established by HUD. Click this link to 
learn more about this law. 
See the Offce of Fair 
Housing and Equal 
Opportunity (FHEO) 
website for more 
information on fair 
housing enforcement. 
Check out Seattle/ 
King County’s “Guide 
to Fair Housing 
for Nonproft 
Housing and Shelter 
Providers”. 


8 
Equal Access Expectations Toolkit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This document was 
modeled on one 
developed by The 
Network/La Red. 
Check out other 
materials they’ve 
developed. 
The document below was developed by a project in Boston, MA. It communicates concisely 
the provider’s commitment to equal treatment for all residents. Each resident acknowledges the 
policy upon project enrollment. 
SAMPLE DOCUMENT: 
Communicating Anti-Discrimination 
Policy to Clients 
(Project Name) welcomes individuals who are heterosexual, bisexual, gay, 
lesbian, transgender queer and/or gender non-conforming of different races, 
classes, religions, ages and backgrounds. I will be respectful of the other 
program participants and staff. I understand that any oppressive or abusive 
language or actions are not acceptable. If I have any questions about this 
policy, I can ask a staff member to explain it to me. 
If a program participant or staff member is acting in an abusive or oppressive 
way towards me, I know that I can report this behavior to a staff member. If 
I feel that the issue has not been addressed, I can then report it to the project 
coordinator, _____________. If the issue has still not been appropriately 
addressed, I can bring the issue to the executive director, ________________. 
Signed: ________________________________ 
Date: 
_________________________________ 
HUD has provided a Notice that providers can publicly post to inform staff and residents about requirements 
of the Equal Access Rule. 


9 
Equal Access Expectations Toolkit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inclusive Policy Standards for Staff and Residents 
This section explains: 
• What policies a provider can implement to build an inclusive project and community; 
• How policies can mitigate risk to transgender and gender non-conforming residents; and 
• What elements to include in policies to increase their effectiveness. 
Given the increased occurrence of discrimination affecting transgender and gender non­
conforming residents, HUD-funded projects must take precautions to ensure a project is free 
of discrimination and inform residents of their fair housing rights. Likewise, if a resident 
encounters discrimination, a clear protocol must be in place for addressing discriminatory 
behavior towards transgender and gender-non conforming residents and intervening to 
address and prevent harassment, including trauma-informed interventions that prioritize 
survivor safety, work with perpetrators to address and alter their behavior, and lead up to 
disciplining or expelling the perpetrator if they do not alter their behavior. 
Staff and volunteers should be trained in inclusivity and equal access, and given support 
to think through the most equitable way to handle situations they may need guidance in 
addressing using this framework. Contractors should be told that they are expected to abide 
by these standards of inclusivity, especially if those contractors have direct contact with shelter 
residents. Resident orientation should also share the project’s standards and expectations 
around inclusivity in clear and accessible language. Clear guidelines defning unacceptable 
behavior, the process for reporting violations of the policy and corrective actions allow all 
members of the shelter community to participate with consistent expectations. 
A recent study by the Center for American Progress found that only 33% of 100 shelters across four states 
correctly admitted transgender identifed residents. 
Link to National 
Coalition for 
the Homeless 
“Transitioning Our 
Shelters” Report. 


10 
Equal Access Expectations Toolkit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inclusive Policy Standards: Staff 
Check out what the 
Connecticut Coalition 
to End Homelessness 
is doing to train their 
Continuum! 
For more information 
about the US 
Equal Employment 
Opportunity 
Commission and the 
impact of harassment 
see this link. 
Implementing the Equal Access Rule requires upholding consistent standards for all project 
staff, contractors and volunteers. Multiple studies have found that transgender individuals are 
at a higher risk than other members of the homeless community of becoming the subject of 
harassment and assault. Best practices for mitigating these risks include establishing policies to 
meet discriminatory conduct with a consistent organizational response. Language and actions 
that are discriminatory in nature, regardless of the intent, cannot be tolerated. With this in 
mind, projects should have policies on what language and behavior is unacceptable for staff 
and volunteers to use in any interaction within the project. 
Project staff may speak or act out of ignorance, inadvertently using offensive language. A 
staff member may carelessly or intentionally use the wrong pronoun and name to refer to a 
transgender or gender non-conforming resident. Projects should actively communicate with 
staff to ensure the provider’s commitment to transgender-inclusive language and programming 
is clearly understood. By establishing personnel actions that encompass both educational 
and corrective goals, site managers can identify appropriate next steps. Incorporating 
these guidelines into training and initial hire orientation promotes consistent expectations of 
behavior among all staff, volunteers and contractors. 
Actions, especially those that are egregious, malicious, or severe in nature, may warrant 
termination or a more serious legal response. Projects should clearly articulate which actions 
are opportunities for education or additional training, and which actions will result in more 
serious personnel consequences. Communicating and consistently applying these parameters 
creates shared expectations among the entire project team. 
In creating safe, supportive and inclusive environments, an important part of staff 
responsibilities is addressing confict that may arise. Managing confict can be challenging 
and uncomfortable, and staff might improperly focus their attention on the more cooperative 
harassed individual, and not on the aggressor, to resolve a confict. Conficts that could 
escalate to expulsion from the project are among the most challenging for staff to approach. 
It is important that training incorporates multiple methods for addressing and resolving 
impermissible conduct among residents to ensure that all staff and volunteers possess 
strategies that will work for them. Training may include role-playing, providing sample 
language and utilizing onsite or on-call senior staff to manage complex situations. 


11 
Equal Access Expectations Toolkit
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STANDARDS OF BEHAVIOR: 
Across the Coordinated Entry Process 
It is important that all organizations involved in referrals support transgender and 
gender non-conforming inclusive projects. Unfortunately, a recent study by the Center 
for American Progress found inconsistent practices. The survey of 25 shelters in each 
of four states found only 30% of projects correctly offering shelter to test callers who 
identifed as transgender3. With CoCs working to design common intake procedures 
and single-points-of-entry, it is critical that all eligible people know they are welcome. 
From the frst contact with a 2-1-1 operator to the last interaction with the CoC, all 
people should be free from discrimination. CoCs should look closely at each step in 
the process to identify opportunities to improve their practices. Possible improvements 
may be: 
Triage/Pre-Assessment 
• Training phone operators to avoid gendered greetings such as “sir” and “ma’am” 
• Ensuring all forms allow for transgender and gender non-conforming selections by clients (for example, 
on a form that asks residents to list their title, list options as Mr., Ms., or Mx.) 
• Creating space on forms for all people to indicate their preferred name and pronouns 
Referrals 
• Supporting transgender individuals’ enrollment and placement based on their gender identity in 
single-sex options to ensure correct procedures are followed throughout the Continuum 
• Only sharing necessary information about individuals when making a referral 
• Listening to callers and respecting their choices to access any options for which they are eligible without 
requiring “proof” 
Caitlin Rooney, et al, “Discrimination Against Transgender Women Seeking Access to Homeless Shelters,” Center for American Progress 
(January 2016), https://www.americanprogress.org/issues/lgbt/report/2016/01/07/128323/discrimination-against-transgender-women­
seeking-access-to-homeless-shelters/ 
This guide, 
developed by the 
Fenway Institute 
in Boston, MA, 
provides examples 
of question formats 
and answers for 
use by practitioners 
when inquiring about 
sexual orientation 
and gender identity. 
Check it out! 
3 


12 
Equal Access Expectations Toolkit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Check out the District 
of Columbia’s Offce 
of Human Rights 
campaign to support 
inclusive bathroom 
signage. 
Inclusive Policy Standards: Residents 
Regardless of the size, mission or staffng, all HUD-funded projects are expected to be free of 
discrimination and harassment. Providers communicate the absence of bias by using inclusive 
language in: 
• Signage within the project; 
• Interactions with staff and residents; 
• Publications about the project; and 
• Intake forms that give residents the option to reveal or omit their transgender or gender non-conforming status. 
Most providers have created codes of conduct that describe expected behavior in simple, 
straightforward language. Smaller projects and those with long-term residents might provide 
residents with a written copy of these expectations, while larger emergency shelters that exit 
all residents every morning might post the code of conduct in public spaces within the shelter. 
Ensuring that residents adhere to these codes of conduct can be challenging. Projects can 
be chaotic, requiring residents to interact with strangers constantly and, at times, with little 
control over their environment. Transgender residents have the added threat of discrimination 
and rejection if projects do not work to create inclusive environments. Harassment creates 
unwelcoming atmospheres, creating or exacerbating confict between residents. Although 
this confict may be initiated by another resident, it risks the expulsion of all parties involved, 
aggressor and subject alike. 
Directors and managers must craft policies that enable all eligible residents to access services. 
As frontline staff are largely responsible for enforcing these policies, it is imperative that 
clear expectations are documented and communicated to assist staff in their roles. Managers 
and senior staff help set an inclusive tone for the project, which can be done in part through 
modeling appropriate language and behavior at all times. This will help set a standard of 
inclusiveness among both staff and residents. 


13 
Equal Access Expectations Toolkit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Projects employing inclusive language on forms, internal signage and external publications 
about the project communicate their commitment to a transgender-inclusive project. This is a 
component of supporting all eligible participants. Once admitted to a project, an individual’s 
interactions with staff and fellow residents in the community play a role in their progress 
towards ending their homelessness. Projects should have policies and procedures in place 
that support a transgender and gender non-conforming inclusive environment. Policies and 
procedures should: 
Use gender neutral standards. For example, dress codes should articulate which 
areas of a resident’s body should be covered rather than focusing on gender-
specifc articles of clothing (e.g., residents must be covered from the base of 
their neck to their knees when in public areas of the project). This removes any 
reference to particular types of clothes that individuals must wear. 
Incorporate the same standards of respectful behavior into employee, resident, 
volunteer and contractor training to establish consistent expectations. 
It is fundamental that all project policies reinforce that an individual’s identity as transgender 
or gender non-conforming does not create a risk to others’ health and safety. Rather, 
maintaining an inclusive community enhances safety for all residents. Some residents may 
initially present concerns about transgender or gender non-conforming residents to project 
staff and managers. Staff should treat those concerns as opportunities to educate and refocus 
the resident on their own progress. But even then, confict may persist and complaints may 
escalate to verbal or physical harassment. Whether directed at another resident within the 
project or off-site, harassment jeopardizes the health and safety of community members. 
Providers should have policies and procedures in place to support residents and staff in 
addressing and resolving conficts that escalate to harassment. Policies and procedures 
should: 
• Include specifc behaviors that violate standards of respectful behavior, such as language, actions and 
non-verbal intimidation. 
• Escalate corrective actions if an individual repeats the same violation of standards after educational 
opportunities are offered. 
• Focus corrective actions on aggressors who violate project rules, not on the subject of their harassment. 
• If a resident continues to disrespect a transgender individual, consider as interim steps: 
» requiring that the harassing resident stay away from the transgender individual, 
» making changes in sleeping arrangements without limiting the freedom of the transgender individual, or 
» pursuing other interventions that do not result in the expulsion of the harassing resident. 
In no instances should interim or fnal steps involve expulsion of the harassed client. 
Transgender 
and gender non­
conforming clients 
are at signifcantly 
increased risk of 
being the victim of 
physical and sexual 
assault. Identifying 
as transgender does 
not create risks for 
anyone other than 
the transgender 
individual. 


14 
Equal Access Expectations Toolkit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Creating Inclusive Standards: Transgender and Gender 
Check out this report 
from FORGE on 
serving transgender 
survivors of violence. 
Non-Conforming Individuals’ Access to Projects 
The questions and factors listed below address some of the components providers will need to 
consider when creating inclusive policies. Providers likely have additional requirements based 
on state and local statutory and regulatory requirements. CoC and providers may want to 
share the costs of legal advice to ensure comprehensive compliance. 
Is the project or service permitted by statute or regulation to segregate services based 
on gender? 
The Department of Justice has established that Violence Against Women Act (VAWA)­
funded projects must be able to demonstrate that sex-segregation of services are 
essential to the operation of the project. http://www.justice.gov/sites/default/fles/ 
ovw/legacy/2014/06/20/faqs-ngc-vawa.pdf 
HUD has established that emergency shelter and other facilities are permitted to 
operate single-sex projects when the project consists of a single structure with shared 
bedrooms or bathing facilities such that the considerations of personal privacy and 
the physical limitations of the confguration of the housing make it appropriate for the 
housing to be limited to one sex. See regulations at: https://www.hudexchange.info/ 
resources/documents/CoCProgramInterimRule_FormattedVersion.pdf 
If the provider is permitted to segregate services based on gender, the provider must 
create policies that ensure housing and services to all eligible individuals identifying 
with that gender, including those individuals whose gender identity does not match 
the sex assigned at their birth. 
Center for American 
Progress just put out 
a new report about 
diffculties obtaining 
identifcation if you 
are a homeless LGBT 
youth. Check it out 
here. 
HUD recognizes a difference may exist between an individual’s gender identity and 
their sex assigned at birth. 
HUD has established that providers may not deny access to a single-sex emergency 
shelter or facility because the provider possesses identity documents indicating a sex 
different than the gender with which the resident or potential client identifes. 
A provider may not consider the resident or potential resident ineligible for an 
emergency shelter or other facility because their appearance or behavior does not 
conform to gender stereotypes. 
A provider may not ask questions or otherwise seek information or documentation 
concerning a person’s anatomy or medical history related to their gender identity 
or expression. 


15 
Equal Access Expectations Toolkit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
If the provider is not permitted to segregate services based on gender, then the 
provider must serve all individuals who are eligible for the project. 
HUD-funded family shelters may not deny services to clients of any gender if they are 
eligible. 
HUD-funded family shelters may never discriminate on the basis of gender. Some 
projects have erroneously established a policy of not housing males over the age of 13 
or requiring them to seek other housing, thus separating them from their families. This 
involuntary separation is prohibited by 578.93(e) of the CoC Program Interim Rule 
and is a violation of the Equal Access Rule and may also violate the Fair Housing Act. 
Transgender and gender non-conforming clients have access to projects according to 
their gender identity. 
Clients may choose to disclose their transgender status at some projects within a 
community while not disclosing at other projects. For instance, a client may want to 
disclose their transgender status at a health clinic to receive appropriate healthcare 
but not at a project where one’s sex assigned at birth is not relevant to the services 
provided. 
A transgender client may elect to share their transgender status with project staff, 
or not. In the event that a client discloses being transgender, staff should consult 
that client about whether the client prefers to have the HMIS data element for 
“gender” refect their transgender status or not. For instance, if a client identifes as a 
transgender man but would prefer not to have this refected in his HMIS record, then 
the staff person would select a gender category that does not indicate transgender 
status. Staff can still note in a confdential case management note, if this feature is 
available in the HMIS, an individual’s transgender status if it is appropriate and 
necessary to the provision of services. 
Clients reporting different gender identities or presenting different gender expressions 
at multiple projects within the same CoC are not violating standards for accurate 
collection of information. Clients decide to which projects they will disclose potentially 
sensitive information. Project staff should enter the self-reported information as 
directed by the client. 
HUD maintains a list 
of Frequently Asked 
Questions (FAQs). 
For more information 
on the defnition of 
“family” under the 
Equal Access Rule, 
go here. 


16 
Equal Access Expectations Toolkit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Creating Inclusive Spaces: Facilities 
Self-determination 
is fundamental to 
all clients in HUD 
projects. While shelter 
and project staff may 
offer accommodations 
based on safety 
concerns or other 
valid professional 
considerations, at 
no time are staff 
permitted to require 
a transgender 
or gender 
non-conforming 
client accept an 
accommodation 
based on gender 
identity. 
Some projects, particularly emergency shelters, may be based in physical facilities that were 
not designed for the purpose of providing shelter or housing, or for the number of residents 
they currently serve. Additionally, facilities may have been developed in accordance with 
outdated regulations that have since been updated to refect the importance of accessibility, 
privacy and safety. Given the scope of existing resources, projects may not be able to 
immediately alter the physical spaces of the project. While this limitation restricts the extent to 
which a project can adapt, there are several strategies that projects can implement to meet 
residents’ privacy and safety needs. 
Staff must take non-discriminatory steps that may be necessary and appropriate to address 
privacy concerns raised by residents. The provider must ensure that its policies do not isolate 
or segregate clients within the project based upon transgender and gender non-conforming 
status unless a specifc privacy request is made. In both the use of bathrooms and bed 
assignment, a variety of methods may be effective at addressing a resident’s privacy needs. 
Staff may offer a resident a room, foor or bed that is in proximity to staff workstations. 
Staff may offer a resident access to rooms, foors or beds set aside for residents with 
increased vulnerability. However, the accommodation should be available to clients 
based on a variety of factors that can increase one’s vulnerability, and not just be 
restricted for use by transgender or gender non-conforming residents. 
Staff may offer to assist a resident in identifying an alternate project that will provide 
comparable services and provide a referral. Staff should make reasonable efforts to 
ensure a vacancy exists, that the resident is eligible for that project, and that the client 
is able to enroll in the alternate project. 
A strategy of last resort could be to offer a client a hotel or motel voucher. However, 
to be a comparable option, the voucher must be offered for the full period of time 
the original project site would be able to shelter the client, and the client has access 
to comparable services and resources either via an outreach team or a supportive 
service project. 


17 
Equal Access Expectations Toolkit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The use of bathroom and shower facilities for every client is an important part of maintaining 
hygiene and dignity. Many cities and communities have established bathrooms that are for 
individual use and do not have a gender marker on the door. Some facilities have designed 
bathrooms that permit congregate use by all genders, with individual stalls designed to 
maintain privacy and dignity. These options may or may not be reasonable for a given 
project. Regardless, strategies exist to accommodate any client with a need for individual or 
private showers or bathrooms. Clients with special health concerns, trauma histories or other 
needs may also make reasonable requests for accommodations. Some options for staff are: 
Establish a single use bathroom for client use at specifc intervals during the day. 
Often an existing staff member bathroom may be made available for this purpose 
without compromising the requirements of staff members. 
Provide certain times during the day that a bathroom can be scheduled by any client 
with a request to use a congregate facility privately. 
Ensure that toilet and shower stalls have locking doors or, at a minimum, curtains to 
allow for modesty and dignity. 
For shower use, consider implementing a schedule for all clients if communal showers 
are the only available type of shower. 
Some federal agencies use the terms “sex” and “gender” synonymously. Other departments use them to 
accurately distinguish the physical anatomy of an individual’s body (sex) and their internal sense of identity 
(gender). An added complexity for projects is that some statutory language uses different defnitions. In 
general, project staff should review formal guidance from federal program staff for clear defnitions. HUD 
grantees can submit question using the Ask-A-Question feature on www.hudexchange.info for program 
specifc guidance. 
If your project 
has a health care 
component, check 
out the Center 
of Excellence for 
Transgender Health 
at the University 
of California, San 
Francisco for some 
excellent examples 
for creating an 
inclusive program. 


18 
Equal Access Expectations Toolkit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Confdentiality: Sex Assigned at Birth 
Clients often share very personal and private information as they seek services. Every 
HUD-funded project has policies related to confdentiality. However, most staff training fails 
to instruct staff that a client’s sex assigned at birth is confdential information. Staff that have 
not been trained to understand the impact that disclosure can have on a client’s physical 
and mental well-being may inadvertently delay or derail a client’s progress towards ending 
homelessness. It is essential that all staff, from the chief executive offcer and the board of 
directors to contracted security, receive training on confdentiality to avoid jeopardizing 
client welfare. 
CoCs and projects should consider including sex assigned at birth on their list of confdential 
information. Transgender residents of projects have a higher likelihood of suffering 
harassment or physical harm based on the disclosure of the difference between their gender 
identity and their sex assigned at birth. This is true both within the physical structure of the 
project and outside the project. 
Additionally, clients may elect not to disclose their transgender status in certain spaces or at 
certain moments for health and safety reasons. The decision to disclose one’s transgender 
status lies solely with the client. 
If a staff member has questions regarding disclosure of an individual’s transgender status, 
they should seek additional training from their human resources department or guidance 
from their supervisor. 


19 
Equal Access Expectations Toolkit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Confdentiality: Medication 
Almost every project has policies related to accessing both prescription and non-prescription 
medications. Some shelters incorporate outside programs into their operations (e.g., Health 
Care for the Homeless or mobile healthcare providers who visit project sites on a regular basis 
to provide primary care). Many projects also require residents to submit their belongings to a 
search by staff to deter the introduction of weapons and illegal drugs to the project. Given the 
range in types of both medical and housing services, and the different security measures used 
across projects, medication access policies vary broadly. 
In some projects, staff secure prescription medication and must be present when clients 
access the medication. Some shelters have medication lockers that clients use to secure their 
medication, while other sites are licensed for the administration of medication and are more 
involved in the process. Whether a client is cisgender or transgender, their prescription 
medication should be subject to all of the same standards of the shelter. 
Transgender individuals may have a variety of medical needs, related or unrelated to their 
transgender status. They may carry hypodermic needles for the use of insulin to control 
diabetes (unrelated) or for injecting prescribed hormones (related). A resident’s reason for 
using a particular medication is generally irrelevant; once staff members have documented 
that a medication is properly prescribed, then standard policies should apply to all residents. 
Some people experiencing homelessness who identify as transgender may use hormones 
or other medication as part of their gender-affrming healthcare regimen. Because access 
to prescription medication requires access to both a healthcare provider and the funding to 
purchase these medications, some individuals may be using medications from illicit or outside 
sources, acquired through the Internet or on the street. If staff members are concerned that 
any client is using medication improperly (e.g., without a prescription or from an unregulated 
source) they should follow local project policies for reviewing these concerns with a client. 
Shelter staff can assist residents in obtaining health insurance or if currently enrolled, fnding a 
healthcare provider that will support the resident’s transition-related health care needs. 
The US Department of Health and Human Services has proposed a new Rule that prohibits discrimination in 
healthcare coverage related to transgender status. For more information, check out this HHS website. 
If you have clients 
without health 
insurance, check to 
see if the Affordable 
Care Act has created 
access to healthcare in 
your community. Link 
to ACA marketplace 
site. 


20 
Equal Access Expectations Toolkit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
What’s Next? Next steps and where to go for help. 
Looking for resources and examples for materials to incorporate into your project? Be sure 
to check out the links referenced in this sourcebook! If these don’t address your informational 
needs, take a look at the resources developed by some of the organizations working on these 
issues, including: 
• The National Center for Transgender Equality 
• The Ali Forney Center 
• The True Colors Fund 
• The National Network to End Domestic Violence 
• The National Resource Center on Domestic Violence 
• The Massachusetts Transgender Political Coalition 
• FORGE 
• The Washington State Coalition Against Domestic Violence 
• The Anti-Violence Project 
HUDExchange.info is the place to go for formal program guidance and to request technical 
assistance. Looking for an answer to a specifc question not addressed here? Submit it to the 
Ask-A-Question feature on the HUDExchange. 
For questions or specifc complaints related to Fair Housing Act enforcement, HUD’s Offce 
of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity maintains several options for registering a complaint, 
including: 
• How to File a Fair Housing Complaint 


U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development 
Offce of Special Needs Assistance Programs 
Washington, DC 20410-6000