Key takeaways
-       Lending discrimination is not new, but policies like the Equal Credit Opportunity Act penalize lenders for discriminatory practices.
-       Critics of current credit-scoring models argue that inputs like income and homeownership still include racial bias, according to Bankrate's overview of credit card statistics by race and ethnicity.
-       Multiple credit-scoring models exist, though FICO is the most popular.
-       Communities of color often have less access to financial services for various reasons, many based in systemic oppression, and these roadblocks further limit these communities from accessing and building credit.
Credit scores help lenders assess someone's risk of defaulting on borrowed money. The higher your credit score, the less of a risk you pose. High credit scores make accessing credit lines with better interest rates much easier. But is everyone treated the same in credit scoring?
A study from the Federal Reserve Board shows that Black, Hispanic and Native American borrowers generally have lower credit scores today, even when researchers control for other factors like education and income. Studies like these may lead people to wonder if race plays a significant role in credit scores, and if so, how that affects the borrowing power of different ethnicities and racial groups.
A brief history on lending practices
In the past, gender and race were both factors lenders used to discriminate against people seeking financial services. For example, practices like redlining — a discriminatory practice in which institutions refused or withheld financial products like mortgages from people in financially "high-risk areas" — made it almost impossible for people of color to get home loans.
Lending practices changed due to the diligent work of activists, who inspired the laws that prohibit bias in lending. Both the Civil Rights Movement and the Women's Movement contributed to anti-bias legislation in the 1960s and 1970s.
One such law is The Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA), which Congress passed in 1974, to protect against discriminatory lending practices by prohibiting creditors from using race or gender to make lending decisions. Instead, creditors use factors like your income, debt, recurring expenses and credit history. Credit scores as we know them became commonplace in 1989 when FICO created its credit-scoring model. Now, lenders use your credit score to determine approval for things like credit cards, mortgages and auto loans.
Though the government has enacted laws to keep discriminatory practices at bay, the long-term impact of past discriminatory practices and disparity in lending continues.