Factors to Consider When Making Your Choice of Career
Written by 
Updated June 16, 2026
KEY TAKEAWAYS:
- Once you understand these factors, it's a case of evaluating them against your potential earning capacity and deciding whether you consider the salary fair for the career.
- When the time comes to decide your choice of career, several factors might influence your decision.
- It's vital that you take the time to consider your options and determine if a particular career is the best option for you.
Insights from Indeed
career manager Hiring Insights
Average salary
$69,725/ year
Low $28,000High $140,000
Job seekers
91
-1 since July 2026
Employers hiring
8
+8 with open roles this month
Based on Indeed data · Refreshed monthlySee 9 open career manager jobs
Factors that influence your choice of career
When the time comes to decide your choice of career, several factors might influence your decision. These factors include:
Potential salary
The earning potential of a particular career often ranks highly among those considering their future career options. It may help you to spend some time learning about the potential salary and the expectations associated with it. Here are some common factors related to pay:
- expected number of work hours per week
- location of the work
- responsibilities of the position
Professional prestige
Professional prestige reflects the worth or regard to which a community holds a profession. An individual working in that profession may have a higher social standing in the community due to their position. Prestige may also influence an individual's feelings about themselves. It can also mean that society perceives an individual to have certain positive character traits because they are a member of a particular profession. While prestige does not drive everyone in their career choice, you may find that it helps you narrow down your options if it is something you value.
Job accessibility
While job accessibility is often relevant when choosing a career, it may carry less weight than factors such as earning potential or prestige. This factor is especially relevant to those with certain constraints on where they work. For example, someone in Canada wanting to become an astronaut has job accessibility because Canada has a space program. If that same person relocates to a country without a space agency, job accessibility may be limited for this particular profession.Related: 5 Principles for How to Choose a Career
Job security
The importance of job security fluctuates, with the current labour market being a primary factor for how much weight an individual gives it. For instance, when the labour market is tight and few jobs are available, careers offering long-term job security may be more popular. The same may be true when there are changes to the employment environment that make it appealing to secure long-term employment. An example might be if legislative changes encourage employers to have casual rather than permanent employees.
Personal interests
Personal interests can sometimes be a defining factor in your career choice. If you gravitate towards careers that match your interests, consider developing skills based on the activities and areas important to you. When it comes time to identify a suitable career, this approach can also help ensure you have some foundational knowledge to build upon.
Self-efficacy
Self-efficacy is the confidence a person has in their ability to meet the challenges ahead and complete the task or job. In this context, it's a person's belief that they have the necessary skills and talent to succeed in a particular role. While external factors may shape a person's perception of themselves, self-efficacy comes from within. This intrinsic value tends to be personal and is not necessarily something others can proactively influence.
Professional development opportunities
The availability of opportunities for professional development is an influencing factor when selecting a career. While this may mean different things for different careers, many people want careers with the possibility of promotion or career advancement. For example, some professions, such as medicine or law, have clear professional pathways. Depending on your values and goals, you may be less drawn to careers without the opportunity to develop your skills or advance within an organization.Related: ISFJ Careers: Find the Right Career for Your Personality
Influence of family members, teachers, and friends
When choosing a career, you may find that the people around you have their own opinions and ideas. Outside influence can come from family members such as parents and siblings, school teachers, work mentors, and even friends. While they're all valuable sources of information, it's vital to ensure they don't inform your decision excessively or take your focus away from your personal goals and interests.
Narrowing your options
When choosing a career, you may be faced with a multitude of possibilities. While the process can sometimes feel overwhelming, it's important to remember to take your time. Here are some tools you may find helpful during the decision-making process:
Brainstorm your career options
One of the best ways to work through your career options is to create a list of possibilities. Consider making a list of potential careers you might be interested in so that you can properly evaluate each option. Instead of going into too much detail at this early stage in the decision-making process, consider brainstorming career ideas. Once you're done, you can leave the list for a day or so before returning to it.When you come back to your list, go through it and consider each option in more detail. While you may be able to discard some of your ideas immediately, try to come up with a shortlist of four or five options that interest you the most. You can always return to a career you have left off the list once you have gone through your top choices.Related: Exploring Second Career Options (With Salary Information)
Research the careers
Next, consider each of the options remaining. Research each career option on your list and learn about its career path, the training required, and the skills necessary to succeed. Find out as much as possible about each job and what it's like working there. This might include salaries, benefits, opportunities for advancement, necessary skills, and other factors that may help you decide.When conducting your research, try to be as specific as possible. For example, if you are looking into educational requirements, you can research details such as prerequisites or specialist courses. You can also speak to someone who works in your field or area of interest, as this may provide you with unique insights and valuable information.
Identify your strengths
Everyone has areas where they are strong and likely to excel. This might be because they have a particular interest in that area or have skills that lend themselves to the field. Choosing a career that matches your strengths can increase the likelihood of being successful. It can also be a great way to develop your confidence in a particular profession. Make a list of your key strengths, including physical, academic, character traits, hard skills, and work experience.Related: How to Answer "What Is Your Greatest Strength?" (With Examples)
Match skills and careers
Once you have done the background work, it's time to match your skills to those necessary for each of your selected careers. This approach helps identify the careers that align with your current skills and experience level. If necessary, consider improving your skill set and whether further study is a realistic option for you.
 
The information on this site is provided as a courtesy and for informational purposes only. Indeed is not a career or legal advisor and does not guarantee job interviews or offers.
 
Related articles
1 / 9