Revised June 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Supporting Transgender & Nonbinary Students: 
College Admissions & Financial Aid 
Resource Guide for College Access Professionals 
 
 
 


 
 
1 
 
 
Introduction 
 
This resource guide is designed to assist college access professionals who work with high school 
students who identify as lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, nonbinary, or queer (LGBTQ+). The 
information provided emphasizes the support of non-binary and transgender youth who plan to 
continue their education at a postsecondary institution. This guide is not intended as legal advice 
and has been compiled from various sources (see page ten). Students should contact their 
prospective postsecondary institutions or Federal Student Aid for specific guidance.  
 
Table of Contents 
Applying to College as an LGBTQ Student ................................................................................................. 2 
Assessing the LGBTQ+ Friendliness of a Campus ...................................................................................... 2 
LGBTQ+ Resources on Campus...................................................................................................................... 2 
Understanding the Campus Climate .............................................................................................................. 3 
The Application Process ................................................................................................................................... 4 
Completing the FAFSA ..................................................................................................................................... 5 
Frequently Asked Questions ........................................................................................................................... 6 
Glossary ........................................................................................................................................................... 10 
Sources .............................................................................................................................................................. 11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The contents of this publication were developed under a grant from the U.S. Department of Education. However, the 
content does not necessarily represent the policy of the Department of Education, and you should not assume 
endorsement by the Federal Government. 
RESOURCE: Glossary 
Find some common terminology in the Glossary section on page nine of this guide. To learn more, 
see Teaching Tolerance:  https://www.tolerance.org/classroom-resources 


 
 
2 
 
Applying to College as an LGBTQ+ Student
The college application process is complicated for all students, regardless of their sexual 
orientation or gender identity. For LGBTQ+ applicants, however, their sexual orientation or 
gender can bring added challenges during the admissions process. For transgender and/or non-
binary students who are early in their process of transitioning, there may be many different 
reasons for wanting to use (or not use) their legal name. Students should know that procedures 
and policies vary from institution to institution. It’s important to understand the college 
requirements to which you are applying.   
The college process also represents an excellent opportunity for students to find a campus that is 
friendly and welcoming of their LGBTQ+ identity. This guide is designed to help college access 
staff assist students who wish to be out during their application process and help students assess 
the level of LGBTQ+ friendliness on campus.  
Assessing the LGBTQ+ Friendliness of a Campus 
Determining how warmly a campus welcomes LGBTQ+ students involves weighing several factors, 
including existing policies and less tangible cultural influences. 
LGBTQ+ Inclusive Policies 
An LGBTQ+ friendly campus will have policies in 
place to ensure that LGBTQ+ students feel 
comfortable and protected throughout their college 
years.  
• Look to see if a campus nondiscrimination 
policy includes sexual orientation and 
gender identity. 
• For transgender, non-binary, and gender 
non-conforming students, it is often crucial 
that the school offers an easy process for 
changing gender markers on official school 
records. Some schools also provide 
transition-related care in their campus 
insurance plans. 
• Other LGBTQ+ friendly policies include providing gender-neutral housing (in which 
students of different genders may live together in the same room) and gender-neutral 
bathrooms.  
• The way that a campus treats its LGBTQ+ employees is an essential indicator of how 
welcoming a campus will be to LGBTQ+ students — it reflects how the institution feels 
about the rights and protections afforded to LGBTQ+ individuals. Do they offer domestic 
partner benefits? Is there an employee resource group?  
 
LGBTQ+ Resources on Campus 
One way that colleges and universities can provide support is through LGBTQ+ student groups 
and resource centers. Help students assess LGBTQ+ resources at an institution by having students 
research these questions: 
• Does the school have an employee to provide resources and services to LGBTQ+ students? 
• Is there an LGBTQ+ center on the campus? 
RESOURCE: Campus Pride Index 
The free online tool allows prospective 
students, families, parents, and those 
interested in higher education to 
search a database of LGBTQ+ 
friendly campuses that have come out 
to improve the academic experience 
and quality of campus life. 
See Campus Pride Index: 
http://www.campusprideindex.org 


 
 
3 
 
• Are there one or more LGBTQ+ student groups or organizations that acknowledge the 
diversity of the LGBTQ+ community? For example, some schools have groups dedicated to 
transgender students or LGBTQ+ students of color, while others have one group broadly 
dedicated to the LGBTQ+ population. 
• Does the school offer health and counseling services designed for LGBTQ+ students? 
• What kind of events does the campus LGBTQ+ group or center sponsor? Groups may be 
focused on activism and advocacy, while others are more interested in providing social 
opportunities for the LGBTQ+ community. 
• How many events did the campus LGBTQ+ group or center hold last year? How many 
people attended? With student-run groups, especially, it is usually good to check whether 
they are active. 
 
Understanding the Campus Climate 
While policies and services that protect and nurture the LGBTQ+ community are crucial 
considerations for LGBTQ+ applicants, it is also vital that students and their families try to 
understand the cultural climate on campus regarding LGBTQ+ students. Encourage students to:  
RESOURCE: Campus Pride Trans Policy Clearinghouse 
Are you a prospective student wondering what campuses have gender-inclusive housing? An 
administrator researching trans-inclusive health insurance models to implement on your 
campus? A parent looking for trans-friendly colleges and universities for their child? The 
Campus Pride Trans Policy Clearinghouse is a resource for transgender policies at colleges 
and universities. The clearinghouse is updated regularly by Dr. Genny Beemyn, a noted 
scholar on trans issues in higher education and the Director of the University of Massachusetts 
Amherst’s Stonewall Center. 
You can search trans policies at colleges and universities across the United States: 
• Colleges and Universities with Nondiscrimination Policies that Include Gender 
Identity/Expression 
• Colleges and Universities that Cover Transition-Related Medical Expenses Under 
Student Health Insurance 
• Colleges and Universities that Cover Transition-Related Medical Expenses Under 
Employee Health Insurance 
• Colleges and Universities that Provide Gender-Inclusive Housing 
•  Colleges and Universities that Allow Students to Change the Name and Gender on 
Campus Records and to Have Their Pronouns on Course Rosters 
• Colleges and Universities with a Trans-Inclusive Intramural Athletic Policy 
• Colleges and Universities with LGBTQ Identity Questions as an Option on Admission 
Applications & Enrollment Forms  
• Women’s Colleges with Trans-Inclusive Admissions Policies 
Source-Campus Pride https://www.campuspride.org/tpc/ 


 
 
4 
 
• Look up bias crime statistics for the campus to see if there have been any recent incidents 
that targeted LGBTQ+ students or employees (or any other marginalized group, for that 
matter).  
• Read the campus newspaper, often online, to see what potential future peers say about 
LGBTQ+ issues. 
• Visit campuses (some schools offer travel scholarships) and talk to students who don’t work 
for the admissions office about the campus climate. Reach out to students through the 
campus LGBTQ+ center or a dean of multicultural affairs.  
 
Students deserve to be on a campus where they feel safe and free to be who they are in every 
context—whether in the classroom, in their social life, or while competing for their school. The 
school's culture and policies will significantly impact their experiences, and students should keep 
this in mind throughout the application process.  
Being Out During the Application Process 
There is no hard-and-fast rule regarding being out during the application process. Ultimately, the 
choice to disclose an LGBTQ+ identity to schools depends on the individual. Many schools 
appreciate having the fullest possible sense of all their applicants, including those who identify as 
LGBTQ+. Ultimately, it is up to the individual to decide what they are most comfortable with 
disclosing, and the decision should be carefully considered in consultation with counselors and 
family members as appropriate. Researching all prospective institutions is essential as part of this 
decision-making process.  
In 2013, Washington State's community colleges 
added voluntary questions about sexual 
orientation and gender identity to all student 
registration forms. Students may disclose their 
sexual orientation and gender identity at the 
time of registration. The data collected helps 
two-year schools promote a welcoming campus, 
enhance programs and services, better track 
students' progress and success, and promote a 
safe and inclusive learning environment for 
LGBTQ+ students enrolled in the Community and 
Technical College (CTC) system. 
You Can, But Don’t Need To, Come Out In Your Essay 
While some LGBTQ+ students write their application essay on a topic related to their sexual 
orientation or gender identity, there are other ways to come out to admissions staff in an 
application. For example, the application may include a “Personal Statement” section where 
students can write about their LGBTQ+ identity, or they can use the “Additional Information” 
section to note their orientation or identity. Some schools will also allow students to disclose their 
LGBTQ+ identity in their college applications or supplements. Again, this is a decision best made 
by the individual. Students are not required to disclose if they are not comfortable doing so.  
 
It Is Possible To Be Out To Admissions Staff Members But Not To Your Family. 
Not everyone comes out before leaving high school for a variety of reasons. LGBTQ+ students 
who are not currently out to their families may want to consider whether they want to come out in 
RESOURCE: Scholarship Databases 
• Human Rights Campaign’s LGBT Student 
Scholarship Database: 
www.hrc.org/resources/scholarship-
database   
• Campus Pride National Scholarship 
Database: 
www.campuspride.org/national-
scholarship-database/  


 
 
5 
 
their written application materials. If students choose not to disclose information to admissions 
through the written application, they may opt to call admissions officers at a school or come out 
during an interview with a staff member.  
 
Conclusion 
As you help students through the college admissions process, remind them to look for a school 
where they will feel comfortable academically and socially. Students should also consider how the 
college they select will accept their LGBTQ+ identity and the support services that will be 
available to them. 
 
Content adapted from the Human Rights Campaign: http://www.hrc.org/resources/applying-to-college-as-an-
LGBTQ-student     
Completing the FAFSA  
The FAFSA is an official government form. According to Federal Student Aid, applicants must 
enter their information as it appears on official, government-issued documents (e.g., birth 
certificates and Social Security cards). If the student has not changed their legal name and 
gender marker on Identity Documents (e.g., birth certificate, license, passport, Social Security 
Card), they must use the original information. If students do not use their legal name and official 
gender designation, their application will not be processed successfully, and their financial aid 
may be in jeopardy. 
Unsure of what to do? Contact the Federal Student Aid Information Center by email, chat, or 
phone. See https://studentaid.gov/help-center/contact  
Students can find out how to get a legal name change where they live and update their 
name/gender on state and federal IDs and records at the National Center for Transgender 
Equality ID Document Center: https://transequality.org/documents  
In addition, in Washington State, people who identify as nonbinary may change the sex 
designation on a birth certificate. Under this rule, people born in Washington State who want to 
change the sex designation on their birth certificate to reflect their gender identity may do so by 
completing the appropriate request form. The new rule added “X” as a third-sex designation 
option. “X” means a gender that is not exclusively male or female, including, but not limited to, 
intersex, agender, androgynous, bigender, demigender, female-to-male, genderfluid, 
genderqueer, male-to-female, neutrois, nonbinary, pangender, third sex, transgender, 
transsexual, Two Spirit, and unspecified. 
You are required to complete the appropriate Sex Designation Change request form. A court 
order or a letter from your physician will not be accepted. 
Learn more: 
https://www.doh.wa.gov/LicensesPermitsandCertificates/BirthDeathMarriageandDivorce/SexDes
ignationChangeonaBirthCertificate 


 
 
6 
 
Frequently Asked Questions:  
Q: What laws protect LGBTQ+ students? 
A: State and federal civil rights laws prohibit discrimination in public schools. 
 
Protected 
Class 
(Discrimination 
Prohibited) 
Federal Law 
Washington State Law 
Sex 
Title IX of the Education 
Amendments of 1972 (34 C.F.R. 
Part 106) 
Title IV of the Civil Rights Act of 
1964 (42 U.S.C. §2000c, et seq.) 
Employment Discrimination: Title 
VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 
(34 C.F.R. Part 106)  
Chapter 28A.640 RCW - Sexual equality 
Chapter 28A.642 RCW - Common school 
provisions – Discrimination prohibition 
Chapter 392-190 WAC – Equal 
educational opportunity – Unlawful 
discrimination prohibited 
Chapter 49.60 RCW 
Washington Law Against Discrimination* 
OSPI Guidelines: Prohibiting Discrimination 
in Washington Public Schools 
Sexual 
Orientation 
Title IX of the Education 
Amendments of 1972 (34 C.F.R. 
Part 106) 
Title IX prohibits discrimination 
based on sex and sex 
stereotyping, such as 
discrimination based on a 
person’s failure to conform to 
stereotypical notions of 
masculinity and femininity.  
Chapter 28A.642 RCW - Common school 
provisions – Discrimination prohibition 
Chapter 392-190 WAC – Equal 
educational opportunity – Unlawful 
discrimination prohibited 
Chapter 49.60 RCW 
Washington Law Against Discrimination* 
OSPI Guidelines: Prohibiting Discrimination 
in Washington Public Schools 
Gender 
Identity and 
Expression 
Title IX of the Education 
Amendments of 1972 (34 C.F.R. 
Part 106) 
Title IX prohibits discrimination 
based on sex and sex 
stereotyping, such as 
discrimination based on a 
person’s failure to conform to 
stereotypical notions of 
masculinity and femininity.  
Chapter 28A.642 RCW - Common school 
provisions – Discrimination prohibition 
Chapter 392-190 WAC – Equal 
educational opportunity – Unlawful 
discrimination prohibited 
Chapter 49.60 RCW 
Washington Law Against Discrimination* 
OSPI Guidelines: Prohibiting Discrimination 
in Washington Public Schools 
Sources- OSPI Equity and Civil Rights: http://www.k12.wa.us/equity/CivilRights/default.aspx  
U.S. Department of Education: https://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/lgbt.html  
GLSEN: https://www.glsen.org/activity/lgbtq-student-rights  
• 
Title IX of the 1964 Civil Rights Act: Title IX prohibits discrimination based on sex in 
education programs or activities that receive Federal financial assistance. Title IX applies 
to institutions that receive federal financial assistance from the U.S. Department of 
Education (ED), including state and local educational agencies. These agencies include 
approximately 16,500 local school districts and 7,000 postsecondary institutions. As of 


 
 
7 
 
2021, the U.S. Department of Education Confirmed Title IX Protects Students from 
Discrimination Based on Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity. 
• The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA): This federal law protects the 
privacy of student educational records and gives current and former students the right to 
amend those records to  match  their  legal  documents  if  they  are  “inaccurate, 
misleading, or in violation of the student’s rights of privacy.” Once a student reaches 18, 
their parents can no longer access these records unless the student grants permission. 
(For more information, see “A Transgender Advocate’s Guide To Updating and 
Amending School Records”.) 
• Washington Law Against Discrimination (WLAD): WLAD protects people from 
discrimination based on sexual orientation, ** which is inclusive of gender expression or 
actual or perceived gender identity in these areas: 
o Places of public accommodation (i.e., places that serve the public), including 
restaurants, hotels, and public schools; 
o Housing, including the renting, buying, and selling of homes; 
o Employment, specifically in state, municipal, and private workplaces with eight or 
more employees; 
o The extension of credit; and 
o Insurance transactions. 
• 
HB 3026 / Chapter 28A.642 RCW: This state law prohibits discrimination in 
Washington public schools and includes sexual orientation and gender expression or 
identity as protected classes. It is similar to the sexual equality law already in the school 
code, chapter 28A.640 RCW, which prohibits discrimination based on sex.  
Q: How should K-12 school districts address a student’s name and sex on official 
records? 
A: School districts maintain permanent student records, including a student’s legal name and 
gender. To the extent that the school district is not legally required to use a student’s legal name 
and gender on school records or documents, the district should use the name and gender by which 
the student identifies. School IDs, for example, are not legal documents and should use the 
student’s preferred name. The school district should change a student’s official record to reflect a 
change in the student’s legal name or gender upon receipt of documentation that such change has 
been made under a court order or through amendment of state- or federally-issued identification. 
When school staff or administrators are required by law to use or report a student’s legal name 
or gender, such as for standardized testing, school staff should adopt practices to avoid the 
inadvertent disclosure of such confidential information. 
 
Q: Should K-12 schools inform staff, students, or parents about a student’s 
transgender status?  
A: Information about a student’s transgender status, legal name, or gender assigned at birth may 
constitute confidential medical or educational information. Disclosing this information to other 
students, parents, or third parties may violate privacy laws, such as the federal Family 
Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) (20 U.S.C. § 1232g; 34 C.F.R. Part 99). School staff 
should not disclose information that may reveal a student’s transgender status to others, 
including parents and other school staff, unless legally required to do so or unless the student 
has authorized such disclosure. 
 


 
 
8 
 
 
 
Q: Can a religious institution discriminate against a transgender student? 
A: Title IX prohibits educational institutions that receive federal funding from discriminating based 
on sex, including gender identity. The law allows religious-based schools to claim exemptions. In 
2014, the ED granted such exemptions to three colleges: George Fox University in Oregon, 
Spring Arbor University in Michigan, and Simpson University in California. 
Q: Can a single-sex college reject an application because a student is transgender? 
A: Title IX allows certain educational institutions to admit students of only one “sex,” including all-
women’s colleges. In December 2014, the ED issued its third official guidance on this issue, this 
time affirming that “All students, including transgender students and students who do not conform 
to sex stereotypes, are protected from sex-based discrimination under Title IX. Under Title IX, a 
recipient generally must treat transgender students consistent with their gender identity in all 
aspects of the planning, implementation, enrollment, operation, and evaluation of single-sex 
classes.” This applies to single-sex institutions, as well.  
Q: Do transgender students have the right to be placed in campus housing 
according to their gender identity? 
A: Yes, trans students have that right if their college or university is subject to Title IX and hasn’t 
specifically exempted itself from this requirement. Institutions frequently use the gender marker on 
the application to inform campus records and practices. Encourage students to research whether 
their prospective college or university offers gender-inclusive housing as an option; this is 
particularly important for non-binary or gender-nonconforming (GNC) students.  
Q: Do transgender students have the right to use restrooms and locker rooms on 
campus according to their gender identity? 
A: Yes, restroom and locker-room rights are much like housing rights: Students are protected if 
their college or university is subject to Title IX and hasn’t specifically exempted itself. Students 
might also be protected under state or local nondiscrimination laws. Have students find out if their 
prospective institution has gender-inclusive (not single-sex) restrooms; these can be particularly 
important for GNC students. For more information, see the Trans Policy Clearinghouse at 
www.campuspride.org/tpc/.  
Q: What should college students do to change the name or gender marker on a 
student ID, transcript, or diploma? 
A: First, encourage students to check to see if their prospective college or university already has a 
procedure in place for allowing name and gender marker changes on student records. More than 
RESOURCE: The Rights of Transgender People in Washington State 
This guidebook is designed to help transgender individuals understand their legal rights in the 
state of Washington. This information is not intended to provide legal advice. 
 
View Guide:  https://www.aclu-wa.org/pages/rights-transgender-people-washington-state-updates-progress  
 
Source: ACLU-WA. 2025 


 
 
9 
 
a hundred institutions now allow students to indicate their chosen name on school records 
regardless of whether they have legally changed their name. Others require students to legally 
change their name and gender marker on other documents, such as a state ID, passport, or birth 
certificate, before they will amend certain educational records. For more information, see the 
Trans Policy Clearinghouse at www.campuspride.org/tpc/. 
If the campus does not have a stated procedure for allowing name and gender marker changes, 
or if students do not meet the existing policy requirements, the Registrar’s Office may be willing 
to work with those students to change their educational records. When approaching the Registrar, 
students may want to enlist the support of an ally, such as a staff member, faculty member, or an 
LGBTQ+ resource professional. You may also want to bring some helpful materials, including 
Lambda Legal’s Transgender Rights Toolkit, to help your school understand how important it is to 
update your educational records. 
Source: Lambda Legal- http://www.lambdalegal.org/know-your-rights/transgender/in-college-faq#5    
 
 


 
 
10 
 
Glossary 
 
Cisgender: Of, relating to, or being a person whose gender identity corresponds with the sex the 
person had or was identified as having at birth. 
Gender expression: External appearance of one's gender identity, usually expressed through 
behavior, clothing, haircut, or voice, and which may or may not conform to socially defined 
behaviors and characteristics typically associated with being either masculine or feminine. 
Gender-fluid: A person who does not identify with a single fixed gender of or relating to a 
person having or expressing a fluid or unfixed gender identity. 
Gender Identity is one's internal, personal sense of one's own gender. Many people believe in 
a more fluid gender identity than simply “male” and “female.” 
Gender Non-conforming: A broad term referring to people who do not behave in a way that 
conforms to the traditional expectations of their gender or whose gender expression does not fit 
neatly into a category. 
Genderqueer: Genderqueer people typically reject notions of static gender categories and 
embrace a fluidity of gender identity and often, though not always, sexual orientation. People 
who identify as "genderqueer" may see themselves as being both male and female, neither male 
nor female, or as falling completely outside these categories. They are also known as non-binary.  
Gender Transition is when a person begins to live in a gender role that aligns with their 
internal gender identity. Transition is not a one-step procedure but a complex process that occurs 
over a long period. The transition may include some or all of the following cultural, legal, and 
medical adjustments: informing one's family, friends, and/or co-workers; changing one's name and 
sex on legal documents; undergoing hormone therapy; and/or seeking surgical alteration (see 
Sex Reassignment Surgery). 
LGBT: An acronym for “Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender.” Other versions may add “Q” for 
Queer or Questioning, “I” for Intersex, and “A” for Allied. Some may prefer to list the acronym as 
TBLG to place trans people in a position of importance and to rectify the way trans has 
historically been omitted, devalued, or excluded. 
Non-Binary: Most people, including most transgender people, are either male or female. But 
some people don't neatly fit into the categories of "man" or "woman," or “male” or “female.” For 
example, some people have a gender that blends elements of being a man, a woman, or a 
gender different from either male or female. Some people don't identify with any gender. Some 
people's gender changes over time. People whose gender is not male or female use many 
different terms to describe themselves, with non-binary being one of the most common. Other 
terms include genderqueer, agender, bigender, and more. None of these terms mean the same 
thing, but all speak to an experience of gender that is not simply male or female. 
Queer: Queer is a term that has been reclaimed by members of the gay, lesbian, bisexual, and 
transgender communities to describe people who transgress culturally imposed norms of 
heterosexuality and gender traditionalism. Although still a derogatory term in many cases, many 
queer-identified people have taken back the word to use it as a symbol of pride and affirmation 
of difference and diversity. 
Transgender: An umbrella term that describes people whose gender identity and/or gender 
expression differs from the sex they were assigned at birth. This group includes, but is not limited 
to, transsexuals, cross-dressers, and other gender-variant people. Transgender people may or 
may not choose to alter their bodies hormonally and/or surgically. 
 
 


 
 
11 
 
Sources 
 
ACLU-WA- The ACLU of Washington is a non-partisan organization dedicated to protecting, 
fostering, and extending the civil liberties principles embodied in the Bill of Rights and the 
Washington State Constitution.  
Campus Pride Index-  Campus Pride is the leading national educational organization for LGBTQ+ 
students and allied college students and campus groups, building future leaders and safer, more 
LGBTQ+-friendly learning environments at colleges and universities. 
—Federal Student Aid, part of the U.S. Department of Education, is the nation's largest provider of 
student financial aid. 
GLSEN (Gay, Lesbian, Straight Education Network)– A national organization for educators and 
students who want to create schools where differences are respected. They support Safe Space 
training, a Day of Silence event, Gay-Straight Alliance clubs, and other resources for educators. 
Human Rights Campaign- National lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender civil rights 
organization, 
Lambda Legal Defense Fund—This organization aims to create equality for lesbians and gays. It 
has developed publications on the rights of LGBTQ+ students. 
National Center for Transgender Equality– A national social justice advocacy organization. Offers 
guidance around transgender rights.  
Office of Superintendent of Public Instruction- Washington's primary agency overseeing K-12 
public education.  
 
Safe Schools Coalition– A pioneer in assessing the safety of LGBTQ+ youth, and provides student 
panels and mediation for schools in Washington. 
Teaching Tolerance- A place for educators to find thought-provoking news, conversation, and 
support for those who care about diversity, equal opportunity, and respect for differences in 
schools.  
U.S. Department of Education (ED)- ED's mission is to promote student achievement and 
preparation for global competitiveness by fostering educational excellence and ensuring equal 
access. 
Washington State Legislature- Find information on Washington State bills, laws, rules, and 
regulations.  
 
 


 
 
12 
 
• 
Wisconsin Statewide Transition Initiative/Department of Public Instruction