OVERREPRESENTATION 
OF PEOPLE WHO 
IDENTIFY AS LGBTQ+ 
IN THE CRIMINAL
LEGAL SYSTEM
Jane Hereth 
Assistant Professor of Social Work, Helen Bader School of Social 
Welfare, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee




This report was created with support from the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur 
Foundation as part of the Safety and Justice Challenge, which seeks to reduce over-
incarceration by changing the way America thinks about and uses jails. Core to the 
Challenge is a competition designed to support efforts to improve local criminal 
justice systems across the country that are working to safely reduce over-reliance on 
jails, with a particular focus on addressing disproportionate impact on low-income 
individuals and communities of color. 
More information is available at www.SafetyandJusticeChallenge.org.


CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
SPOTLIGHTING ORGANIZATIONS
FOR FURTHER LEARNING
REFERENCES
PATHWAYS AND PIPELINES INTO THE CRIMINAL 
LEGAL SYSTEM FOR LGBTQ+ INDIVIDUALS
RESEARCH, POLICY, AND DIRECT SERVICE 
RECOMMENDATIONS
RATES OF CRIMINAL LEGAL SYSTEM 
INVOLVEMENT
1
3
5
8
9
11
12


Overrepresentation of People Who Identify as LGBTQ+ in the Criminal Legal System
1
INTRODUCTION
Individuals who identify as lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, or who 
hold other marginalized sexual orientation and/or gender identities (LGBTQ+) are 
overrepresented within the criminal legal system.[1-4] LGBTQ+ people of color and 
LGBTQ+ people with disabilities experience even higher rates of criminal legal system 
involvement than their White LGBTQ+ peers.[1, 2, 4] This report will review factors 
contributing to these disparities. Additionally, the report will highlight the work of 
organizations addressing the needs of LGBTQ+ individuals involved in the criminal legal 
system and outline recommendations to address overrepresentation. 
A Note on Terminology
Defining LGBTQ+ identities is challenging because conceptualizations of sexual 
orientation and gender identity are constantly evolving at individual and cultural 
levels. The definitions provided here are intended to clarify how terms are used in this 
report, yet these definitions do not represent how all individuals conceptualize or use 
these terms. In addition to the identities represented by the letters of the acronym 
(see Key Terms), the + denotes others who hold marginalized sexual orientation and/or 
gender identities but do not use one of the terms in the acronym. Other members of 
the broader LGBTQ+ community, including intersex and gender expansive individuals, 
are also likely overrepresented within the criminal legal system. Even less data is 
available about individuals who hold these identities. This report uses the acronym 
LGBTQ+ to match available research, but it is not the author’s intention to exclude 
intersex and gender expansive individuals or other individuals who hold marginalized 
sexual orientation and/or gender identities. This report uses the term “criminal legal 
system” to refer broadly to the system of law enforcement that includes surveillance, 
arrest, prosecution, defense, sentencing, and punishment. 


2
Overrepresentation of People Who Identify as LGBTQ+ in the Criminal Legal System
Key Terms:[5-7]
Sexual orientation: Used to describe patterns of sexual, emotional, and romantic 
attraction. Dimensions of sexual orientation include attraction, how one self-identifies 
(i.e., the labels or terms one uses), and behavior (i.e., with whom one engages in sexual or 
romantic activity). The expression of these dimensions is unique to each individual and can 
change across the life course. 
Gender identity: Used to describe how one self-identifies and conceptualizes gender. 
Dimensions of gender identity include how one self-identifies, gender expression (i.e., 
how one chooses to present their gender, including clothing), and body (i.e., the range of 
decisions one may or may not make to medically affirm one’s gender). The expression of 
these dimensions is unique to each individual and can change across the life course. Gender 
identity and sexual orientation may overlap yet are distinct concepts. Gender identity and 
biological sex are also different concepts.
Lesbian: A sexual orientation label often used by individuals who identify as women and 
are sexually, emotionally, and/or romantically attracted to women.
Gay: A sexual orientation label often used by individuals who are sexually, emotionally, 
and/or romantically attracted to people of their same gender identity.
Bisexual: A sexual orientation label often used by individuals who are sexually, emotionally, 
and/or romantically attracted to people of their same gender identity and people of 
different gender identities than their own.
Transgender: Often used by individuals whose gender identity differs from sex assigned at 
birth and/or whose gender identity falls outside of the male/female binary.
Gender expansive: Often used by individuals whose gender identity falls outside of the 
male/female binary. Used interchangeably with the term “gender nonconforming” in this 
report.
Heterosexual: A sexual orientation label often used by individuals who are sexually, 
emotionally, and/or romantically attracted to people of different gender identities than 
their own.
Cisgender: Often used by individuals whose gender identity aligns with sex assigned at 
birth.
Queer: This term has multiple meanings. It is often used to describe a sexual orientation 
and/or gender identity that falls outside of heterosexual and/or cisgender norms. It is also 
used as an umbrella term for the LGBTQ+ community (i.e., “the queer community”).


Overrepresentation of People Who Identify as LGBTQ+ in the Criminal Legal System
3
RATES OF CRIMINAL 
LEGAL SYSTEM 
INVOLVEMENT
Documenting the number of LGBTQ+ individuals within the 
criminal legal system is difficult for several reasons. First, 
evolution of identity terminology makes it difficult to capture 
broad population estimates of the LGBTQ+ community, 
regardless of criminal legal involvement.[8] Secondly, data 
regarding sexual orientation and gender identity is not uniformly 
collected by criminal legal system institutions or researchers.
[9] Lastly, even when these data are collected, many LGBTQ+ 
individuals may not feel comfortable disclosing their identities 
for fear of discrimination or abuse.
ARREST
Despite difficulties with data collection, emerging data indicate 
that LGBTQ+ individuals experience high rates of arrest and 
incarceration.[10-13] According to an analysis of data from the 
National Survey on Drug Use and Health, gay, lesbian, and 
bisexual individuals were 2.25 times as likely to be arrested 
in the last year when compared to heterosexual individuals.
[10] Furthermore, this analysis found that lesbian and bisexual 
women were four times more likely to be arrested than 
straight women. Emerging research suggests that transgender 
individuals are at heightened risk for arrest and that transgender 
women of color experience the highest rates of arrest.[1, 11] Data 
from the 2015 National Transgender Discrimination Survey 
(NTDS) assessed arrest just within the last year and found 
that while 2% of all respondents had been arrested within the 
last year, 6% of Black transgender women and 6% of Native 
American transgender women reported at least one arrest.[1] 
By comparison, an estimated 3% of the overall U.S. population 
is arrested each year.[12] An analysis of data from the National 
Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health found that lesbian, gay, 
and bisexual youth were significantly more likely to be stopped 
by the police than their heterosexual peers.[13]
INCARCERATION AND DETENTION
According to a study using data from the National Inmate Survey, 
the incarceration rate of people who self-identified as lesbian, 
gay, or bisexual was three times that of the general 
U. S. population.[2] Again, lesbian and bisexual women were found 
to be particularly overrepresented; the survey found that 9.3% 
of cisgender men in prison and 6.3% of cisgender men in jail 
identified as sexual minorities, while 42.1% of cisgender women 
in prison and 35.7% of cisgender women in jail identified as sexual 
minorities.[2] Transgender individuals experience particularly high 
rates of incarceration.[1, 4, 14] For example, 16% of transgender and 
gender nonconforming respondents to the 2010 NTDS reported 
being incarcerated in their lifetime.[14] However, only 6.6% of 
the U.S. population is likely to be incarcerated at some point 
in their life.[15] The 2010 NTDS reported particularly high rates 
of incarceration among transgender people of color, with 47% 
of Black and 30% of Native American respondents reporting 
a history of incarceration.[14] LGBTQ+ youth are particularly 
overrepresented within the juvenile detention system; a study 
using data from the second National Survey of Youth in Custody 
ound that 39.4% of girls and 3.2% of boys in juvenile correctional 
facilities identify as lesbian, gay, or bisexual.[4]
DISCRIMINATION BY CRIMINAL LEGAL SYSTEM 
ACTORS
LGBTQ+ individuals report high rates of discrimination and 
harassment by criminal legal system actors, including police, 
judges, and prison staff.[1, 14, 16] A study of lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
and transgender individual’s experiences of discrimination 
within the criminal legal system conducted by Lambda Legal 
found that 73% of respondents had face-to-face contact with 
the police within the past five years.[16] Almost a quarter (21%) 
reported that police had a hostile attitude towards them, 14% 
reported being verbally harassed by police, 3% reported sexual 
harassment by police, and 2% were physically assaulted by 
police. Furthermore, the study found that, among respondents 
who had been involved in the court system in the last five years, 
19% overhead a judge, attorney, or other court employee make 
negative comments about their sexual orientation, gender 
identity, or expression.
CONDITIONS OF CONFINEMENT
Inside jails and prisons, LGBTQ+ individuals experience 
heightened harassment and abuse.[1, 3, 14, 16-19] Prison and jail 
staff are often the perpetrators of this victimization; according 
to Lambda Legal’s report, among survey respondents with a 
history of incarceration 7% were sexually assaulted, 12% were 
physically assaulted, 27% were sexually harassed, and 57% were 
verbally assaulted or harassed by jail or prison staff.[16] Staff also 
fail to prevent victimization; according to a survey conducted 
by Black & Pink of incarcerated LGBTQ+ individuals, 76% of 
respondents believe that prison staff intentionally placed them 
in situations where they were likely to be sexually assaulted 
by another prisoner.[17] Research indicates that incarcerated 
transgender individuals experience particularly high rates of 
violence and victimization.[1] Among respondents to the 2015 
NTDS with a history of incarceration with the last year, 20% 
reported being sexually assaulted by facility staff or other 
inmates during that time period, five times higher than the rates 
of sexual assault by staff or other inmates reported by the 
general U.S. incarcerated population.[1] Transgender inmates are 
often housed according to sex assigned at birth, which heightens 
the risk of victimization, discrimination, and adverse mental 
health outcomes.[17, 18] LGBTQ+ youth in juvenile detention report 
vastly higher rates of victimization than their heterosexual 
peers; according to the 2013 National Survey of Youth in 
Custody, 10.5% of lesbian, gay, and bisexual youth in custody 
reported being sexually victimization by other youth while they 
were in custody compared to 1.5% of heterosexual youth.[19]


4
Overrepresentation of People Who Identify as LGBTQ+ in the Criminal Legal System
SOLITARY CONFINEMENT
Incarcerated LGBTQ+ youth and adults report high rates of 
placement in solitary confinement while incarcerated.[3, 17] Black 
& Pink’s survey of incarcerated LGBTQ+ individuals found that 
85% had ever been in solitary confinement.[17] Many respondents 
were placed in solitary confinement to protect them from 
victimization; 38% of respondents who had been housed in 
solitary confinement were placed there at their own request in 
order to protect them from victimization, yet 50% of respondents 
were placed in solitary confinement against their will. Solitary 
confinement is associated with a range of adverse mental health 
outcomes, including anxiety, depression, paranoia, and psychosis.
[20]
HEALTHCARE
LGBTQ+ inmates are routinely denied inclusive health care, 
particularly transgender affirming care and HIV treatment.[1, 
17, 23] Black & Pink’s survey of LGBTQ+ inmates found that 67% 
of respondents had been diagnosed with a mental illness, 
yet 48% of those with a diagnosis were not receiving mental 
health care.[17] Many transgender individuals choose to receive 
hormone therapy as a component of medically affirming one’s 
gender.[21] Hormone therapy has been found to improve quality 
of life and reduce depression and anxiety among transgender 
individuals.[22] Of respondents to the 2015 NTDS who had been 
taking hormones prior to incarceration, 37% were prohibited 
from receiving hormones while in jail or prison.[1] A study of 
incarcerated transgender women in Massachusetts identified 
a combination of structural barriers (e.g., requiring specific 
documentation of prior hormone usage in order to receive 
hormones while incarcerated) and interpersonal barriers (e.g., 
medical staff who were unfamiliar with providing care to 
transgender individuals or who refused to provide care due 
to anti-transgender bias) responsible for restricting hormone 
access.[23]
Rates of HIV are higher among incarcerated populations as 
compared to the general U.S. population; it is estimated that 
the HIV prevalence rate in prisons in 2015 was 1.3% among 
incarcerated individuals compared to 0.3-0.4% among the 
general population.[24-26] Nationwide, Black gay men and 
transgender women bear a disproportionately high burden 
of HIV.[27] Efforts to increase access to HIV treatment among 
incarcerated individuals have generally contributed to improved 
treatment outcomes during incarceration. Yet research indicates 
that, once released, formerly incarcerated individuals experience 
a decrease in HIV treatment, often to levels lower than those 
prior to incarceration.[28] 


Overrepresentation of People Who Identify as LGBTQ+ in the Criminal Legal System
5
PATHWAYS AND 
PIPELINES INTO THE 
CRIMINAL LEGAL 
SYSTEM FOR LGBTQ+ 
INDIVIDUALS
The following section highlights just a few of the pathways and 
pipelines funneling LGBTQ+ individuals into the criminal legal 
system and contributing to overrepresentation. Each subsection 
begins with a short vignette, an anonymous composite based 
upon experiences shared by LGBTQ+ individuals and prior 
research meant to illustrate the pathway or pipeline. Examining 
these pathways and pipelines helps to untangle the complex web 
of social and structural inequality driving overrepresentation of 
LGBTQ+ individuals within the criminal legal system and can help 
inform prevention efforts. 
CRIMINALIZATION OF LGBTQ+ IDENTITIES
It is necessary to situate pathways and pipelines into the 
criminal legal system within a broader context of historical 
and present-day criminalization of LGBTQ+ identities and the 
crisis of mass incarceration. Bias and stigma against LGBTQ+ 
individuals contribute to perceptions of LGBTQ+ individuals as 
deviant.[29] People of color are similarly construed as criminal 
or threatening;[30] as a result, LGBTQ+ people of color are 
particularly impacted by these stereotypes. Mogul, Richie, and 
Whitlock[29] argue that the origins of criminalization of LGBTQ+ 
identities are rooted in racism, stating “Indigenous peoples, 
enslaved Africans, and immigrants, particularly immigrants of 
color, were systematically policed and punished based on actual 
or projected ‘deviant’ sexualities and gender expressions, as an 
integral part of colonization, genocide, and enslavement” (p. 1).
In more recent U.S. history, stereotypes about deviance were 
perpetuated by laws targeting LGBTQ+ communities, such as 
those that criminalized homosexual sex and wearing clothing of 
the “opposite” sex.[29] These laws have, for the most part, been 
overturned or repealed, or are no longer enforced, yet they 
contributed to lasting cultural representations and perceptions 
of LGBTQ+ individuals as deviant. More recent laws criminalize 
aspects of LGBTQ+ identities in less direct ways. For example, 
in recent years many states have attempted to pass legislation 
restricting access to public restrooms and locker rooms for 
transgender individuals.[31, 32] While many of these have not been 
passed, the governor of Tennessee signed two new bills into law 
in May of 2021.[33] Some of these legislative attempts, if passed 
into law, could have resulted in transgender individuals being 
arrested and charged with indecent exposure for using public 
restrooms that align with their gender identity.[34] Regardless 
of engagement in criminalized activities, LGBTQ+ people are 
subjected to heightened police surveillance due to these 
perceptions of deviance.[16, 35] Additionally, this bias contributes 
to disparities in charges filed, adjudication, and sentencing of 
LGBTQ+ individuals.[16, 29] 
SCHOOL-TO-PRISON PIPELINE
Advocates and organizers use the term “school-to-prison 
pipeline” to describe the direct and indirect impact of policies 
that push students out of schools and into the criminal legal 
system.[36] A component of the school-to-prison pipeline is 
the enactment of zero tolerance policies, which are intended 
to prevent victimization and bullying by harshly punishing 
violence in schools through suspensions and expulsions.[37] These 
policies increase the likelihood of youth coming into contact 
with law enforcement, particularly because many schools 
have police officers, often referred to as “school resource 
officers,” stationed there to handle rule infractions.[35, 38-40] Zero 
tolerance policies have contributed to disproportionate rates of 
detention, suspension, and expulsion among students of color.
[41, 42] Additionally, research suggests that LGBTQ+ youth are 
disproportionately impacted by zero tolerance policies.[40, 43] Like 
Victoria, many LGBTQ+ students experience bullying in school.
[39] According to the most recent National School Climate Survey, 
82% of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender respondents had 
experienced verbal harassment at school, and 36.7% reported 
being physically harassed.[39] Yet many do not receive help from 
Victoria1 is a 15-year-old Latinx woman who 
identifies as queer. Her family is very supportive of 
her identity, but she has a lot of trouble at school. 
Her school has policies prohibiting public displays 
of affection between students, yet they are never 
enforced for straight students. However, Victoria 
and her girlfriend have gotten detention several 
times for holding hands at school. Victoria has also 
experienced a lot of bullying by other students, 
including being called derogatory names, receiving 
threatening notes in her locker, and being pushed or 
tripped in the hallways. One day, Victoria and her 
girlfriend were sitting together in the cafeteria. A 
group of students walked by and pushed their trays 
off the table, spilling their lunches onto the floor. 
One of the students called them a derogatory name 
as they all started to walk away. Out of frustration, 
Victoria stood up and pushed one of the students. 
The student turned and started hitting and punching 
Victoria. Victoria fell to the ground and put her 
hands up to protect herself. A school resource officer 
rushed in to break up the fight and everyone was 
sent to the principal’s office. The other students 
were suspended, but because Victoria already had 
several detentions on her record, she was expelled.
1 All of the vignettes in this report are composites based on experiences shared by LGBTQ+ individuals and existing research.[3, 13, 40, 43]


6
Overrepresentation of People Who Identify as LGBTQ+ in the Criminal Legal System
school staff and instead defend themselves, which often results 
in punishment in accordance with zero tolerance policies.[40] 
Additionally, LGBTQ+ youth, particularly LGBTQ+ youth of color, 
are more likely to be punished for non-violent school infractions, 
such as public displays of affection and dress code violations.[40] 
Bullying and discrimination by school staff lead many LGBTQ+ 
students to skip school or drop out; according to the National 
School Climate Survey, 34.9% of respondents intentionally 
missed at least one day of school in the past month because they 
felt unsafe or uncomfortable at school.[39] Among 18-24-year-
old respondents to Lambda Legal’s survey, 9% reported 
being verbally assaulted by school security or police and 23% 
said they heard school security or police use anti-LGBTQ+ 
language.[16] School pushout due to unsafe school climates, in 
turn, contributes to heightened risk for criminal legal system 
involvement. For example, youth who are not in school can be 
arrested for truancy, and LGBTQ+ youth are more likely to be 
charged with truancy when compared to their heterosexual 
peers.[44] Not finishing high school increases the likelihood of 
criminal legal system involvement.[45]
HOMELESSNESS, UNEMPLOYMENT, AND 
POVERTY
Due to a complex web of family rejection, homelessness, 
unemployment, poverty, bias, and discrimination, LGBTQ+ 
individuals may turn to criminalized activities like theft, 
panhandling, and sex work in order to survive.[1, 18, 46] Heightened 
police surveillance increases the likelihood of LGBTQ+ individuals 
being arrested and charged for forms of criminalized survival.[1, 
16, 35] LGBTQ+ individuals experience high rates of homelessness.
[47] Of respondents to the 2015 NTDS, 30% had experienced 
homelessness at some point in their lives.[1] Family rejection plays 
a large role in homelessness, particularly among LGBTQ+ youth.
[48] According to a national survey of social service providers who 
work with LGBTQ+ homeless youth, 46% of respondents became 
homeless because they ran away from home due to family 
rejection of their sexual orientation and/or gender identity, and 
43% were forced out by parents because of their identity.[48] 
Homelessness itself is criminalized; many cities in the U.S. have 
laws prohibiting sleeping outside or in a vehicle, “camping” in 
public spaces, panhandling, loitering, or sitting or lying down in 
particular public places.[49]
Both unemployment and poverty can result in engaging in 
criminalized activities in order to survive. LGBTQ+ individuals 
experience high rates of unemployment.[50] According to data 
from the Williams Institute, 9% of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and 
transgender adults surveyed were unemployed compared to 
only 5% of adults who do not identify as lesbian, gay, bisexual 
and/or transgender.[50] Unemployment rates are even higher 
among transgender individuals.[1] As Mia experienced, the lack of 
identity documents that reflect individuals’ names and gender 
identities can pose a barrier to employment. Processes for 
obtaining legal name and gender marker changes differ state to 
state, but often require producing identity documents, obtaining 
documentation from mental health or medical providers, 
appearing before a judge, and paying court filing fees. While Mia 
may have been able to obtain a new birth certificate to replace 
the one at her mother’s house, many individuals are unsure 
how or cannot afford the expense.[1] Even with the necessary 
documents, filing for a name change is prohibitive for many; 
of respondents to the 2015 NTDS, 35% said they have not 
attempted a legal name change because they could not afford 
it.[1] Yet name changes can play an important role in interrupting 
the pathway into the criminal legal system; one study examining 
the impact of legal name changes among transgender women 
of color found that women who had obtained a name change 
were significantly more likely to have stable housing and a higher 
monthly income compared to the pre-name change group.
[51] Poverty and involvement in the criminal legal system are 
closely linked, and rates of poverty are higher among lesbian, 
gay, bisexual, and transgender individuals. The Williams Institute 
reports that 22% of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender 
people are estimated to live in poverty in the U.S. compared 
to 16% of cisgender, straight adults.[52] LGBTQ+ people of color 
report even higher poverty levels.[1, 52] On top of all of these 
disparities and inequalities, LGBTQ+ individuals with a history 
of criminal legal system involvement experience heightened 
discrimination and exclusion from employment, education, 
and other opportunities because of their records, leading to 
continued homelessness, unemployment, and poverty. This 
creates a revolving door back into the system.[53, 54]
Mia2 is a 29-year-old Black transgender woman. 
Mia came out to her mother when she was 16. Her 
mother is very religious and is unsupportive of Mia’s 
transition. She kicked Mia out of the house, and 
Mia became homeless. Despite being homeless, Mia 
finished high school and started college. However, 
she had difficulty finding a job because her IDs did 
not match her name or gender identity. She’d heard 
that, in order to legally change her name, she’d need 
her birth certificate. Her birth certificate was at her 
mom’s house and her mom still refused to talk to her, 
so she stopped looking into the legal name change 
process. When she was 19, a friend asked if she 
wanted to participate in a robbery. Mia didn’t want 
to do it, but she was still experiencing homelessness, 
had no money, and no way to meet her basic needs. 
She agreed to join her friend, but she ended up 
getting arrested. She served four years in prison in a 
men’s facility. After being released from prison, she 
was unable to change her name due to a state law 
that bars individuals with felony convictions from 
changing their names for ten years after completing 
their sentences. And with a felony conviction on her 
record, she is having an even harder time finding a 
job.
2All of the vignettes in this report are composites based on experiences shared by LGBTQ+ individuals and existing research.[1, 3, 18, 46]


Overrepresentation of People Who Identify as LGBTQ+ in the Criminal Legal System
7
VIOLENCE AND VICTIMIZATION
LGBTQ+ individuals experience high rates of violence and 
victimization, including child abuse, intimate partner violence, 
sexual assault, and bias-related victimization.[1, 55-59] Yet many 
LGBTQ+ individuals feel uncomfortable seeking support, 
especially from the police.[16] Lambda Legal’s survey found that 
62% of LGBTQ+ respondents who had been victims of a physical 
assault felt that the police did not fully address their complaints.
[16] Additionally, 41% of respondents to the Lambda Legal survey 
who had experienced intimate partner violence and 39% of 
respondents who experienced sexual assault felt that the police 
did not fully address their complaints.[16] Among respondents to 
the 2015 NTDS, 57% reported feeling either somewhat or very 
uncomfortable asking the police for help.[1] As in Jay’s example, 
in situations involving intimate partner violence, LGBTQ+ 
individuals experience higher rates of dual arrest and wrongful 
arrest when compared to cisgender, heterosexual individuals.
[60] According to a study using data from the National Incident-
Based Reporting System, incidents with same-sex couples were 
substantially more likely to result in dual arrest when compared 
to heterosexual couples.[60] LGBTQ+ individuals are also deterred 
from accessing other supportive services, including shelters for 
survivors of intimate partner violence or counseling, due to anti-
LGBTQ+ discrimination.[57, 58, 61, 62] 
Lacking legal or other supportive services, many LGBTQ+ 
individuals are left with few good options to protect themselves 
from victimization. There are no available data regarding the 
number of LGBTQ+ individuals who have been arrested or 
incarcerated for defending themselves from victimization. 
However, the links between experiencing victimization and 
Jay3 is a 34-year-old White gay man. He lives with 
his partner, Robbie. Robbie has been emotionally 
abusive towards Jay in the past and occasionally 
physically abusive. During one terrifying incident, Jay 
locked himself in the bathroom of their apartment 
and called 911. When the officers arrived, they 
separated Jay and Robbie. Jay told the officers 
what happened but could tell that they were 
being dismissive. They didn’t arrest Robbie, and 
Jay overheard one of them saying on the way out 
“this isn’t a domestic violence incident, it’s just two 
roommates fighting.” After that, Jay was hesitant to 
call the police and felt like he had no way to protect 
himself. A few weeks later Robbie became physically 
abusive again. This time he had his arm pressed 
up against Jay’s neck, and Jay was struggling to 
breathe. Jay had a pocket knife in his pocket, and 
quickly pulled it out and stabbed Robbie in the leg. 
Robbie called the police that time, and when they 
came, they only arrested Jay. 
criminal legal system involvement among cisgender women are 
well-established.[35, 63] Given the high rates of victimization among 
LGBTQ+ individuals, it likely plays an important part in shaping 
pathways into the criminal legal system, yet more research 
is necessary to better understand these connections. Among 
LGBTQ+ individuals, victimization likely also has indirect effects 
on criminal legal system involvement; for example, victimization 
at work or school may result in decreased employment or 
educational opportunities and increase the likelihood of turning 
to criminalized activities in order to survive.[1, 3, 4, 18, 37, 40, 46] 
PATHWAYS AND PIPELINES SUMMARY
The pathways and pipelines outlined in this report are just a few 
examples of the many social and structural factors contributing 
to the overrepresentation of LGBTQ+ individuals within the 
criminal legal system. These factors are similar to those driving 
overrepresentation of other communities within the criminal 
legal system, including heterosexual and cisgender people of 
color and people with disabilities or mental health conditions.
[29, 35, 44] Tracing these pathways and pipelines also illuminates 
broader problems with our reliance on the criminal legal system 
to maintain social control and the role that the criminal legal 
system plays in perpetuating inequality. Interrupting these 
pathways and pipelines requires diverting resources from 
the criminal legal system and funding social and educational 
services. The following section highlights several organizations 
that are already engaged in these efforts.  
3All of the vignettes in this report are composites based on experiences shared by LGBTQ+ individuals and existing research.[16, 58]


8
Overrepresentation of People Who Identify as LGBTQ+ in the Criminal Legal System
SPOTLIGHTING 
ORGANIZATIONS
There are a growing number of organizations working to address 
the overrepresentation of LGBTQ+ individuals within the criminal 
legal system. The work of a few organizations and individuals 
are highlighted below. Many of these organizations connect 
their work to broader efforts to address mass incarceration, 
acknowledging that the same structural inequalities impacting 
LGBTQ+ individuals are also drivers of the broader crisis of mass 
incarceration, including discrimination and poverty. Their work 
demonstrates the importance of operating on multiple levels, 
including providing direct support to formerly and currently 
incarcerated LGBTQ+ individuals, advocating for resources to 
be diverted from the criminal legal system and toward services 
and programs that will interrupt pathways and pipelines into 
the system, and creating cultural shifts in how we think about 
criminality, violence, and punishment. 
BREAK OUT!
Based in New Orleans, Break Out!’s goal is to end the 
criminalization of LGBTQ+ youth through organizing, advocacy, 
and support. Their work spans many areas, but each is 
intrinsically linked to the pathways by which LGBTQ+ youth 
are funneled into the criminal legal system. For example, they 
engage in organizing and advocacy work to interrupt the 
school-to-prison pipeline. They help students start LGBTQ+ 
youth groups in high schools with the goal of increasing school 
safety. They also assist young people who have been pushed 
out of school to earn a general education diploma. They have 
successfully advocated to reduce the fees associated with legal 
name changes in Orleans Parish. Additionally, they provide 
know-your-rights trainings for young people and staff at youth-
serving organizations. 
TRANSFORMATIVE JUSTICE LAW PROJECT
Based in Chicago, the Transformative Justice Law Project (TJLP) 
provides legal advocacy and support to transgender and gender 
expansive individuals. In addition to criminal defense work, 
TJLP operates the Name Change Mobilization project. Launched 
in 2011, the Name Change Mobilization supports individuals 
as they navigate the legal name change process. Staff and 
trained volunteers assist petitioners with filling out paperwork, 
obtaining necessary documentation, and filing the petition. TJLP 
can also help with requesting fee waivers, which requires that 
petitioners appear before a judge. Petitioners can request that 
a volunteer or attorney attend their name change hearing and 
accompany them to the DMV to obtain their new driver’s license 
or state identification. Additionally, TJLP provides information 
about how to change other legal documents, including birth 
certificates, social security cards, and passports. In Illinois, 
individuals with felony convictions are unable to change their 
names for ten years after completing their sentences, and 
those with identity theft convictions or who are required to 
be on the sex offender registry are barred for life, making 
Illinois one of only nine states in the U.S. to enforce waiting 
periods or permanent restrictions due to criminal records.[61] 
Attempts to change the law through legislation have, to date, 
been unsuccessful. Thus, in 2019, TJLP filed a federal lawsuit to 
challenge the constitutionality of the name change restrictions. 
The case is pending. For more information, see www.tjlp.org.
BLACK & PINK
Black & Pink is a national organization working to address the 
needs of LGBTQ+ people in the criminal legal system. Black 
& Pink provides support to currently incarcerated LGBTQ+ 
individuals through a newsletter distributed to 19,000 
incarcerated individuals and a pen pal program matching 
incarcerated individuals with allies on the outside. Black & Pink 
describes their pen pal program as a harm reduction strategy 
because it connects incarcerated individuals to a network 
outside of prison with whom they can share experiences of 
discrimination or victimization. Pen pals can then share this 
information with Black & Pink to help inform advocacy efforts. 
Centered in Omaha, Nebraska, Black & Pink also supports eleven 
volunteer-led chapters around the country. In addition to pen pal 
matching, chapters engage in mutual aid projects, connecting 
community volunteers to currently and formerly incarcerated 
LGBTQ+ individuals to help meet basic needs. In 2014, Black & 
Pink conducted a survey of LGBTQ+ incarcerated individuals, 
among the largest surveys of LGBTQ+ people in prison.[17] 
Recognizing the need for housing and other basic resources 
to prevent criminal legal system involvement and support 
recently incarcerated individuals, in 2020 Black & Pink opened 
a Lydon House in Omaha. Named for Black & Pink’s founder, in 
its first year Lydon House provided housing to six residents and 
wrap around services to 50 community members impacted by 
incarceration. For more information, see www.blackandpink.org.
CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO OFFICE 
OF THE DISTRICT ATTORNEY
In 2021, San Francisco District Attorney Chesa Boudin 
announced a new policy mandating practices related to 
pronoun use for people with whom their office works, including 
people accused of crimes, witnesses, and victims.[64] Noting 
the disproportionately high number of transgender individuals 
who come into contact with the criminal legal system and the 
detrimental impact of misgendering transgender individuals, 
the policy directive states that these practices is an important 
first step in mitigating the “harmful norms around sexuality 
and gender identity [that] are reinforced in our courtrooms and 
throughout the legal system” (p. 2). The policy requires that 
prosecutors and staff members of the district attorney’s office 
ask about pronouns and note an individual’s pronouns in their 
file. Additionally, the policy includes direction for prosecutors to 
note if an individual’s chosen name differs from their legal name 
and to use the chosen name. Furthermore, prosecutors must ask 
the defense about pronouns of anyone accused of a crime, and to 
document and use those pronouns.   


Overrepresentation of People Who Identify as LGBTQ+ in the Criminal Legal System
9
RESEARCH, POLICY, 
AND DIRECT SERVICE 
RECOMMENDATIONS
Addressing the overrepresentation of LGBTQ+ individuals within 
the criminal legal system requires concerted efforts at multiple 
levels, including research, policy, and direct services for LGBTQ+ 
individuals. As illustrated in the previous section, there are many 
organizations and individuals already engaged in this work. Much 
of this work is happening outside of the criminal legal system. 
Working within the system poses many challenges, including 
needing to navigate around institutional policies and practices 
that may be biased against LGBTQ+ individuals. However, as 
demonstrated by the example from the San Francisco District 
Attorney’s Office, individuals working within the criminal legal 
system can also play important roles in increasing safety and 
providing direct support to LGBTQ+ individuals. The following 
recommendations are starting points for this important work. 
Additional information and recommendations can be found in the 
For Further Learning section at the end of this report.
ADDRESSING THE CRIMINALIZATION OF 
LGBTQ+ IDENTITIES
As detailed in this report, perceptions of LGBTQ+ individuals, 
particularly LGBTQ+ people of color, as deviant and criminal 
contribute to the overrepresentation of LGBTQ+ individuals in 
the criminal legal system. Addressing these perceptions is a part 
of the larger work of combatting hetero/cissexism, racism, and 
other forms of oppression. There are many steps that individuals 
and organizations can take to engage in this work, including:
•	
Engage in on-going education and self-reflection to combat 
hetero/cissexism and bias.
•	
Learn about the historical and present-day criminalization of 
LGBTQ+ identities.
•	
Ensure that the voices of LGBTQ+ communities are centered 
in efforts to address mass incarceration by including 
LGBTQ+ individuals in organizations and leadership roles.
•	
Organize and advocate to redirect funds from the criminal 
legal system and toward meeting basic needs of LGBTQ+ 
and other marginalized communities. 
•	
Implement mechanisms to hold criminal legal system actors 
accountable for bias against LGBTQ+ individuals.
•	
Organize against new waves of anti-LGBTQ+ legislation, 
including bills aimed at restricting access to public restrooms 
and locker rooms.
RESEARCH
This report highlights the need for on-going research to better 
understand the rates of arrest and incarceration of LGBTQ+ 
individuals, particularly those who have been overlooked 
by research to date (i.e., intersex and gender expansive 
communities). Further research is also necessary to understand 
the experiences of incarcerated LGBTQ+ individuals and their 
needs upon re-entry. Understanding the pathways and pipelines 
by which LGBTQ+ individuals enter the criminal legal system is 
also critical for informing prevention efforts. The following are 
suggestions for future research:
•	
Include questions regarding gender identity and sexual 
orientation on surveys conducted among people in jails 
and prisons and returning to communities. However, it is 
imperative that confidentiality and safety be prioritized in 
data collection, including barring police, prison guards, or 
other criminal legal system actors from obtaining access to 
the identities of specific individuals in their facilities. Surveys 
should also collect data criminal legal system involvement 
and experiences of other members of the broader LGBTQ+ 
community, including intersex and gender expansive 
individuals. 
•	
In keeping with best practices related to collection of gender 
identity and sexual orientation data,[65] survey responses 
should include a write-in option instead of or in addition 
to multiple choice options. This practice allows individuals 
to self-identify and is more respectful of the evolving and 
complex nature of identity labels and terminology.
INTERRUPTING PATHWAYS AND PIPELINES 
AND PROMOTING ALTERNATIVES TO THE 
CRIMINAL LEGAL SYSTEM
Addressing the overrepresentation of LGBTQ+ individuals 
requires interrupting the pathways and pipelines funneling 
LGBTQ+ individuals into the system. Individuals and organizations 
working within and outside of the criminal legal system can 
all play roles in this work. In addition to the examples shared 
previously in this paper, here are several recommendations for 
ongoing prevention:
•	
Engage in creative program development to interrupt 
pathways into the criminal legal system for LGBTQ+ 
individuals. For example:
	
	
•Create restorative justice programs in schools to 	
	
	
address bullying and victimization without involving the 	
	
police
	
	
•Provide support and counseling to families of LGBTQ+ 	
	
individuals to reduce family rejection
	
	
•Offer assistance to transgender and gender expansive 	
	
individuals as they navigate the legal name change 	
	
	
process and advocate to reduce barriers to obtaining 	 	
	
name changes
	
	
•Create housing programs specifically for LGBTQ+ 	
	
	
individuals to reduce homelessness
	
	
•Develop employment and educational opportunities 	 	
	
for LGBTQ+ individuals to reduce poverty
	
	
•Ensure that services for survivors of victimization are 	
	
inclusive of LGBTQ+ individuals
•	
Advocate for the decriminalization of factors contributing 
to pathways. For example, eliminate legislation criminalizing 
homelessness and sex work. Instead of relying on the 
criminal legal system to address forms of criminalized 
survival, use restorative justice practices and referrals to 
programs to help individuals meet their basic needs. 


10
Overrepresentation of People Who Identify as LGBTQ+ in the Criminal Legal System
ADDRESSING CONDITIONS OF CONFINEMENT 
FOR LGBTQ+ INDIVIDUALS
Individuals working within prisons and jails can play a crucial 
role in ensuring safety and meeting the basic needs of currently 
incarcerated LGBTQ+ individuals. While these efforts will not 
reverse overrepresentation, they are still important harm 
reduction strategies. Some suggestions include: 
•	
Inside jails and prisons, provide LGBTQ+ inclusive medical 
and mental health services, including treatment by qualified 
clinicians following informed consent models for gender-
affirming care.[21]
•	
Link recently released individuals to medical treatment 
to ensure ongoing access to medical care received while 
incarcerated, particularly HIV treatment.
•	
Develop and follow best practices for making housing 
designations that reflect an individual’s gender identity and 
safety needs.
•	
Include professionals and experts from outside jails and 
prisons in boards or committees that oversee housing 
transfer requests based on gender identity. Prison and 
jail staff may not have the necessary experience to make 
these decisions and/or may be biased. The inclusion of 
outside professionals provides additional oversight for these 
decisions.
MEETING RE-ENTRY NEEDS OF LGBTQ+ 
INDIVIDUALS
LGBTQ+ individuals may not feel welcome in re-entry programs 
and services or may have specific needs such as LGBTQ+-
affirming and/or HIV-related health care. Organizations like Black 
& Pink are already working to address this gap by providing 
LGBTQ+-specific re-entry services. Additional recommendations 
for individuals and organizations working in re-entry include: 
•	
Ensure that existing re-entry services, including housing, 
employment training, and substance use services, are 
inclusive of LGBTQ+ individuals.
•	
Simultaneously, design new re-entry services that meet the 
distinct needs of LGBTQ+ communities. 


Overrepresentation of People Who Identify as LGBTQ+ in the Criminal Legal System
11
FOR FURTHER 
LEARNING 
GENERAL INFORMATION REGARDING LGBTQ+ 
IDENTITIES
PFLAG resources for allies
Human Rights Campaign guide, “Human Rights Campaign 
resources for allies”
UC Davis LGBTQIA Resource Center, “Basic tips for expanding 
your allyship”
ORGANIZATIONS
Black and Pink
	
Report, “Coming out of concrete closets” 
Hearts on a Wire
Just Detention International
LGBT Books to Prisoners
Survived and Punished
Sylvia Rivera Law Project
Transgender Law Center
Transformative Justice Law Project of Illinois
REPORTS
Center for American Progress
	
Report, “Beyond bullying: How hostile school climate
	
perpetuates the school-to-prison pipeline for LGBT 	
	
	
youth”
The Fenway Institute
	
Report, “Emerging best practices for the management 	
	
and treatment of incarcerated lesbian, gay, bisexual, 	 	
	
transgender, and intersex, (LGBTI) individuals”
Lambda Legal
	
Report, “Protected and Served?” survey exploring
	
discrimination by police, courts, prisons and school 	
	
	
security against LGBT people and people living with HIV 	
	
in the U.S. 
Movement Advancement Project
	
Report, “Unjust: How the broken criminal justice system 	
	
fails LGBT people of color”
National Center for Transgender Equality
	
Report, “Standing with LGBT prisoners: An advocate’s 		
	
guide to ending abuse and combating imprisonment”
Prison Policy Initiative
	
Briefing, “Visualizing the unequal treatment of LGBTQ 		
	
people in the criminal legal system”
Williams Institute
	
Reports, briefs, and fact sheets on LGBTQ+ 	 	
	
	
communities and criminalization


12
Overrepresentation of People Who Identify as LGBTQ+ in the Criminal Legal System
REFERENCES
1.	
James, S. E., Herman, J. L., Rankin, S., Keisling, M., Mottet, 
L. & Anafi, M. (2016). Report of the 2015 U.S. Transgender 
Survey. National Center for Transgender Equality.
2.	
Meyer, I. M., Flores, A. R., Stemple, L., Romero, A. P., Wilson, 
B. D., & Herman, J. L. (2017). Incarceration rates and traits 
of sexual minorities in the United States: National Inmate 
Survey, 2011-2012. American Journal of Public Health, 107(2), 
267-273.
3.	
Majd, K., Marksamer, J., & Reyes C. (2009). Hidden injustice: 
Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender youth in juvenile 
courts. Legal Services for Children, National Juvenile 
Defender Center, and National Center for Lesbian Rights.
4.	
Wilson, B. D. M., Jordan, S. P., Meyer, I. H., Flores, A. R., 
Stemple, L., & Herman, J. L. (2017). Disproportinality and 
disparities among sexual minority youth in custody. Journal 
of Youth and Adolescence, 46(7), 1547-1561.
5.	
University of California San Francisco Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual 
and Transgender Resource Center. (n.d.). General Definitions. 
https://lgbt.ucsf.edu/glossary-terms.
6.	
Hereth, J., Pardee, D. J., & Reisner, S. L. (2020) Gender 
identity and sexual orientation development among young 
adult transgender men sexually active with cisgender men:‘I 
had completely ignored my sexuality… that’s for a different 
time to figure out’. Culture, Health & Sexuality, 22(sup1), 31-
47.
7.	
GLAAD. (n.d.). GLAAD Media Reference Guide - Lesbian/
Gay/Bisexual/Queer Glossary of Terms. www.glaad.org/
reference/lgbtq.
8.	
Gates, G. J. (2011). How many people are lesbian, gay, 
bisexual, and transgender. The Williams Institute: Los 
Angeles, CA.
9.	
Reisner, S. L. & Sevelius, J. (2014). Racial/ethnic disparities 
in history of incarceration, experiences of victimization, and 
associated health indicators among transgender women in 
the U.S. Women & Health, 54(8), 570-767.
10.	 Jones, A. (2021). Visualizing the unequal treatment of LGBTQ 
people in the criminal justice system. Prison Policy Initiative. 
https://www.prisonpolicy.org/blog/2021/03/02/lgbtq.
11.	 Stotzer, R. L. (2014). Law enforcement and criminal justice 
personnel interactions with transgender people in the 
United States: A literature review. Aggression and violent 
behavior, 19(3), 263-277.
12.	 Federal Bureau of Investigation. (2019). Crime in the United 
States, 2019.
13.	 Himmelstein, K. E. & Bruckner, H. (2011). Criminal-justice and 
school sanctions against nonheterosexual youth: A national 
longitudinal study. Pediatrics, 127(1), 49-57.
14.	 Grant, J. M., Mottet, L. M., Tanis, J., Harrison, J., Herman, J. 
L., & Keisling, M. (2011). Injustice at every turn: A report of the 
National Transgender Discrimination Survey. National Center 
for Transgender Equality and National Gay and Lesbian Task 
Force.
15.	 Bonczar, T.P. (2003). Prevalence of imprisonment in the U.S. 
population, 1974-2001. The Bureau of Justice Statistics.
16.	 Lambda Legal. (2015). Protected and served?: The excecutive 
summary of Lambda Legal’s national survey that explores 
discrimination by police, courts, prisons and school security 
against lebian, gay, bisexual, transgender (LGBT) people and 
people living with HIV in the United States.
17.	 Lydon, J., Carrington, K., Low, H., Miller, R., Yazdy, M. (2015). 
Coming out of concrete closets: A report on Black & Pink’s 
National LGBTQ Prisoner Survey. Black & Pink.
18.	 Hereth, J., Garthe, R. C., Garofalo, R., Reisner, S. L., 
Mimiaga, M. J., & Kuhns, L. M. (2021). Examining patterns 
of interpersonal violence, structural and social exclusion, 
resilience, and arrest among young transgender women. 
Criminal Justice and Behavior, 48(1), 54-75.
19.	 Beck, A., Cantor, D., Hartge, J., & Smith, T. (2013). Sexual 
victimization in juvenile facilities reported by youth, 2012. 
Bureau of Justice Statistics, U.S. Department of Justice.
20.	 Smith, P. S. (2006). The effects of solitary confinement on 
prison inmates: A brief history and review of the literature. 
Crime and Justice, 34(1), 441-528. 
21.	 Schulz, S. L. (2018). The informed consent model of 
transgender care: An alternative to the diagnosis of gender 
dysphoria. Journal of humanistic psychology, 58(1), 72-92.
22.	 White Hughto, J. M. & Reisner, S. L. (2016). A systematic 
review of the effects of hormone therapy on psychological 
functioning and quality of life in transgender individuals. 
Transgender Health, 1(1), 21-31.
23.	 White Hughto, J. M., Clark, K. A., Altice, F. L., Reisner, 
S. L., Kershaw, T. S., Pachankis, J. E. (2018). Creating, 
reinforcing, and resisting the gender binary: A qualitative 
study of transgender women’s healthcare experiences in 
sex-segregated jails and prisons. International Journal of 
Prisoner Health, 14(2), 69-88.
24.	 Spaulding, A. C., Seals, R. M., Page, M. J., Brzozowski, A. 
K., Rhodes, W., Hammett, T. M. (2009). HIV/AIDS among 
inmates of and releasees from U.S. correctional facilities, 
2006: Declining share of epidemic but persistent public 
health opportunity. PLoS One, 4(11), e7558.
25.	 Maruschak, L .M. & Bronson, J. (2017). HIV in prisons, 
2015-Statistical tables. U.S. Department of Justice Office of 
Justice Statistics.
26.	 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2020). 
Estimated HIV incidence and prevalence in the United 
States, 2014-2018. HIV surveillance supplemental report 
2020;25(No. 1).
27.	 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2020). HIV 
Surveillance Report, 2018 (Updated). 
28.	 Iroh, P. A., Mayo, H., & Nijhawan, A. E. (2015). The HIV care 
cascade before, during, and after incarceration: A systematic 
review and data synthesis. American Journal of public 
health, 105, e5-e16.
29.	 Mogul, J. L., Ritchie, A. J., & Whitlock, K. (2011). Queer (in)
justice: The criminalizatin of LGBT people in the United States. 
Beacon Press.
30.	 Alexander, M. (2010).The new Jim Crow: Mass incarceration in 
the age of colorblindness. The New Press.
31.	 Kralik, J. (2019). “Bathroom bill” legislative tracking. 
National Conference of State Legislatures. https://www.
ncsl.org/research/education/-bathroom-bill-legislative-
tracking635951130.aspx.
32.	 Schilt, K. & Westbrook, L. (2015). Bathroom battlegrounds 
and penis panics. Contexts, 14(3), 26-31.


Overrepresentation of People Who Identify as LGBTQ+ in the Criminal Legal System
13
33.	 Ronan, W. (2021).Tennessee Gov. Lee signs anti-transgender 
“business bathroom bill” into law. Human Rights Campaign.
34.	 Ring, T. (2019).Tennessee ‘indecent exposure’ bill targets 
trans people.The Advocate. https://www.advocate.com/
transgender/2019/3/04/tennessee-indecent-exposure-bill-
targets-trans-people.
35.	 Ritchie, A. J. (2017). Invisible no more: Police violence against 
Black women and Women of Color. Beacon Press.
36.	 Wald, J. & Losen, D. J. (2003). Defining and redirecting 
a school-to-prison pipeline. New Directions for Youth 
Development, 2003(99), 9-15.
37.	 Heitzeg, N. A. (2009). Education or incarceration: Zero 
tolerance policies and the school to prison pipeline. Forum on 
Public Policy.
38.	 Mallett, C. A. (2016).The school-to-prison pipeline: A critical 
review of the punitive paradigm shift. Child and adolescent 
social work journal, 33(1), 15-24.
39.	 Meiners, E. R. (2011). Ending the school-to-prison pipeline/
building abolition futures. The Urban Review, 43(4), 547-565.
40.	 Mitchum, P. & Moodie-Mills, A. C. (2014). Beyond bullying: 
How hostile school climate perpetuates to school-to-prison 
pipeline for LGBT youth. Center for American Progress.
41.	 Hoffman, S. (2014). Zero benefit: Estimating the effect of 
zero tolerance discipline policies on racial disparities in 
school discipline. Educational Policy, 28(1), 69-95.
42.	 Skiba, R. J., Horner, R. H., Chung, C. G., Rausch, M. K., 
May, S. L., & Tobin, T. (2011). Race is not neutral: A 
national investigation of African American and Latino 
disproportionality in school discipline. School Psychology 
Review, 40(1), 85-107.
43.	 Snapp, S. D., Hoenig, J. M., Fields, A., & Russell, S. T. (2015). 
Messy, butch and queer: LGBTQ youth and the school-to-
prison pipeline. Journal of Adolescent Research, 30(1), 57-82.
44.	 Irvine, A. (2010).’We’ve had three of them’: Addressing 
the invisibility of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and gender 
nonconforming youths in the juvenile justice system. 
Columbia Journal of Gender and Law, 19(3), 649-674.
45.	 Lochner, L. & Moretti, E. (2004). The effect of education on 
crime: Evidence from prison inmates, arrests, and self-
reports. American Economic Review, 94(1), 155-189.
46.	 Center for American Progress & Movement Advancement 
Project (MAP). (2016). Unjust: How the broken criminal justice 
system fails LGBT people of color.
47.	 Ecker, J., Aubry, T., & Sylvestre, J. (2019). A review of the 
literature on LGBTQ adults who experience homelessness. 
Journal of Homosexuality, 66(3), 297-323.
48.	 Durso, L. E. & Gates, G. L. (2012). Serving our youth: Findings 
from a National Survey of Service Providers Working with 
lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender youth who are 
homeless or at risk of becoming homeless. The Williams 
Institute with True Colors Fund and The Palette Fund.
49.	 National Law Center on Homelessness & Poverty. (2014). No 
safe place: The criminalization of homelessness in U.S. cities.
50.	 The Williams Institute, UCLA School of Law. (2019). LGBT 
Demographic Data Interactive.  https://williamsinstitute.law.
ucla.edu/visualization/lgbt-stats/?topic=LGBT#density.
51.	 Hill, B. J., Crosby, R., Bouris, A., Brown, R., Bak, T., Rosentel, 
K., VandeVusse, A., Silverman, M., Salazar, L. (2018). 
Exploring transgender legal name change as a potential 
structural intervention for mitigating social determinants 
of health among transgender women of color. Sexuality 
Research and Social Policy, 15(1), 25-33.
52.	 Badgett, M. V. L., Choi, S., K., & Wilson, B. D. M. (2019). LGBT 
poverty in the United States: A study of differences between 
sexual orientation and gender identity groups. The Williams 
Institute, UCLA School of Law.
53.	 Santos, T., (2021). Justice in reentry for formerly incarcerated 
LGBTQ people and people living with HIV. Center for 
American Progress.
54.	 Mountz, S. (2020). Remapping pipelines and pathways: 
Listening to queer and transgender youth of color’s 
trajectories through girls’ juvenile justice facilities. Affilia, 
35(2), 177-199.
55.	 Irvine, A. & Canfield, A. (2015). The overrepresentation of 
lesbian, gay, bisexual, questioning, gender nonconforming 
and transgender youth within the child welfare to juvenile 
justice crossover population. Journal of Gender, Social Policy 
& the Law, 24(2), 243-262.
56.	 Reuter, T. R., Newcomb, M. E., Whitton, S. W., & Mustanski, 
B. (2017). Intimate partner violence victimization in LGBT 
young adults: Demographic differences and associations 
with health behaviors. Psychology of Violence, 7(1), 101-109.
57.	 Peitzmeier, S. M., Malik, M. Kattari, S. K., Marrow, E., 
Stephenson, R., Agenor, M., & Reisner, S. L. (2020). Intimate 
partner violence in transgender populations: Systematic 
review and meta-analysis of prevelance and correlates. 
American journal of public health, 100(9), e1-e14.
58.	 Hereth, J. (2021). ‘Where is the safe haven?’: Transgender 
women’s experiences of victimization and help-seeking 
across the life course. Feminist Criminology. Advance online 
publication.
59.	 Todahl, J. L., Linville, D., Bustin, A., Wheeler, J., & Gau, J. 
(2009). Sexual assault support services and community 
systems: Understanding critical issues and needs in the 
LGBTQ community. Violence against Women, 15(8), 952-976.
60.	 Hirschel, D. & McCormack, P. D. (2021). Same-sex couples 
and the police: A 10-year study of arrest and dual arrest 
rates in responding to incidents of intimate partner violence. 
Violence against Women, 27(9), 1119-1149.
61.	 Calton, J. M., Cattaneo, L. B., & Gebhard, K. T. (2016). Barriers 
to help seeking for lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, 
and queer survivors of intimate partner violence. Trauma, 
Violence, & Abuse, 17(5), 585-600.
62.	 Guadalupe-Diaz, X. L. & Jasinski, J. (2017). ‘I Wasn’t a 
Priority, I Wasn’t a Victim’: Challenges in Help Seeking 
for Transgender Survivors of Intimate Partner Violence. 
Violence against Women, 23(6), 772-792.
63.	 DeHart, D., Lynch, S., Belknap, J., Dass-Brailsford, P., & 
Green, B. (2014). Life history models of female offending: 
The roles of serious mental illness and trauma in women’s 
pathways to jail. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 38(1), 
138-151.
64.	 Boudin, C. (2021). Policy directive: San Francisco District 
Attorney’s Office gender neutral and gender inclusivve 
pronoun use for people encountering the criminal legal 
system. San Francisco District Attorney’s Office. https://
sfdistrictattorney.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/06/
Pronoun-policy-Final.pdf.


Overrepresentation of People Who Identify as LGBTQ+ in the Criminal Legal System
14
65.	 Sexual Minority Assessment Research Team (SMART). 
(2009). Best practices for asking questions about sexual 
orientation on surveys. The Williams Institute, UCLA School 
of Law.


www.SafetyAndJusticeChallenge.org 
This report was created with support from the 
John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation 
as part of the Safety and Justice Challenge, which 
seeks to reduce over-incarceration by changing 
the way America thinks about and uses jails.