TAX CODE
RIGGED FOR
WEALTHY
Our tax code could be a tool for gender equity:
People who are transgender, genderqueer,
nonbinary, and two-spirit experience
disproportionately greater economic hardship due
to persistent discrimination. As a result, gender-
diverse people are more likely to earn less and
consequently pay a higher share of their incomes in
taxes in Washington. According to the 2015 U.S.
Transgender Survey, which includes "transgender,
trans, genderqueer, and nonbinary people" in its
definition of trans:
The upside-down (regressive) tax code amplifies gender-based inequities. In Washington, lower-
income households pay six times their share of incomes in taxes as the top 1%, and households headed by
women are more likely to be in this lowest-income, highest-taxed group.  This is because women still face
discrimination, are over-represented in low-paying fields, and are paid less than men for the same work.
Economic inequities are even more stark for Black, indigenous, and other women of color, people with
disabilities, and gender diverse individuals due to added, intersecting layers of discrimination. We can start to
address these inequities with the Working Families Tax Credit, WorkFirst/Temporary Assistance for Needy
Families (TANF), and a capital gains tax.
Working Families Tax Credit, WorkFirst/TANF, and capital
gains tax are steps in the right direction
 
1
29%
OF TRANS PEOPLE
LIVE IN POVERTY –
TWICE THE NATIONAL
AVERAGE
 
Trans and nonbinary people are also harmed by our tax code 
27%
OF TRANS PEOPLE
REPORTED JOB
DISCRIMINATION IN
2014
 
Source: 2015 U.S. Transgender Survey 
Our tax code is upside down
SALES TAXES
SQUEEZE
PEOPLE
WITH LOW
INCOMES
Sales taxes on essential goods
like period products and diapers
disproportionately impact
women, gender-diverse people,
and other communities with low
incomes. 
Households headed by women are more
likely to be lowest-income, highest-taxed
Meanwhile, without wealth taxes to
balance the tax code and invest back
into communities, we reinforce
inequities by giving tax breaks to the
people who need them the least. 
1


Although Washington state-specific income data that accurately describes people's genders are limited,
national surveys and stories help us fill in the gaps. Still, the terminology used by data sources to describe
people’s gender identities can be limited and/or inconsistent. As a result, the statistics presented here tell a
limited story. And in some cases, the numbers don’t reflect people’s lived experiences. The
term "gender diverse" describes a spectrum of genders, including, but not limited to, genderqueer,
transgender, nonbinary, and two-spirit people. We welcome feedback and further conversation.
(1) Text and following graph: Budget & Policy Center Analysis of IPUMS 5 year ACS data, 2017
(2) Markowitz S, Komro K, Livingston MD, Lenhart O, Wagenaar AC. Effects of state-level Earned Income Tax Credit laws in the U.S. on maternal health
behaviors and infant health outcomes. Soc Sci Med. 2017;194:67-75.
(3) Washington State Coalition Against Domestic Violence. Domestic Violence Housing First One Pager. See: https://wscadv.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/05/DVHF-One-Pager-Final.pdf 
 
A broad-based sales tax exemption on essentials like diapers and period products is
one strategy to balance the tax code; however, broad-based sales tax exemptions on
goods are not the most effective way to reduce the strain of our regressive tax code
on people with low incomes. Instead, targeted assistance programs like
WorkFirst/TANF would enable people with low incomes to access essentials like
diapers. 
TARGETED ASSISTANCE PROGRAMS 
WORKING FAMILIES TAX CREDIT 
CAPITAL GAINS & OTHER WEALTH TAXES
2
Progressive policy options can advance gender equity 
Note on data & language
Sources
A tax on capital gains would help lawmakers pay for tax credits and programs that
would benefit women, nonbinary people, and other communities overrepresented
among households with low incomes.
Tax credits like the Working Families Tax Credit have been shown to be good for moms
and for maternal health.  Pregnant people who receive the credit have healthier
pregnancies. Moreover, cash from the credit can help survivors of domestic violence –
who are overwhelmingly women – find stability.   
@BUDGET_POLICY
FACEBOOK.COM/BUDGETANDPOLICY/
BUDGETANDPOLICY.ORG/SUBSCRIBE/
2
3