Working Paper Series 
Gender bias and credit access 
 
 
 
Steven Ongena and
Alexander Popov
No 1822 / July 2015 
Note: This Working Paper should not be reported as representing the views of the European Central Bank (ECB). 
The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the ECB 
 


 
 
Abstract 
 
     This paper studies the causal effect of gender bias on access to bank credit. We extract an 
exogenous measure of gender bias from survey responses by descendants of US immigrants on 
questions about the role of women in society. We then use data on 6,000 small business firms 
from 17 countries and find that in countries with higher gender bias, female-owned firms are 
more frequently discouraged from applying for bank credit and more likely to rely on informal 
finance. At the same time, loan rejection rates and terms on granted loans do not vary between 
male and female firm owners. These results are not driven by credit risk differences between 
female- and male-owned firms or by any idiosyncrasies in the set of countries in our sample. 
Overall, the evidence suggests that in high-gender bias countries, female entrepreneurs are 
more likely to opt out of the loan application process, even though banks do not appear to 
discriminate against females that apply for credit.  
   
  JEL classification: G21, J16, N32, Z13. 
     Keywords: Cultural bias; Gender-based discrimination; Bank credit; Female-owned firms. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
1


Non-technical summary 
In this paper, we aim to establish a causal link going from a well-defined cultural belief – 
i.e., the belief that women are inferior to men, or the gender bias – to a well-defined economic 
outcome – i.e., credit access. Specifically, we study whether, in high-gender bias countries and 
relative to male-owned counterparts, females-owned firms: (1) Are more often denied bank 
credit; (2) are more often discouraged from applying for bank credit; (3) rely less on bank credit 
and more on alternative sources of finance, such as trade credit, in the financing of the 
operations of their firm; and (4) are offered inferior terms on granted loans. 
To extract the predetermined component of the gender bias across our sample of 
countries, we employ information on cultural attitudes of US-born descendants of European 
immigrants embedded in the General Social Survey. In particular, we focus on whether the 
person agrees or disagrees with the claim: “It is much better for everyone involved if the man is 
the achiever outside the home and the woman takes care of the home and family.” Since social 
capital is transmitted from parents to children, the degree of the gender bias of a person born 
in the U.S. whose parents were born in Germany is a good proxy for the degree of gender bias 
of his parents, and by extension a good proxy for the predetermined component of gender bias 
in contemporaneous Germany. This measurement strategy allows us to isolate the inherited 
component of the gender bias for 17 European countries. We then match our country-specific 
proxy for gender bias to information on the credit market experience by 5,905 firm-owners – 
4,193 males and 1,712 females – in these countries, and test whether variations in inherited 
cultural biases are mapped into variations in credit access and in the terms on loans and credit 
lines granted by banks.  
We find that cross-country differences in gender bias explain a substantial proportion of 
the variation in credit access by female firm-owners, but not in loan rejection rates or in the 
loan terms of the ultimately successful loan applications. In particular, in countries with a 
higher inherited gender bias and comparing female owners to male owners, the former group 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
2


of owners: 1) More often do not apply for a loan, and 2) finance a lower portion of their firm’s 
operating expenses with bank credit and a higher portion with trade credit. However, once the 
firm applies for a loan or a line of credit, we find – in most specifications - no statistical 
differences between male- and female-owned firms in the probability of application denial. We 
also find no differences in the terms on granted loans, such as interest rates, collateral 
requirements, and the negotiation time involved. The evidence thus implies that the negative 
effect of gender bias on credit access is primarily manifested through a reluctance of female 
entrepreneurs to apply for formal credit which is driven by their belief that their credit 
application will be denied. Once the credit application is made, similar approval rates and loan 
terms suggest female-owned firms are assessed to be identical to male-owned firms, and this 
assessment is correct because their credit worthiness also turns out to be statistically similar. 
The evidence thus suggests that there is no taste-based discrimination at the level of the bank, 
i.e., it is not the case that loan officers select only the best female-owned firms while lending 
also to mediocre male-owned firms. 
The contribution of our paper consists in linking the severity of the inherited cultural 
gender bias as it exists across countries to one specific economic outcome (credit access). Our 
results are consistent with a mechanism whereby female entrepreneurs tend to shy away from 
the formal credit granting process in countries where cultural attitudes favour males, even 
though credit markets are not actively discriminating against them. Policies in high-gender bias 
countries that enable and facilitate lending to female-owned firms are therefore called for and 
in particular and beyond doubt will enhance overall firm performance. One possibility could be 
to stimulate banks to recruit and train female loan officers that may be less subject to a gender 
bias, and thus encourage female entrepreneurs to apply. An alternative policy could be 
subsidies to banks to actively solicit loan applications from creditworthy female-owned firms 
that are now for no good reason discouraged from seeking formal access to credit. 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
3


A woman cannot be herself in the society of the present day, which is an exclusively 
masculine society, with laws framed by men and with a judicial system that judges feminine 
conduct from a masculine point of view. 
Henrik Ibsen, Ibsen’s Workshop, 1912 
 
1.
Introduction 
Economic research has focused intensely in recent years on the link between culture – 
which Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2006) define as the customary beliefs and values that are 
transmitted fairly unchanged from generation to generation – and economic outcomes. 
Scholars have provided strong evidence that various beliefs and preferences, rooted in the 
cultural experience of economic agents, are related to a wide array of economic phenomena, 
ranging from growth (Knack and Keefer, 1997) and financial development (Guiso, Sapienza, and 
Zingales, 2004), to trade (Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales, 2009) and regulation (Aghion, Algan, 
Cahuc, and Shleifer, 2010). 
Having established a robust correlation, the research effort has turned to identifying the 
causal impact of culture on economic outcomes. Doing so requires taking two crucial steps. 
First, one needs to show that a narrow subset of the entire range of cultural beliefs and 
preferences has a directly measurable impact on a specific economic phenomenon. Second, 
one needs to show that not only the contemporaneous component of these beliefs and 
preferences, but also their predetermined component, has an impact on the economic 
outcome in case. 
This paper aims to take both steps concurrently by investigating the impact of a well-
defined cultural belief – i.e., the belief that women are inferior to men, or the gender bias – on 
a well-defined economic outcome – i.e., credit access. Specifically, we study whether, in high-
gender bias countries and relative to male-owned counterparts, females-owned firms: (1) Are 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
4


more often denied bank credit; (2) are more often discouraged from applying for bank credit; 
(3) rely less on bank credit and more on alternative sources of finance, such as trade credit, in 
the financing of the operations of their firm; and (4) are offered inferior terms on granted loans. 
Establishing a causal link from gender bias to credit market outcomes is at the heart of 
our paper. To extract the predetermined component of the gender bias across our sample 
countries, we borrow the empirical strategy from Algan and Cahuc (2010) who employ 
information on cultural attitudes of US-born descendants of European immigrants to extract 
measures of inherited trust and investigate its effect on economic growth. We focus on 
answers provided by U.S. descendants of European immigrants to survey questions about the 
proper place of women in society. For instance, we compare Americans of German, Polish, or 
Russian origin whose ancestors immigrated to the US in 1960. Since it is well established that 
social capital is transmitted from parents to children (Putnam, 2000; Guiso, Sapienza, and 
Zingales, 2006), the degree of the gender bias of a person born in the U.S. that has parents that 
were born in Russia is a good proxy for the degree of gender bias of his parents, and by 
extension a good proxy for the predetermined component of gender bias in contemporaneous 
Russia. 
This measurement strategy allows us to isolate the inherited component of the gender 
bias for 17 European countries. Our measure of inherited gender bias is clearly superior – in a 
causal sense – to similar measures that are commonly extracted from contemporaneous 
surveys of cultural attitudes in these countries, such as the World Values Survey, that may be 
directly influenced by the current experiences of the surveyees including those in credit 
markets. 
Next, we match our country-specific proxy for gender bias to information on the credit 
market experience by 5,905 firm-owners – 4,193 males and 1,712 females – in these countries, 
and test whether variation in inherited cultural biases is mapped into variations in credit access 
and in the terms on loans and credit lines granted by banks. We focus on small individually- or 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
5


family-owned firms to make sure that if one of the owners of the firm is female, she is 
materially influential in the firm’s decisions. 
We find that cross-country differences in gender bias explain a substantial proportion of 
the variation in credit access by female firm-owners, but not in loan rejection rates or in the 
loan terms of the ultimately successful loan applications. In particular, in countries with a 
higher inherited gender bias and comparing female owners to male owners, the former group 
of owners: 1) More often do not apply for a loan because they believe they will not get one, 
and 2) finance a lower portion of their firm’s operating expenses with bank credit and a higher 
portion with trade credit. However, once the firm applies for a loan or a line of credit, we find – 
in most specifications - no statistical differences between male- and female-owned firms in the 
probability of application denial. We also find no differences in the terms on granted loans, 
such as interest rates, collateral requirements, and the negotiation time involved. 
The evidence thus implies that the negative effect of gender bias on credit access is 
manifested through a self-selection of female entrepreneurs out of the loan application process 
rather than through higher loan denial rates or a higher price of credit. Importantly, this self-
selection is largely driven by the female firm-owners’ belief that their credit application will be 
denied. Our results are observed even when country and industry fixed effects (which capture 
important time-invariant variation within the high versus low gender-bias group), a wide range 
of firm-specific characteristics, and a nearly exhaustive set of characteristics capturing the 
national business environment are included. 
Overall, our evidence is consistent with Cavalluzzo, Cavalluzzo, and Wolken (2002) and 
Muravyev, Schäfer, and Talavera (2009) who find that female-owned firms are less likely to 
apply for and/or to obtain bank credit than male-owned firms, both in the US and in an 
international context. However, to our knowledge, our paper is the first to make the empirical 
link between gender, a specific economic outcome (credit access), and the gender bias. 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
6


This paper’s results are robust to one potentially confounding influence. In particular, a 
higher gender bias can over time trigger changes in the skill composition of the labor force 
through the selection of workers into education or employment, or through migration, for 
instance (Mulligan and Rubinstein, 2008). One potential implication is that in countries with 
high gender bias, female firm-owners’ set of skills required to run a firm could be inferior. If 
banks know this, they would be rationally rationing female-owned firms in the credit markets, 
and consequently the line between statistical and taste-based discrimination would become 
blurred. However, we verify that there is no statistical difference in firm growth between 
female-owned and male-owned firms. Even stronger than that, we show that in high gender-
bias countries, there is no statistical difference in growth rates between constrained female-
owned firms and unconstrained male-owned firms. We therefore argue that our estimates 
indeed pick up the effect of taste-based discrimination rather than the rationing of potentially 
inferior projects by banks in countries with a pronounced gender bias. 
We are clearly not the first to analyze the impact of cultural beliefs and preferences on 
economic outcomes. Putnam, Leonardi, and Nanneti (1993) show that social capital is a good 
predictor of government performance across Italian regions. Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales 
show that trust in society affects phenomena such as entrepreneurship (2006) and trade 
(2009). Algan and Cahuc (2009) and Aghion, Algan, and Cahuc (2011) analyze the relationship 
between trust and institutions and find that, in general, countries whose citizens trust each 
other less tend to put in place more restrictive institutions. Aghion, Algan, Cahuc, and Shleifer 
(2010) explain this result by arguing that distrust increases the public demand for government 
intervention whereas regulation in itself discourages the formation of trust. Tabellini (2008) 
analyzes the role of culture on the per-capita-income of European regions by using institutional 
history and literacy rates as an instrument for contemporaneous trust. Finally, Barr and Serra 
(2010) find that social norms in the home country are related to immigrants’ tolerance for 
corruption.  
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
7


Our contribution to this extant literature is that we uncover a specific mechanism 
through which culture affects economic growth, namely through the gender bias and the 
differential access to credit. To make this contribution we borrow the recently introduced 
identification strategy from Algan and Cahuc (2010). They use the cultural attitudes of U.S.-born 
descendants of non-U.S. born ancestors to extract another predetermined component of 
culture, i.e., trust, in the ancestral countries and in this way made an important contribution to 
this literature. 
The second related strand of the literature analyzes the relation between well-defined 
characteristics of the credit market and various social outcomes. Garmaise and Moskowitz 
(2006) for example show that bank mergers result in substantially higher property crime rates, 
because lower access to finance depresses local economic growth and raises the relative 
benefit of illegal activity. Beck, Levine, and Levkov (2010) show that bank deregulation is 
associated with a tighter distribution of income, an outcome that is not due to better access to 
credit for poorer households, but to an increase in the relative demand for low-skilled workers 
by business firms. While we do not explore the link between the structure of the credit market 
and economic outcomes, our work is naturally related to these studies in that we study how 
gender bias is transmitted into entrepreneurship through the channel of access to bank credit. 
Our paper also relates to the literature on taste-based discrimination pioneered by 
Becker (1957). This literature has focused mainly on the labor market consequences of various 
physical attributes. For example, Hammermesh and Biddle (1994) and Mobius and Rosenblat 
(2006) find that physical beauty has a positive effect on earnings, while Cawley (2004) finds that 
obesity lowers the wages of white females. Persico, Postlewaite, and Silverman (2004) and Case 
and Paxson (2008) establish a robust effect of height on earnings, the latter through the 
channel of higher cognitive abilities. Johnston (2010) finds a substantial female wage premium 
from being blonde. 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
8


Various authors have also looked into the effect of discrimination – as well as of its 
interaction with various market developments – on the white-black wage gap (Neal and 
Johnson, 1996; Rodgers and Sprigs, 1996; Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2004; Carneiro, 
Heckman, and Masterov, 2005; Charles and Guryan, 2008; Levine and Rubinstein, 2011). And, in 
a recent contribution, Castilo, Petrie, Torero, and Vesterlund (2013) find that difference 
between males and females in prices and rejection rates in a highly competitive taxi market 
with experienced traders is due to statistical, not to taste-based discrimination.  
Conceptually most similar to our study is the research on the effect of discrimination on 
the male-female wage gap (Bayard, Hellerstein, Neumark, and Troske, 2003), and on female 
market participation (Goldin and Rouse, 2000). This research in general confirms the existence 
of a sizeable earnings gender gap. For example, controlling for education, experience, personal 
characteristics, city and region, occupation, industry, government employment, and part-time 
status, Altonji and Blank (1999) find that only about 27 percent of the gender wage gap is 
explained by differences in observable characteristics. We argue that the difference in income 
between females and males can be related to cultural beliefs, with access to credit being one 
channel through which the gender bias depresses the earnings of women in society. To our 
knowledge, ours is the first paper to test for a direct link between the predetermined cultural 
component of gender discrimination and a well-defined economic outcome. 
Most related to our paper is the empirical research on gender and credit market 
outcomes. Using US data on small businesses, Asiedu, Freeman, and Nti-Addae (2012) find that 
while race is a significant predictor of both access to credit and the cost of credit, gender is not. 
Belluci, Borisov, and Zazzaro (2010) find that female firm-owners in Italy face tighter credit 
constraints when dealing with one individual bank, even though they do not pay higher interest 
rates. Using the Italian Credit Registry, however, Alesina, Lotti, and Mistrulli (2013) find that 
after controlling for entrepreneurial risk, female borrowers do pay higher rates, especially when 
their guarantor is a female, too. Using a large cross-country sample, Muravyev, Schäfer, and 
Talavera (2012) find that female firm-owners are more likely to be denied bank credit and that 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
9


they tend to pay higher rates on bank loans, while for a number of Sub-Saharan countries 
Aterido, Beck, and Iacovone (2013) in contrast find no evidence of such gender discrimination. 
The first three papers use data from one country only and so unlike ours are unable to relate 
access to credit to the variation in cultural biases across countries. Relative to the latter two 
papers, we are not only able to link gender to credit outcomes in an international context, but 
also to investigate the effect of gender bias on that link. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the data. Section 3 
discusses our identification strategy. Our estimates of the effect of inherited cultural biases on 
credit market outcomes are presented in Section 4. Section 5 concludes. 
2.
Data 
In this section, we discuss the various data sources used in this paper. 
A.
General Social Survey 
Our measure of the inherited gender bias is constructed using data on U.S. born 
descendants of non-U.S. born forebears. The information itself is provided by the General Social 
Survey database (GSS). The database covers the period 1972-2010. The data contains a range of 
demographic characteristics, such as age, gender, religion, marital status, education, and 
employment status of the respondents. Importantly for our purposes, it provides information 
on the birthplace and the country of origin of the respondents’ forebears since 1977. The 
respective GSS variable “ETHNIC” is defined as the answer to the question: “From what 
countries or part of the world did your ancestors come?” The countries of origin cover almost 
all European countries, alongside Canada, Mexico, India, and Africa (an aggregate category). We 
use information on U.S. citizens whose ancestors came from abroad, regardless of when they 
arrived in the U.S. 
Our proxy for gender bias is derived from the variable “FEFAM” which is defined by the 
answer to following question: “It is much better for everyone involved if the man is the achiever 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
10


outside the home and the woman takes care of the home and family.” The answers are given on 
a scale from 1 to 4. From these answers, we construct a variable for inherited gender bias which 
we denote as “Traditional gender roles”. The variable is equal to 1 if the respondent answered 
“Strongly agree” or “Agree”, and equal to 0 if the respondent answered “Disagree” or “Strongly 
disagree”. There are a total of 20,992 responses in the GSS, of which 8,715 (41.5 percent) 
responded “Strongly agree” or “Agree”, and 12,277 (58.5 percent) responded “Disagree” or 
“Strongly disagree”.1 6,472 of those respondents come from 17 countries that overlap with the 
countries in our firm-level dataset which we describe next. 
B.
Firm-level data 
Our firm-level data come from the 2004/2005 wave of the Business Environment and 
Enterprise Performance Survey (BEEPS), administered jointly by the World Bank and the 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD).2 We exclude data from other 
waves of this survey as they do not provide comparable information on credit access. The 2004 
and 2005 BEEPS surveyed 9,655 firms from 27 countries in Eastern Europe and central Asia, and 
4,453 firms from 5 Western European countries, respectively. We narrow this sample down to 
17 countries for which we also have GSS data.3 In addition to that, we exclude all firms that are 
not sole proprietorships. This allows us to focus on small individually- or family-owned firms. In 
this way, we make sure that if one of the owners of the firm is female, she has actual influence 
1 Algan and Cahuc (2010) use an identical strategy to extract the predetermined component of trust from GSS 
answers on the question whether people in general can be trusted. 
2 For a detailed discussion of the data, see, e.g., Brown, Ongena, Popov, and zeƔin (2011), Popov and Udell (2012), 
and Ongena, Popov, and Udell (2013). 
3 Unfortunately, due to the geographic scope of the survey, we are missing information from many European 
countries, such as the Scandinavian ones, that were pioneers in women’s rights. We address this issue in a 
robustness test described in Section 4.B. 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
11


in the firm’s decisions. The number of firms that report all the information we require for this 
study ranges from 141 in Bosnia, Croatia, and Lithuania, to 763 in Poland.4 
B.1. 
Credit access 
To measure credit access by the firm we employ four different measures. We employ 
the self-reported Share working capital financed with bank credit and the Share working capital 
financed with trade credit as two direct measures of “past” access to credit. The survey 
questionnaire also includes three questions about firm financing which allow us to further 
describe firms’ current access to credit. Firms are first asked if they have a loan or not. Those 
firms without a loan are then asked in Q47a whether they (a) did not apply for a loan or (b) 
applied for a loan, but the application was turned down or (c) have a loan application pending.5 
Those firms that did not apply for a loan are then asked in Q47b to list the main reasons 
why they did not do so. To this question there are multiple possible answers: (a) The firm does 
not need a loan, (b) application procedures are too burdensome, (c) collateral requirements are 
too strict, (d) interest rates are too high, (e) informal payments are necessary, or (f) the firm did 
not think their application would be approved. From the above questions we establish our two 
indicators of current credit access. The variable Firm discouraged from applying for a loan is a 
dummy variable which equals 1 for those firms which did not apply for a loan, listing (b), (c), (d), 
(e), or (f) as a potential reason. For all firms which did apply for a loan, or did not apply because 
of reason (a), the variable equals 0. The variable Loan application rejected is a dummy variable 
4 The survey aimed to achieve representativeness in terms of the size of firms it surveyed: Roughly two thirds of 
the firms surveyed are “small”, i.e., they have less than 20 workers. By design the survey only covers established 
firms, i.e., firms which have been in business for at least three years. This implies that our sample does not allow us 
to examine credit access for very young or start-up firms. Moreover, our results are subject to sample selection, in 
the sense that we only observe firms which had sufficient internal or external funds to survive for at least three 
years.
5 Despite the care by the surveyors to solicit the correct answers, it is not entirely impossible that males 
underreport past loan rejection or application discouragement more than females. Yet it seems rather unlikely to 
us that the (mis-)reporting of the shares of working capital would be gender-specific. 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
12


which equals 1 for those firms which applied for a loan but their application was turned down, 
and equals 0 for those firms which applied for a loan and have a loan. Firms with pending 
applications (i.e., less than 1 percent) are treated as missing. 
< Table 1 > 
Table 1 presents summary statistics for our indicators of past and current credit access 
by country. The table shows that there are substantial cross-country differences in credit access 
across the countries in our sample. For instance, while only 4 percent of the average Russian 
firm’s working capital is financed with bank credit, in Ireland bank credit accounts for almost a 
quarter (24 percent). The fraction of firms that are discouraged from applying for a loan varies 
between 2 percent in Ireland and 53 percent in Macedonia. The cross-country variation in loan 
rejection rates is similarly substantial, with 1 percent of loan applications rejected in Bosnia 
versus 16 percent in the Czech Republic. In general, loan rejections rates appear low, suggesting 
that in our sample, restriction in access to finance happen mostly in the dimension of 
discouragement, and that firms apply for a loan only when they are reasonably certain that 
their application will not be rejected. 
The availability of data on discouraged firms is one of the main strengths of the BEEPS, 
allowing us to separate firms that did not apply for a loan because they do not need one from 
those that did not apply although they need one. The reasons for not applying for a loan vary 
widely across countries in Eastern Europe. The share of firms which do not apply because they 
do not need a loan varies from 47 percent in Yugoslavia to 81 percent in Slovenia. The share of 
firms that are discouraged by burdensome procedures varies from 2 percent in Slovakia to 16 
percent in Macedonia. Whereas only 1 percent of firms in Estonia feel discouraged because 
they anticipate rejection, this share is 10 percent in Lithuania. In addition to that, 
discouragement may signal an actual rejection if firms decide not to file an application after an 
informal conversation with the loan officer (see Duca and Rosenthal, 1993). 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
13


B.2. 
Loan terms 
Alongside variables describing various aspects of credit availability, we make use of a 
number of variables that describe the terms of granted bank loans. Firms with outstanding bank 
credit provide many details on their most recent loan. In particular, firms in BEEPS are asked 
about the loan rate, the maturity, the currency denomination, the collateral requirements, and 
the time it took to negotiate the last bank loan. 
< Table 2 > 
Table 2 provides the sample summary statistics by country for the most relevant loan 
characteristics. In the full sample it takes an average of almost 20 days to negotiate a loan, but 
only 8 days in Spain and more than a month in the Czech Republic and in Slovakia. The 
overwhelming majority of loans in all countries are collateralized, but there is great deal of 
variation, with the share of collateralized loans ranging from 56 percent in Greece and Slovenia 
to 95 percent in Bosnia and Macedonia. Collateral itself averages 149 percent of the loan. In 
euro area countries, at most 2 percent of the loans are in foreign currency compared to 45 
percent in Macedonia. Finally, the nominal average annualized rate of loans is 985 basis points, 
ranging from 474 basis points in Ireland to 1,794 basis points in Romania. 
B.3. 
Firm characteristics 
Recent empirical research by Brown, Jappelli, and Pagano (2009), Brown, Ongena, and 
YeƔin (2009), Brown, Ongena, YeƔin, and Popov (2011), Popov and Udell (2012), and Ongena, 
Popov, and Udell (2012) using the BEEPS data, and by Chakravarty and Xiang (2013) using the 
similar Investment Climate Survey data, has shown that firm size, ownership, activity, product 
market competition, accounting standards, bank use and internal financing, and obstacles to 
doing business affect credit access and credit terms. 
Following the above literature we relate our indicators of credit access to firm-level 
indicators of firm size (Small firm, Medium firm, and Large firm), privatization history (Originally 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
14


private), export activities (Exporter), the number of local product market competitors of the 
firm (Competition), access to government subsidies (Subsidized), and accounting standards 
(Audited). We further feature an indicator of the sector in which the firm operates (by SIC 1-
digit). Crucially, we incorporate information on the firm owner’s gender (Female). While we do 
not have data on tangible assets to proxy for the ability of the firm to pledge collateral, the 
variables capturing firm size and industry of operation alleviate this problem to a large degree. 
< Table 3 > 
The definitions of these firm-level variables are provided in the Appendix. Summary 
statistics for our firm-level variables are presented in Table 3. The table shows substantial cross-
country variation within our sample in terms of ownership by gender. For example, fewer than 
1 in 5 firms in Macedonia, Slovakia, and Spain have a female owner, while 1 in 2 in Portugal 
does. Apart from that, the average firm in our sample is small, originally private, has no access 
to foreign product markets, receives no subsidies from local or central governments, and does 
not have its financial statements certified by an external auditor. 
C.
Country-level data 
As in Pistor, Raiser, and Gelfer (2000), de Haas and Lelyveld (2006), Giannetti and 
Ongena (2008), and Brown, Jappelli, and Pagano (2009), we pay attention to how access to 
credit may be determined by market and institutional characteristics. In particular, we relate 
access to credit and loan terms to foreign ownership in the banking sector, to credit 
information sharing, and creditors’ rights, as well as to various macroeconomic and financial 
developments. 
< Table 4 > 
Table 4 presents summary statistics for our country-level variables. Unsurprisingly, 
foreign bank ownership is very low in countries with large domestic banks (like Germany and 
Spain) and very high in Eastern European countries which underwent bank privatizations in the 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
15


1990s. Western European countries which have large and developed financial sectors and are 
euro area members also have the highest private credit/GDP ratios, the highest degree of 
information sharing, the highest GDP per capita, and the lowest inflation. Conversely, Eastern 
European countries have on average higher GDP growth rates, although the highest growth 
rates in the sample are in Greece and Ireland. 
The central variable in our study is the country-specific gender bias. The variable is 
calculated using the answers by descendants of European immigrants in the US to the GSS 
question on the role of women in society (see Section 2.A). We describe the estimating 
procedure we employ to calculate this variable in the next section, but the general idea is that 
after controlling for a variety of demographic characteristics, we interpret the coefficient on the 
country-of-origin fixed effect as the inherited gender bias. In an OLS context, this gender bias is 
calculated relative to the rest of the countries in the GSS. As Table 4 makes clear, being a 
descendant of parents coming from the countries in former Yugoslavia results in a higher 
gender bias, and being a descendant of, for instance, Irish parents results in a lower gender 
bias, than being a descendant of parents coming from the reference group. 
3.
Identification strategy 
In this section, we discuss the construction of our measure of country-specific inherited 
gender bias, as well as the identification strategy. 
A.
Inherited gender bias 
The construction of the country-specific measure of gender bias is based on the GSS. To 
simplify things, we do not focus on one particular generation, but take the answers of all 
respondents in the survey, regardless of what generation immigrants they are. Thus, inherited 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
16


trust in 2005 corresponds to the trust inherited by U.S.-born children of European immigrants, 
born at any point after 1910.6 
< Table 5 > 
Table 5 reports the OLS estimates of the gender bias for the full sample.7 The gender 
bias of all other countries of origin is used as the reference group.8 The regression includes 
country-of-ancestry dummies, whose estimated coefficients are then used as the country-
specific proxies for the gender bias. In addition to those, the regression controls for a host of 
individual-specific characteristics: Age, age squared, education, gender, religion, employment 
status, and income. The total number of observations for which data is available on all relevant 
variables is 20,992. 
The results imply that the gender bias increases with age and decreases with education. 
Males have a higher gender bias than females. All religious groups have a higher gender bias 
than atheists (the reference groups), with the exception of Jewish respondents. Employed, 
unemployed, and retired persons have a lower gender bias relative to the control group (which 
is comprised of inactive persons). Finally, respondents with a higher income have a significantly 
lower gender bias. 
Turning to the countries in our sample, the lowest gender bias in our sample – all else 
equal - is exhibited by the descendant of immigrants from Ireland, who are 4.1 percentage 
points less likely to agree that “it is better if the man pursues a professional career and the 
6 Paulson and Osili (2008) show that the ancestral beliefs of U.S. immigrants decline over time, suggesting that 
gender bias may be more pronounced for U.S. citizens who immigrated to the U.S. more recently. We perform 
tests using the latest wave of immigrants only, and our results are robust to this alternative measurement of the 
inherited gender bias. 
7 The probit regression yields similar results. 
8 An identical ranking of countries in terms of gender bias is obtained when we run the test on the 17 countries in 
the BEEPS data only, using Polish-Americans as a reference group. 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
17


woman takes care of the house and family” than the descendants of the immigrants from the 
reference group. At the other extreme, descendants of the immigrants from Yugoslavia are 20.2 
percentage points more likely to agree with this claim than the reference country descendants. 
We match the coefficient on the Yugoslavia dummy to all five countries in the sample that by 
2005 former Yugoslavia had broken into (i.e., Bosnia, Croatia, Macedonia, Slovenia, and 
Yugoslavia, comprised of Serbia and Montenegro; we later report on the strengthening effect 
on our estimates of removing Yugoslavia from the sample). We also assign the estimate on the 
Czechoslovakia dummy to both the Czech Republic and to Slovakia. 
In general, we classify the bottom 50% of the countries as in terms of gender bias 
relative to the reference group as low-gender bias countries. These countries are the Czech 
Republic, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Lithuania, Portugal, Russia, and Slovakia. Because the 
country-specific gender bias includes a measurement error, being an OLS regression estimate 
itself, in future tests, we pool these countries into the group of “Low gender bias” countries. 
The rest of the countries we classify as the “High gender bias” countries. 
One caveat related to our approach is that even if we have a good proxy for inherited 
gender bias, the correlation between inherited values and contemporaneous economic 
outcomes can be interpreted as a causal relation only if the two variables are not codetermined 
by common factors. It is possible that changes in inherited trust and in credit access are driven 
by changes in institutions that disadvantage women. For example, if the legal system excludes 
women from the inheritance of property, female entrepreneurs will be less likely to have 
tangible collateral to pledge against bank credit, and this phenomenon may affect both gender 
bias and credit access. To address this issue, in robustness tests we calculate the gender bias 
from the earliest possible sub-sample of immigrants to the US. This does not change the 
ranking of countries in terms of gender bias, and hence the main results of the paper. 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
18


B.
Empirical strategy 
In order to tease out the causal effect of culture on credit market outcomes, we 
evaluate the effect of gender on credit market outcomes accounting for gender bias. For 
simplicity of illustration, yet without loss of generality, assume that countries can be divided 
into those with a high gender bias and those where society does not derive disutility from 
treating females as equal to males. We create a dummy variable equal to 1 if the US 
descendants of emigrants from the respective country have a higher gender bias than the US 
descendants of emigrants from the reference group, and to 0 if they have a lower gender bias. 
Then, we estimate the following equations: 
isc
sc
isc
isc
c
isc
isc
X
Female
Bias
Female
access
Credit
H
E
E
E
E

'




 
4
3
2
1
_
                (1) 
and 
isct
sct
sc
isc
isct
c
isc
isct
Y
X
Female
Bias
Female
term
Loan
H
E
E
E
E
E

'





 
5
4
3
2
1
_
      (2) 
In model (1), we evaluate the effect of the gender of the owner of firm i in sector s in 
country c on the probability of being rejected or discouraged in credit markets, as well as on the 
share of capital financed from bank versus non-bank sources, in high relative to low gender bias 
countries.9 The equation controls for firm (X) characteristics, and it includes interactions of 
sector and country fixed effects (
sc
' ). Including firm characteristics is crucial since female-
owned firms may also be smaller, and so the effect of gender on credit we measure may be 
contaminated by the effect of size. The fixed effects are also enormously important as they 
control for any market-sector unobservables that are common across all firms. For example, it 
is possible that there is disproportionate concentration of female entrepreneurs in industries 
9 In the case of our dummy variables for credit access, we employ a probit regression, but the results are robust to 
using a logit model. 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
19


which use more trade credit and less bank credit for technological reasons. While this “female-
run agriculture vs. male-run manufacturing” story may be more applicable to developing 
economies than to the countries in our sample, we wish to fully account for such possibilities, 
and the comprehensive matrix of country and sector fixed effects does exactly that. 
In model (2), we evaluate the effect of gender on the terms of granted loans (days to 
negotiate the loan, collateral, currency denomination, loan rate), in high relative to low gender 
bias countries. Although there is only one loan per firm, this regression has a panel component 
because loans were received at different points in time (between 1998 and 2005), which allows 
us to control for the time-varying component of the various country-level developments (Y). 
The regressions also include different combinations of country, industry, and time fixed effects. 
In the two equations, 
isc
H
 and 
isct
H
, respectively, are i.i.d. error terms composed of a 
person-specific idiosyncratic shock and any unobservable sector-country (sector-country-year) 
fixed effects. We cluster the standard errors by country to allow for arbitrary within-country 
correlations in the errors. 
In these specifications, 
2
E measures the causal impact of being female on access to 
credit or on the terms of granted loans, respectively, and
2
1
E
E 
 measures the effect of being 
female on credit market outcomes or on the terms of granted loans in countries with high 
gender bias. The direct effect of gender bias, which is common to everyone in the respective 
group of countries, is subsumed in the country fixed effects. The matrix of country and industry 
fixed effect interactions accounts for the possibility that a “female-run agriculture vs. male-run 
manufacturing”-type separation is more likely to take place in countries with a high gender 
bias. 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
20


4.
Results 
A.
Inherited cultural bias, gender, and credit market outcomes 
We now turn to the correlation between gender and credit market outcomes, in high vs. 
low gender bias countries. The idea of this section is to test the following hypotheses: a) Firm-
owners’ decision whether to apply for credit are affected by their gender and by the cultural 
environment, and b) bankers’ decisions to ration female-owned firms that are similar to male-
owned firms in terms of creditworthiness are driven by a gender bias. While Hertz (2011) and 
Muravyev, Schäfer, and Talavera (2012) provide evidence that banks discriminate against 
female corporate loan applicants, we want to test whether such an effect can be linked to 
gender bias in society. We also aim to test whether there is an informal mechanism whereby 
female firm-owners are more often discouraged from applying for formal credit in high gender 
bias countries. 
   A.1. Inherited cultural bias, gender, and credit access 
We first investigate the determinants of credit access. Table 6 reports the empirical 
estimates from Model (1). We start by zooming in on the sources of financing of working 
capital. We focus on bank credit and on trade credit. Prior work on the pecking order in 
corporate finance suggests that trade credit is the most expensive source of finance for the 
firm, and it is only used when no other source of external finance (such as bank credit) is 
accessible (e.g., Petersen and Rajan, 1994; Petersen and Rajan, 1997; Harhoff and Koerting, 
1998). We make two salient assumptions, i.e., that female firm-owners have the same 
preferences over the pecking order and that they face the same probability of success when 
applying for trade credit. Then, female owners having relatively lower access to cheaper bank 
credit and having to rely relatively more on more expensive trade credit, especially in high 
gender bias countries, would be one manifestation of taste-based discrimination. 
< Table 6 > 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
21


Column (1) investigates the determinants of bank credit finance and column (2) the 
determinants of trade credit finance. Consistent with the prior literature we find that, all else 
equal, small firms and sole proprietorships are more credit constrained, potentially indicating a 
lower ability to tap alternative capital markets; firms that export part of their production are 
less constrained in terms of both types of finance, potentially signalling the willingness of banks 
and customers/suppliers to lend to firms with higher growth prospects; and audited firms are 
less credit constrained, implying gains from the reduction of informational opacity in terms of 
credit market access. 
Turning to our primary variable of interest - the interaction term of “Traditional gender 
roles” with “Female owner” – we find that a stronger gender bias in the country moderately 
decreases the share of working capital that is financed with bank credit in firms with female 
owners (column (1)). This effect is not statistically significant. At the same time, female firm-
owners appear to finance a smaller portion of their capital expenditures using bank loans, with 
this effect being significant across the board. 
The estimate in column (2) implies that a strong gender bias sharply (and statistically 
significantly) increases the share financed with trade credit. Numerically, the estimated 
coefficient implies that if a firm with a female owner would move from Ireland to Spain, for 
example, trade credit financing would increase by 1.6 percentage points more than if the owner 
of the firms was a male. Given that the mean share of working capital financed with trade 
credit in the sample is only 6.4 percent, moving to a low-gender bias country would decrease 
reliance on informal credit by 25%. 
In the next two columns, we investigate the determinants of being completely shut out 
from the credit markets, either because the firm was discouraged from applying (column (3)) or 
because it applied but its application was rejected (column (4)). We confirm the sign of the firm 
covariates; namely, small firms are both rejected and discouraged more often, while exporters 
and audited firms are less often credit constrained. Importantly, we find further evidence for a 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
22


link between gender bias and credit access. Column (3) shows that female owners are more 
likely to be discouraged from applying for a loan in countries with high gender bias. 
Numerically, moving from Ireland to Spain increases discouragement by female owners by 6 
percentage points more than male owners. Once again, this result is economically significant: 
given that the mean probability of discouragement across all firms is 23 percent, a female 
entrepreneur in a low-gender bias country would be 26% less likely to be discouraged from 
applying for bank credit than in a high-gender bias country, ceteris paribus.10  
To get an idea of the aggregate effect, consider the following back-of-the-envelope 
calculation. In 2012, there were about 2.5 mln. SMEs in Spain.11 According to the BEEPS, 19% of 
these are female-owned, or 475,000. Out of these, 61% have enough internal funds to finance 
their investment needs. Of the 39% female-owned firms with a strictly positive need of bank 
credit, 20% are discouraged from applying for a loan, which amounts to 37,000 firms in the 
aggregate. Our estimates imply that if Spain had as low gender bias as Ireland, an additional 
2200 female-owned firms would be applying for bank credit each year. Of course, this is a 
conservative calculation which disregards the fact that with lower gender bias, there could be 
many more female-owned firms to begin with.  
Finally, the estimate of the coefficient on the interaction term in column (4) is not 
statistically significant (although economically relevant, too). This implies that the banking 
sector in high-gender bias countries does not discriminate against female firm-owners that 
actually apply for lines of credit. To take once again the example of Spain, our evidence 
suggests that if a female-owned SME with a positive need of bank credit were to apply for a line 
10 Female owners in strong gender bias countries may be discouraged from applying for a loan, not because they 
correctly anticipate rejection due to taste-based discrimination, but because they “internalize” the gender bias and 
feel less confident applying per se. As obtaining trade credit is also often a matter of requesting and negotiating it 
(yet we observe trade credit to increase) we do not think such a lack of confidence necessarily applies to the 
female owners in our sample. 
11 See the European Commission’s “Enterprise and industry SBA Factsheet 2012: Spain”. 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
23


of credit, it would face the same application approval rate (98%) as a male-owned SME. We 
conclude that in high-gender bias countries, female entrepreneurs appear to be more likely to 
opt out of the loan application process, even though banks do not discriminate against females 
that end up applying for credit. 
A.2. Inherited cultural bias, gender, and loan terms 
Next we assess if the inherited cultural bias has an impact on the loan terms firms with 
female owners obtain (versus firms owned by males). We extend the framework in Alesina, 
Lotti, and Mistrulli (2013) who reject the hypothesis that banks do not price discriminate 
against females. However, we go beyond previous studies that focused on loan rates, by also 
looking at the effect of the firm owner’s gender on the time it takes to negotiate the loan, on 
the loan’s collateral, and on its currency denomination. Crucially, we compare these effects 
across high and low gender bias countries. 
For a start, we find that some of the variables which matter for credit access (as in Table 
6) also have an impact on the terms of granted loans. In particular, small firms pay higher rates 
on bank loans (column (5)), but these loans are less likely to require collateral (column (2)) and 
take a shorter time to negotiate (column (1)). On the contrary, exporters are charged lower 
rates by their bank (column (5)) and are more likely to have a loan in foreign currency (column 
(4)), potentially in order to reduce exchange rate risk vis-à-vis their export destination. 
In terms of some of the time-varying country-level variables included in this regression, 
loan conditions are easier to negotiate banks in countries with better protection of creditors 
rights (column (1)), and banks charge on average higher rates in countries with higher 
restrictions on new business entry (column (5)). 
< Table 7 > 
Turning to the variables of interest, in sharp contrast to our earlier findings on credit 
access, the estimated coefficients on the interaction term of the “Traditional gender roles” and 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
24


“Female owner” is statistically insignificant in all but one case when a loan term is the 
dependent variable. For example, female-owned firms are no more likely to be charged higher 
rates on loans, both in high and in low gender bias countries (column (1)). This finding is 
somewhat at odds with Alesina, Lotti, and Mistrulli (2013) who detect price discrimination 
against female entrepreneurs in Italy. We also find that in high-gender bias countries, female- 
and male-owned firms do not differ in the time it takes to negotiate a loan (column (1)) or in 
collateralization conditions (columns (2) and (3)), either.12 
This collection of null results implies that in high-gender bias countries there is no 
difference in the terms on loans between male- and female-owned firms. Our data thus provide 
no evidence of discrimination by banks against female firm-owners in high-gender bias 
countries, both in the dimension of loan rejection rates and in the dimension of terms on 
granted loans. However, credit access by female-owned firms is statistically lower in high-
gender bias countries because female entrepreneurs are more likely to opt out of the formal 
credit granting process. Consequently, female-owned firms are more likely to resort to informal 
(and potentially more expensive) credit, such as trade credit. The evidence so far thus implies 
that if our results are indeed due to the operation of a cultural bias, this bias works through 
discouraging females from seeking credit access rather than through banks actively denying 
them such access. 
B.
Robustness 
There are potentially a number of non-trivial yet surmountable problems with our 
empirical analysis so far. To begin with, one of the identifying assumptions related to models (1) 
and (2) is that female- and male-owned firms seeking access to finance are similar in all 
12 Model (2) can alternatively be written as a two-stage model, whereby in the first stage firms select themselves 
into or out of the loan application process, and in the second stage are offered loan terms by the bank (see Popov 
and Udell, 2012, for an example of such empirical strategy). We have run such a version of the empirical model, 
and the main results are qualitatively unchanged (results available upon request).
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
25


respects except for the owner’s gender. This assumption is intrinsically questionable. For 
example, if female entrepreneurs are indeed discriminated against, they are likely to end up 
running smaller firms. This may bias our results even if we formally control for firm size, if the 
distribution of firm sizes would suffer from an insufficient overlap across the two groups. 
Second, our dummy for gender bias is constructed such that countries with gender bias close to 
0, according to the estimates in Table 5 (Greece, Germany, and Portugal), are split in two 
different groups. 
The third problem is related to sample size. In particular, our measure of gender bias is 
calculated across a limited number of countries; we have only 17 countries in the BEEPS 
dataset. Furthermore, only 12 countries of origin in the GSS dataset which we use to calculate 
the proxy for gender bias used in the empirical tests. Part of this exercise relies on assigning one 
measure of gender bias to both the Czech Republic and to Slovakia, and one measure of gender 
bias to five countries from former Yugoslavia (Bosnia, Croatia, Macedonia, Serbia and 
Montenegro, and Slovenia). Such extrapolation may not be fully appropriate if these countries 
exhibited large cultural differences. 
We begin by addressing the first problem, namely, that female-owned firms may be 
systematically different from male-owned ones. To control for that possibility, we borrow from 
the propensity score literature pioneered by Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983). We first run a 
logistic regression of the female dummy on the rest of the firm-level variables described in 
Table 3. We also include country and industry fixed effects in the regression. Panel A of Table 8 
clearly indicates that the two types of firms indeed differ across a number of dimensions. In 
particular, female-owned firms are statistically more likely than male-owned firms to be small 
and originally private rather than privatized, as well as to face a less competitive environment. 
< Table 8 > 
We use the set of statistically significant variables from this regression to calculate the 
propensity score. Next, we choose for each female-owned firm a male-owned one that is most 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
26


similar based on this set of observable characteristics, and re-run model (1) on the new, 
reduced sample derived from this propensity score matching procedure. In the resulting 
sample, female- and male-owned firms are comparable based on observable firm 
characteristics. Panel B of Table 8 indicates that our main results are not weakened by this 
alternative procedure. Female-owned firms are still more likely to be discouraged and to resort 
to informal sources of finance, such as trade credit, in high gender bias countries. They are also 
less likely to have their loan application rejected, and this time the result is marginally 
significant.  
We address the second problem in two different ways. First, we replace the dummy 
variable for gender bias that we have used so far with the continuous variable estimated in 
Table 5. While the latter is clearly subject to measurement error, its advantage is that it does 
not separate in different groups medium-bias countries that are very close to each other in 
terms of numerical estimates (e.g., Germany and Greece). The estimates of these regressions 
are reported in Table 9, Panel A, and they imply that our main results are robust to this 
alternative specification. In Panel B, we address the same problem by simply dropping the three 
medium-bias countries (Germany, Greece, and Portugal). The estimates continue to suggest 
that in high-gender bias countries, female firm owners are more likely to be discouraged from 
applying for bank credit and to resort to informal finance.13 Numerically, for example, the 
estimate reported in column (3) implies that females are statistically more likely to be 
discouraged from applying than men in countries where the continuous gender bias variable is 
higher than -0.02, a groups which includes 12 countries rather than the 8 countries in the 
treatment group in our tests so far.  
< Table 9 > 
13 In unreported regressions we exclude the 5 countries of former Yugoslavia that were given the same value for 
gender bias in the empirical procedure in Table 5; the magnitude of the effect of gender bias on discouragement 
increases by 50% and becomes significant at the 1% level.
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
27


While the procedure in Table 9 goes some way in addressing the concern that our 
results may be contaminated by credit market experience in medium-bias countries, it only 
exacerbates the third problem which is related to the small size of our sample of countries. To 
that end, we next resort to the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM) to extract alternative 
measures of male and female entrepreneurial tendencies. The GEM collects survey data from 
current and potential entrepreneurs in 67 countries, ranging from Western Europe to Sub-
Saharan Africa. While there are no questions related to access to finance, there are questions 
on entrepreneurial intentions summarized, by gender for each country. In particular, one of the 
questions in the survey asks non-entrepreneurs: “Do you intend to start a business in the next 
three years?” We hypothesize that if potential female entrepreneurs are less likely to start a 
business in the future – relative to male counterparts – in high gender bias countries, this could 
be interpreted as corroborative evidence to the one we have presented so far. 
There are 28 countries which are present both in the GEM as a country of residence, and 
in the GSS as a country of origin. We repeat on this larger sample our test aimed at extracting 
exogenous measures of inherited gender bias (See Section 3.A.).14 This allows us to extract 
measures of inherited gender bias for each of the 28 countries, as the coefficient on the 
country-of-origin dummy. Next, we calculate the variable Intention to start ĂďƵƐŝŶĞƐƐ͕ ѐ;DĂůĞ
– Female) as the difference in average entrepreneurial intentions for males and for females, for 
each country. This difference ranges from 0.02 in Sweden (where 12% of males intend to start a 
business in the next three years and 10% of females do) to 15% in Romania (where 35% of 
males intend to start a business in the next three years and 20% of females do). We then 
correlate this measure of relative entrepreneurial tendencies to our measure of inherited 
gender bias. 
14 We now include the following countries, in addition to the ones included in the initial test reported in Table 5: 
Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, and 
the UK. The Czech Republic and Lithuania are not included in the GEM. 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
28


< Table 10 > 
In Table 10, we report the estimates from this test. Column (1) suggests that gender bias 
alone explains about 21% of the variation in entrepreneurial intentions between males and 
females. The correlation itself is statistically significant at the 1% level. In column (2), we add 
the rest of the country-level variables employed in Table 7. The male-female gap in 
entrepreneurial tendencies widens with GDP growth and with good institutions for protection 
of creditors and for enforcement of contracts, and it is larger in countries with fewer entry 
barriers. Crucially, the male-female gap is still positively and statistically significantly (at the 5% 
level) correlated with our measure of gender bias derived from the GSS. Encouragingly, the 
limited set of country-level variables included in the regression has a very high explanatory 
power (R-squared of 0.68), suggesting that the correlation between gender bias and the male-
female gap in entrepreneurial tendencies is unlikely to be driven by an omitted factor. 
C.
Interpretation of the results 
Our results so far indicate that credit access is far more problematic for female than for 
male firm-owners in countries where the gender bias is strong. This is especially true in the case 
of discouragement from applying for bank credit. Loan rejection rates and loan terms, on the 
other hand, are not different between female- and male-owned firms. 
Do these findings imply that there is taste-based discrimination against female 
entrepreneurs in countries with high gender bias? This question crucially depends on the 
nature of discouragement and on differences in ability across genders in those countries. 
Focusing on the first question, out of the five possible reasons for discouragement, only one 
deals with beliefs about access (“the firm did not think their application would be approved”), 
while two deal with beliefs about credit terms that would be offered if the firm were to apply 
for a bank loan (“collateral requirements are too strict” and “interest rates are too high”). It is 
possible that in high-gender bias countries, female entrepreneurs are less wealthy, in which 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
29


 
case their being discouraged by adverse credit terms would be a rational response to their 
inability to pledge collateral rather than a sign of discrimination. 
< Table 11 > 
To address this issue, we split the reasons for discouragement in the four categories for 
which there are sufficient number of answers (this procedure leads to the exclusion of 
discouragement due to the fact that “it is necessary to make informal payments to the bank”), 
and re-estimate Model (3). The estimates in Table 11 indicate that the discouragement of 
female entrepreneurs is driven by the belief that their application would not be approved 
rather than by their perception of adverse credit terms. This finding strongly points in the 
direction of a belief-based “abstention” from partaking in the process to obtain credit. To the 
extent that this result may reflect a mechanism related to the fear of social stigma, it is 
reminiscent of microfinance studies which have found a tendency of female heads of 
households to underreport debt relative to males (e.g., Karlan and Zinman, 2010). 
Turning to the question of differences in ability across genders, if male and female 
entrepreneurs are indeed of equal ability, then our results point to taste-based discrimination 
before the loan application stage where females are mostly discouraged from applying, and 
resort to informal finance, such as trade credit. At the loan application stage itself, the financial 
system does not seem to be discriminating, resulting in similar terms on granted loans.15 
Alternatively, men and women could differ in other salient ways. For example, women 
tend to be more risk-averse (Powel and Ansic, 1997; Jianakoplos and Bernasek, 1998). More 
recent experimental evidence has suggested that gender-specific risk behaviour may be due to 
15 Once access to credit through a non-discriminatory loan officer is possible, potentially because the loan officer 
herself is a female (Beck, Behr, and Madestam, 2012), similar loan terms suggest that female-owned firms are 
deemed to be similar to male-owned firms. However, we do not have information on the loan officer to investigate 
this possibility further. 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
30


differences in opportunity sets rather than risk attitudes (Schubert, Brown, Gysler, and 
Brachniger, 1999), implying that women may be particularly more risk-averse in high-gender 
bias countries. In addition, women tend to dislike competition (Niederle and Vesterlund, 2007). 
These considerations might explain our result that female entrepreneurs are more likely to be 
discouraged from applying for a loan, especially in high-gender bias countries. In addition, they 
also imply that in countries with a high gender bias, where women are discriminated against, 
only the most capable and competitive females start a business and therefore can survive to 
the loan application stage. In this case, the average female entrepreneur would be more skilled 
than the average male entrepreneur. If so, then equal loan conditions would also point to taste-
based discrimination, this time at the loan approval stage. 
However, female entrepreneurs could differ from male entrepreneurs in ways which 
would explain our results absent taste-based discrimination. For example, if women are 
discriminated against, their inputs (such as education and training) might be of lower quality 
than those of men. Klumpp and Su (2013) argue that the belief that the human capital 
distribution exhibits less variation across females can be self-fulfilling, resulting in fewer “star” 
females and leading to a “glass ceiling” effect. Female firm owners might therefore face lower 
access to credit not because of direct discrimination at that stage, but because of differential 
skill accumulation leading to lower expected growth or higher expected risk. Consistent with 
this idea, Cavaluzzo and Cavaluzzo (1998) and Blanchflower, Levine, and Zimmerman (2003) do 
not find significant evidence of gender based discrimination in the US credit market once 
proxies for firm risk are taken into account. The firm-level variables and interactions of sector 
and country dummies we have included in our tests so far only imperfectly control for firm 
growth or risk. 
To investigate this point more formally, we now analyse the difference in firm growth 
across the dimensions of gender, gender bias, and access to credit. In Table 12, we run a 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
31


version of our main tests where the independent variable is realised firm sales growth in the 
past three years.16 
< Table 12 > 
Column (1) suggests that conditioning on firm-level observables and on country and 
industry fixed effects, there are no differences between male-owned and female owned in 
terms of sales growth. If anything, female-owned firms tend to grow faster, but the difference 
is not significant in the statistical sense. In addition, the evidence in Column (2) implies that 
female-owned and male-owned firms exhibit similar growth rates in high-gender bias countries 
as well. This goes somewhat against the idea of statistical discrimination in high-gender bias 
countries whereby access to finance reflects the inferior skills of female entrepreneurs due to 
gender discrimination which starts early on in their lives. 
However, it could still be that only the most capable females become entrepreneurs, so 
their firms should grow faster, but because they are constrained, their firms grow as fast as 
male-owned ones. To that end, in the next two columns we perform even stricter tests where 
we construct a dummy variable equal to 1 if the firm is female-owned and it does not have a 
bank loan because it was rejected or was discouraged from applying, and to 0 if the firm is 
male-owned and its loan application was approved. Essentially, we are comparing the 
performance of otherwise identical firms which vary both in the dimension of gender and credit 
experience. The evidence suggests that we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the two types 
of firms grow at different rates, not even in high-gender bias countries (Column (4)). The fact 
that constrained female-owned firms grow as fast as unconstrained male-owned firms suggests 
that there is no evidence to females having inferior skills to males in high-gender bias countries. 
16 Our results are qualitatively unchanged when we repeat the tests for the logarithm of sales growth, in order to 
account for outliers. 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
32


Therefore, it is reasonable to conclude that the evidence in Tables 6-11 is suggestive of credit 
barriers to female entrepreneurs in countries with a high gender bias. 
Of course, we have no way of fully eliminating alternative mechanisms related to 
unobservable differences between male and female entrepreneurs. One such mechanism can 
be related to spatial mismatch. For example, Rosenthal and Strange (2012) show that female 
entrepreneurs can be less networked than male counterparts, and they may face greater 
domestic burdens, leading them to choose locations that are farther from agglomeration and 
are associated with shorter commuting distances. With such mechanism in place in gender bias 
countries where domestic burdens may be particularly high, female entrepreneurs may be less 
experienced in dealing with banks, and as a result be more reluctant to apply for credit. While 
we cannot entirely rule out this possibility, we think that this mechanism may not be as strong 
in most countries in our sample as these have fairly low birth rates, a recent communist past of 
gender equality when it comes to labor participation, and wide availability of child crèches. 
5.
Conclusion 
We analyse differential credit access and terms across 17 countries for female- versus 
male-owned firms using responses from 5,905 small family firms in the 2004/2005 wave of the 
Business Environment and Enterprise Performance Survey (BEEPS). We find that in high-gender 
bias countries, firms owned by females have lower access to bank credit than otherwise similar 
firms owned by males. This phenomenon is fully explained by the fact that in high-gender bias 
countries, female entrepreneurs are more likely to opt out of the formal credit granting 
process, largely because they believe their loan application will be denied. In contrast, there are 
no statistical differences between female- and male-owned firms in loan rejection rates or in 
the terms on granted loans, such as rates or collateral required by the bank. We also find that 
female-owned firms do not underperform male-owned firms in terms of sales growth, even 
when not obtaining credit or when based in high gender-bias countries, alleviating concerns 
that our results are driven by statistical discrimination. 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
33


Our findings suggest taste-based gender discrimination that limits credit access of firms 
owned by females through the mechanism of self-selection out of the credit granting process. 
Once the credit application is made, similar approval rates and loan terms suggest female-
owned firms are assessed to be identical to male-owned firms, and this assessment is correct 
because their credit worthiness also turns out to be statistically similar. The evidence thus 
suggests that there is no taste-based discrimination at the level of the bank, i.e., it is not the 
case that loan officers select only the best female-owned firms while lending also to mediocre 
male-owned firms. 
The contribution of our paper therefore consists in linking the severity of the inherited 
cultural gender bias as it exists across countries to one specific economic outcome (credit 
access). Our results are consistent with taste-based gender discrimination whereby female 
entrepreneurs tend to shy away from the formal credit granting process in countries where 
cultural attitudes favour males, even though credit markets are not actively discriminating 
against them. One potentially effective policy aimed at addressing this issue is to stimulate 
banks to recruit and train female loan officers that may be viewed as less subject to a gender 
bias (Beck, Behr, and Guettler, 2013), which in turn could encourage female entrepreneurs to 
apply for loans or lines of credit.  
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
34


Bibliography 
Aghion, P., Algan, Y., and P. Cahuc, 2011. Civil society and the state: The interplay 
between cooperation and minimum wage regulation. Journal of the European Economic 
Association 9, 3-42. 
Aghion, P., Algan, Y., Cahuc, P., and A. Shleifer, 2010. Regulation and distrust. Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 125, 1015-1049. 
Alesina, A., Lotti, F., and P. Mistrulli, 2013. Do women pay more for credit? Evidence 
from Italy. Journal of the European Economic Association 11, 45-66. 
Algan, Y., and P. Cahuc, 2009. Civic virtue and labor market institutions. American 
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1, 111-145. 
Algan, Y., and P. Cahuc, 2010. Inherited trust and growth. American Economic Review 
100, 2060-2092. 
Altonji, J., and R. Blank, 1999. Race and Gender in the Labor Market. In Ashenfelter, O. C. 
and D. Card (eds.), Handbook of Labour Economics, Elsevier Science Publishers 3, Chapter 48, 
3143-3259. 
Asiedu, Elizabeth, Freeman, J., and A. Nti-Addae, 2012. Access to credit by small 
businesses: How relevant are race, ethnicity, and gender? American Economic Review 102, 532-
537.  
Aterido, R., Beck, T., and L. Iacovone. 2013. Access to finance in Sub-Saharan Africa: Is 
there a gender gap? World Development 47, 102-120. 
Barr, A., and D. Serra, 2010. Corruption and culture: An experimental analysis. Journal of 
Public Economics 94, 862-869. 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
35


Bayard, K., Hellerstein, J., Neumark, D., and K. Troske, 2003. New evidence on sex 
segregation and sex differences in wages from matched employee-employer data. Journal of 
Labor Economics 21, 887–922. 
Beck, T., Levine, R., and A. Levkov, 2010. Big bad banks? The winners and losers from 
bank deregulation in the United States. Journal of Finance 65, 1637-1667. 
Beck, T., Behr, P. and A. Madestam, 2012. Sex and credit: Is there a gender bias in 
lending? European Banking Center Discussion Paper 17. 
Beck, T., Behr, P., and A. Guettler, 2013. Gender and banking: Are women better loan 
officers? Review of Finance 17, 1279-1321. 
Becker, G., 1957. The Economics of Discrimination. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago 
Press. 
Bellucci, A., Borisov, A., and A. Zazzaro, 2010. Does gender matter in bank-firm 
relationships? Evidence from small business lending. Journal of Banking & Finance 34, 2968-
2984. 
Bertrand, M., and S. Mullainathan, 2004. Are Emily and Greg more employable than 
Lakisha and Jamal? A field experiment on labor market discrimination. American Economic 
Review 94, 991-1013. 
Blanchflower, D., Levine, P., and D. Zimmerman, 2003. Discrimination in the small 
business credit market. Review of Economics and Statistics 85, 930-943. 
Brown, M., Jappelli, T., and M. Pagano, 2009. Information sharing and credit: Firm-level 
evidence from transition countries. Journal of Financial Intermediation 18, 151-172.  
Brown, M., S. Ongena, A. Popov, and P. YeƔin, 2011. Who needs credit and who gets 
credit in Eastern Europe? Economic Policy 65, 93-130. 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
36


Carneiro, P., Heckman, J., and D. Masterov, 2005. Labor market discrimination and racial 
differences in pre-market factors. Journal of Law and Economics 48, 1-39. 
Case, A., and C. Paxson, 2008. Stature and status: Height, ability, and labor market 
outcomes. Journal of Political Economy 116, 499-532. 
Castilo, M., Petrie, R., Torero, M, and L. Vesterlund, 2013. Gender difference in 
bargaining outcomes: A field experiment on discrimination. Journal of Public Economics 99, 35-
48. 
Cavalluzzo, K., and L. Cavalluzzo, 1998. Market structure and discrimination: The case of 
small businesses. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 30, 771-792. 
Cavalluzzo, K., Cavalluzzo, L., and J. Wolken, 2002. Competition, small business 
financing, and discrimination: Evidence from a new survey. Journal of Business 75, 641-680. 
Cawley, J., 2004. The impact of obesity on wages. Journal of Human Resources 39, 451-
474. 
Chakravarti, S., and M. Xiang, 2013. The international evidence on discouraged small 
businesses. Journal of Empirical Finance 20, 63-82. 
Charles, K., and J. Guryan, 2008. Prejudice and the economics of discrimination. Journal 
of Political Economy 116, 773-809. 
De Haas, R., and I. van Lelyveld, 2006. Foreign banks and credit stability in Central and 
Eastern Europe: A panel data analysis. Journal of Banking & Finance 30, 1927-1952. 
Duca J., and S. Rosenthal, 1993. Borrowing constraints, household debt, and racial 
discrimination in loan markets. Journal of Financial Intermediation 3, 77-103. 
Garmaise, M., and T. Moskowitz, 2006. Bank mergers and crime: The real and social 
effects of credit market competition. Journal of Finance 61, 495-538. 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
37


Giannetti, M., and S. Ongena, 2009. Financial integration and firm performance: 
Evidence from foreign bank entry in emerging markets. Review of Finance 13, 181-223.  
Goldin, C., and C. Rouse, 2000. Orchestrating impartiality: The impact of “Blind” 
auditions on female musicians. American Economic Review 90, 715–741. 
Guiso, L., Sapienza, P. and L. Zingales, 2004. The role of social capital in financial 
development. American Economic Review 94, 526-556. 
Guiso, L., Sapienza, P. and L. Zingales, 2006. Does culture affect economic outcomes? 
Journal of Economic Perspectives 20, 23-48. 
Guiso, L., Sapienza, P. and L. Zingales, 2009. Cultural biases in economic exchange. 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 124, 1095-1031. 
Hamermesh, D., and J. Biddle, 1994. Beauty and the labor market. American Economic 
Review 84, 1174-1194. 
Harhoff, D., and T. Koerting, 1998. Lending relationships in Germany – empirical 
evidence from survey data. Journal of Banking & Finance 22, 1317-1353. 
Hertz, N., 2011. Women and banks: Are female customers facing discrimination? 
Institute for Public Policy Research, London. 
Jianakoplos, N., and A. Bernasek, 1998. Are women more risk averse? Economic Inquiry 
36, 620–630. 
Johnston, D., 2010. Physical appearance and wages: Do blondes have more fun? 
Economics Letters 108, 10-12. 
Karlan, D., and J. Zinman, 2010. Expanding credit access: Using randomized supply 
decisions to estimate the impacts. Review of Financial Studies 23, 433-464. 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
38


 
Klumpp, T., and X. Su, 2013. Second-order statistical discrimination. Journal of Public 
Economics 97, 108-116. 
Knack, S., and P. Keefer, 1997. Does social capital have an economic payoff? A cross-
country investigation. Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 1251-1288. 
Levine, R., and Y. Rubinstein, 2011. Racial discrimination and competition. CEP 
Discussion Paper 1069.  
Mobius, M., and T. Rosenblat, 2006. Why beauty matters. American Economic Review 
96, 222-235. 
Mulligan, C., and Y. Rubinstein, 2008. Selection, investment, and women’s relative 
wages over time. Quarterly Journal of Economics 123, 1061-1110. 
Muravyev, A., Schäfer, D., and O. Talavera, 2012. Entrepreneurs' gender and financial 
constraints: Evidence from international data. Journal of Comparative Economics 37, 270-286. 
Neal, D., and W. Johnson. 1996. The role of premarket factors in black-white wage 
differences. Journal of Political Economy 104, 869-895. 
Niederle, M., and L. Vesterlund, 2007. Do women shy away from competition? Do men 
compete too much? Quarterly Journal of Economics 122, 1067-1101. 
Ongena, S., Popov, A., and G. Udell, 2013. ‘When the cat’s away the mice will play:’ Does 
regulation at home affect bank risk taking abroad? Journal of Financial Economics 108, 727-750. 
Paulson, A., and U. Osili, 2008. What can we learn about financial access from U.S. 
immigrants? The role of country of origin institutions and immigrant beliefs. World Bank 
Economic Review 22, 431-455. 
Persico, N., Postlewaite, A., and D. Silverman, 2004. The effect of adolescent experience 
on labor market outcomes: The case of height. Journal of Political Economy 112, 1019-1053. 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
39


Petersen, M., and R. Rajan, 1994. The benefits of lending relationships: Evidence from 
small business data. Journal of Finance 49, 3-37. 
Petersen, M., and R. Rajan, 1997. Trade credit: Theories and evidence. Review of 
Financial Studies 10, 661-691. 
Pistor, K., Raiser, G., and S. Gelfer, 2000. Law and finance in transition countries. 
Economics of Transition 8, 325-368. 
Popov, A., and G. Udell, 2012. Cross-border banking, credit access, and the financial 
crisis. Journal of International Economics 87, 147-161. 
Powell, M., and D. Ansic, 1997. Gender differences in risk behaviour in financial decision-
making: an experimental analysis. Journal of Economic Psychology 18, 605-628. 
Putnam, R., 2000. Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American Community. 
New York: Simon and Schuster. 
Putnam, R., Leonardi, R., and R. Nanetti, 1993. Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions 
in Modern Italy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Rodgers, W., and W. Spriggs, 1996. The effect of federal contractor status on racial 
differences in establishment-level employment shares: 1979-1992. American Economic Review 
86, 290-293. 
Rosenbaum, P., and D. Rubin, 1983. The central role of the propensity score in 
observational studies for causal effects. Biometrika 70, 41-55. 
Rosenthal, S., and W. Strange 2012. Female entrepreneurship, agglomeration, and a 
new spatial mismatch. Review of Economics and Statistics 94, 764-788. 
Schubert, R., Brown, M., Gysler, M., and H. Brachniger, 1999. Financial decision making: 
Are women really more risk-averse? American Economic Review 89, 381-385. 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
40


Tabellini, G., 2008. Institutions and culture. Journal of the European Economic 
Association 6, 255-294. 
White, H., 1980. A heteroskedasticity-consistent covariance matrix estimator and a 
direct test for heteroskedasticity. Econometrica 48, 817-838. 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
41


Table 1. Credit access, by country 
 
 
 
Country 
 
 
# firms 
Share working 
capital financed 
with bank credit 
Share working 
capital financed 
with trade credit 
Firm discouraged 
from applying  
for a loan 
Loan 
application 
rejected 
Bosnia 
141 
0.18 
0.04 
0.17 
0.01 
Croatia 
141 
0.15 
0.06 
0.10 
0.02 
Czech Republic 
253 
0.07 
0.06 
0.36 
0.16 
Germany 
778 
0.13 
0.11 
0.10 
0.08 
Greece 
498 
0.10 
0.12 
0.11 
0.01 
Hungary 
462 
0.12 
0.05 
0.25 
0.03 
Ireland 
395 
0.24 
0.09 
0.02 
0.02 
Lithuania 
141 
0.10 
0.13 
0.24 
0.05 
Macedonia 
153 
0.04 
0.06 
0.53 
0.04 
Poland 
763 
0.06 
0.04 
0.42 
0.09 
Portugal 
370 
0.08 
0.04 
0.31 
0.03 
Romania 
393 
0.12 
0.06 
0.25 
0.12 
Russia 
434 
0.04 
0.07 
0.42 
0.08 
Slovakia 
142 
0.06 
0.02 
0.15 
0.03 
Slovenia 
132 
0.15 
0.03 
0.08 
0.01 
Spain 
501 
0.12 
0.00 
0.14 
0.02 
Yugoslavia 
208 
0.08 
0.05 
0.39 
0.03 
Total 
5,905 
0.11 
0.06 
0.23 
0.05 
Note: This table presents statistics on firm credit access, by country. Share working capital financed with bank 
credit is the proportion of the firm’s working capital that has been financed by borrowing from private 
commercial banks in the past 12 months. Share working capital financed with trade credit is the proportion of 
the firm’s working capital that has been financed with trade credit from suppliers or customers in the past 12 
months. Firm discouraged from applying for a loan is a dummy equal to 1 if the firm did not apply for a bank 
loan because it thought it felt discouraged by credit market conditions, and equal to 0 otherwise (all dummies 
will have these two values; so the “equal to 0 otherwise” will no longer be included below). Loan application 
rejected is a dummy equal to 1 if the firm applied for credit and had its loan application rejected. See Appendix 
for variable definitions and data sources. 
 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
42


Table 2. Loan-level variables 
 
 
Country 
Days to 
negotiate loan 
Loan not 
collateralized 
Collateral as 
% of loan 
Loan in foreign 
currency  
Annualized 
loan rate 
Bosnia 
18.48 
0.05 
203.48 
0.01 
10.30 
Croatia 
27.02 
0.25 
160.36 
0.29 
8.13 
Czech Republic 
32.91 
0.18 
122.20 
0.03 
10.04 
Germany 
18.72 
0.06 
123.69 
0.02 
7.74 
Greece 
17.42 
0.44 
132.72 
0.04 
7.35 
Hungary 
22.53 
0.06 
168.04 
0.21 
13.22 
Ireland 
16.12 
0.37 
158.22 
0.02 
4.74 
Lithuania 
27.30 
0.19 
135.15 
0.33 
5.93 
Macedonia 
22.00 
0.05 
198.05 
0.45 
11.37 
Poland 
22.77 
0.20 
153.18 
0.12 
13.06 
Portugal 
10.99 
0.41 
120.12 
0.00 
7.02 
Romania 
21.21 
0.06 
153.12 
0.38 
17.94 
Russia 
19.80 
0.11 
148.91 
0.13 
18.07 
Slovakia 
35.67 
0.23 
144.31 
0.02 
8.07 
Slovenia 
14.22 
0.44 
157.24 
0.22 
6.48 
Spain 
8.22 
0.28 
134.79 
0.01 
6.51 
Yugoslavia 
22.40 
0.07 
193.36 
0.17 
13.66 
Total 
19.52 
0.20 
148.85 
0.11 
9.85 
Note: This table presents statistics on firm financing, by country. Days to negotiate loan is the number of days it 
took to negotiate the loan with the bank from the day of application. Loan not collateralized is a dummy equal 
to 1 if the financing of the loan did not require collateral. Collateral as % of loan is the value of the collateral 
required as a percentage of the loan value. Loan in foreign currency is a dummy equal to 1 if the loan is 
denominated in foreign currency. Annualized loan rate is the loan’s annual rate of interest. See Appendix for 
variable definitions and data sources. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
43


Table 3. Firm-level explanatory variables 
 
Country 
Female owner 
Small firm 
Large firm 
Originally private 
Exporter 
Competition 
Subsidized 
Audited 
Bosnia 
0.26 
0.67 
0.04 
0.83 
0.32 
0.62 
0.01 
0.45 
Croatia 
0.20 
0.82 
0.06 
0.80 
0.30 
0.51 
0.15 
0.35 
Czech Republic 
0.22 
0.87 
0.03 
0.92 
0.22 
0.45 
0.06 
0.27 
Germany 
0.20 
0.85 
0.06 
0.99 
0.13 
0.00 
0.13 
0.47 
Greece 
0.25 
0.83 
0.06 
0.99 
0.17 
0.00 
0.09 
0.46 
Hungary 
0.40 
0.81 
0.02 
0.88 
0.31 
0.65 
0.15 
0.70 
Ireland 
0.41 
0.86 
0.03 
0.99 
0.29 
0.58 
0.08 
0.94 
Lithuania 
0.26 
0.74 
0.04 
0.79 
0.32 
0.64 
0.06 
0.36 
Macedonia 
0.18 
0.82 
0.06 
0.84 
0.27 
0.65 
0.02 
0.24 
Poland 
0.34 
0.87 
0.02 
0.95 
0.21 
0.65 
0.08 
0.30 
Portugal 
0.50 
0.91 
0.04 
0.99 
0.10 
0.00 
0.04 
0.74 
Romania 
0.28 
0.72 
0.04 
0.85 
0.20 
0.41 
0.05 
0.35 
Russia 
0.28 
0.75 
0.07 
0.86 
0.13 
0.22 
0.01 
0.35 
Slovakia 
0.18 
0.80 
0.03 
0.93 
0.27 
0.82 
0.06 
0.43 
Slovenia 
0.35 
0.92 
0.02 
0.86 
0.42 
0.68 
0.10 
0.20 
Spain 
0.19 
0.88 
0.06 
0.97 
0.14 
0.00 
0.03 
0.27 
Yugoslavia 
0.25 
0.82 
0.06 
0.89 
0.25 
0.56 
0.05 
0.24 
Total 
0.29 
0.83 
0.04 
0.93 
0.21 
0.35 
0.08 
0.44 
Note: This table presents firm-level statistics, by country. All firms in the final sample are individually- or family-owned. Female owner is a dummy equal to 1 if 
the principal owner (or one of the principal owners) is a female. Small firm is a dummy equal to 1 if the firm has less than 20 employees. Large firm is a dummy 
equal to 1 if the firm has more than 100 employees. Originally private is a dummy equal to 1 if the firm was founded as a private company rather than through 
privatization of a previously state-owned one. Exporter is a dummy equal to 1 if the firm has access to foreign markets. Competition is a dummy equal to 1 if 
the firm faces “fairly”, “very”, or “extremely” strong competition. Subsidized is a dummy equal to 1 if the firm has received subsidies during the last 3 years 
from the central or local government. Audited is a dummy equal to 1 if the firm employs external auditing services. Omitted category for firm size is Medium 
firm. See Appendix for variable definitions and data sources. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
44


Table 4. Country-level explanatory variables 
 
 
Traditional 
gender roles 
Private credit 
to GDP 
Bank 
concentration 
Information 
sharing 
Log GDP per 
capita 
GDP growth 
Creditors’ 
rights 
Contract 
enforcement 
 
Inflation 
 
Entry time 
Bosnia 
0.202 
16.38 
0.53 
0.74 
8.46 
1.17 
3.29 
6.83 
2.82 
63 
Croatia 
0.202 
50.73 
0.63 
0.00 
9.36 
3.06 
4.18 
5.61 
3.77 
22 
Czech Republic 
-0.028 
32.00 
0.60 
1.92 
9.85 
1.78 
7.00 
6.63 
2.59 
17 
Germany 
-0.008 
115.44 
0.68 
6.00 
10.28 
0.62 
8.00 
4.03 
1.50 
18 
Greece 
0.018 
59.16 
0.93 
4.00 
10.06 
4.58 
3.00 
8.19 
3.23 
38 
Hungary 
0.111 
40.34 
0.65 
4.04 
9.65 
1.98 
7.00 
3.35 
5.23 
16 
Ireland 
-0.041 
125.52 
0.56 
5.00 
10.51 
4.40 
8.00 
5.15 
2.90 
13 
Lithuania 
-0.027 
22.48 
0.78 
3.00 
9.36 
3.28 
5.00 
2.10 
1.91 
26 
Macedonia 
0.202 
19.39 
0.79 
2.05 
8.76 
0.93 
7.00 
5.21 
1.51 
15 
Poland 
0.029 
26.92 
0.59 
2.76 
9.44 
1.80 
8.00 
9.98 
3.24 
31 
Portugal 
-0.001 
137.24 
0.88 
4.00 
9.88 
-0.39 
3.00 
5.77 
3.03 
7 
Romania 
0.109 
13.04 
0.64 
3.88 
8.96 
3.02 
7.00 
5.37 
17.36 
9 
Russia 
-0.036 
19.86 
0.22 
0.00 
9.34 
3.38 
3.00 
2.81 
19.26 
29 
Slovakia 
-0.028 
33.35 
0.83 
2.81 
9.61 
1.85 
9.00 
6.02 
4.91 
27 
Slovenia 
0.202 
43.97 
0.67 
2.90 
9.98 
1.93 
5.00 
14.25 
3.99 
60 
Spain 
0.088 
108.62 
0.87 
5.00 
10.22 
3.12 
6.00 
5.15 
3.10 
47 
Yugoslavia 
0.202 
19.37 
------ 
0.00 
8.64 
2.15 
7.00 
9.40 
14.43 
23 
Total 
0.046 
61.85 
0.67 
3.43 
9.71 
2.28 
6.16 
6.04 
5.59 
25 
Note: The table summarizes various country-level characteristics used in the empirical analysis. Traditional gender roles is the estimate of the inherited views on 
the role of women in society by U.S. descendants of European immigrants (see Table 5 for details). Foreign bank share denotes the assets held by all foreign 
banks as a share of the assets of all commercial banks. Private credit to GDP denotes the ratio of private credit by deposit money banks and other financial 
institutions to GDP. Bank concentration denotes the assets held by the three largest banks as a share of the assets of all commercial banks. Information sharing 
denotes the maximum of an index for private credit bureaus and an index for public credit registers. Log GDP per capita denotes the natural logarithm of per 
capita GDP. GDP growth denotes annual growth in gross domestic product per capita, average over the past three years. Creditors’ rights denotes the degree of 
protection of creditors’ rights. Contract enforcement denotes the number of days it takes to enforce a legal contract. Inflation denotes annual inflation, 
averaged over the past three years. Entry time denotes the time in days necessary to register a new business. See Appendix for variable definitions and data 
sources. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
45


Table 5. Country of origin and inherited gender bias 
 
 
Traditional gender roles 
 
Coefficient 
Standard error 
 
(1) 
(2) 
Demographic characteristics 
Age 
0.003** 
(0.001) 
Age squared 
0.004*** 
(0.001) 
Education 
-0.029*** 
(0.001) 
Male 
0.096*** 
(0.007) 
Catholic 
0.116*** 
(0.011) 
Protestant 
0.140*** 
(0.010) 
Jewish 
0.027 
(0.026) 
Muslim 
0.173*** 
(0.040) 
Other 
0.121*** 
(0.018) 
Employed 
-0.107*** 
(0.009) 
Unemployed 
-0.096*** 
(0.020) 
Retired 
-0.073*** 
(0.014) 
Income category 
-0.009*** 
(0.001) 
Country of origin 
 
 
Czechoslovakia 
-0.028 
(0.031) 
Germany 
-0.008 
(0.009) 
Greece 
0.018 
(0.052) 
Hungary 
0.111** 
(0.049) 
Ireland 
-0.041*** 
(0.011) 
Lithuania 
-0.027 
(0.068) 
Poland 
0.029* 
(0.018) 
Portugal 
-0.001 
(0.059) 
Romania 
0.109** 
(0.053) 
Russia 
-0.036* 
(0.023) 
Spain 
0.088** 
(0.033) 
Yugoslavia 
0.202** 
(0.084) 
Observations 
20,992 
R-squared 
0.16 
Note: The dependent variable captures the views on the role of women in society inherited by US immigrants 
from the period 1935-2000. Traditional gender roles is measured from the answer to the question: “It is much 
better for everyone involved if the man is the achiever outside the home and the woman takes care of the 
home and family.” The answers are given on a scale from 1 to 4, which correspond to “Strongly agree,” 
“Agree,” “Disagree,” and “Strongly disagree.” The gender bias indicator is equal to 1 if the respondent agrees 
or strongly agrees, and equal to 0 if the respondent disagrees or strongly disagrees. The reference group in 
religion is “Atheist”. The reference group in employment is “Inactive”. Data come from the General Social 
Survey. White (1980) robust standard errors, clustered at the country level, are reported in parentheses, 
where *** indicates significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
46


Table 6. Culture, gender, and credit access 
 
 
Share working capital  
financed with bank 
credit 
Share working capital  
financed with trade 
credit 
Firm discouraged  
from applying for a 
loan 
 
Loan application 
rejected 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
Traditional gender roles u 
-0.006 
0.016** 
0.184** 
0.208 
Female owner 
(0.011) 
(0.008) 
(0.083) 
(0.180) 
Female owner 
-0.027*** 
0.003 
-0.018 
0.124 
 
(0.006) 
(0.007) 
(0.055) 
(0.140) 
Small firm 
-0.046** 
-0.006 
0.614*** 
0.262*** 
 
(0.017) 
(0.010) 
(0.130) 
(0.080) 
Large firm 
0.026 
0.017 
-0.109 
-0.260 
 
(0.019) 
(0.020) 
(0.172) 
(0.325) 
Originally private 
0.029** 
-0.006 
-0.120 
0.036 
 
(0.012) 
(0.012) 
(0.104) 
(0.217) 
Exporter 
0.032** 
0.019*** 
-0.345*** 
-0.302* 
 
(0.013) 
(0.005) 
(0.094) 
(0.170) 
Competition 
0.025** 
0.005 
-0.074 
-0.129 
 
(0.010) 
(0.006) 
(0.108) 
(0.083) 
Subsidized 
0.064*** 
0.016* 
-0.754*** 
-0.550** 
 
(0.021) 
(0.019) 
(0.124) 
(0.240) 
Audited 
0.021*** 
-0.023* 
-0.291*** 
-0.297** 
 
(0.007) 
(0.014) 
(0.110) 
(0.117) 
Fixed effects 
CountryuIndustry 
Observations 
5,307 
5,307 
2,817 
1,837 
R-squared 
0.10 
0.09 
0.20 
0.13 
Note: This table presents regression results of indicators of credit market experience by firms on firm-level 
characteristics. All firms in the final sample are individually owned or family owned. The dependent variable is 
Share working capital financed with bank credit (column (1)), Share working capital financed with trade credit 
(column (2)), Firm discouraged from applying for a loan (column (3)), and Loan application rejected (column (4)). 
Traditional gender roles is a country-level measure of inherited views on the role of women in society estimated in 
Table 5. Female owner is a dummy equal to 1 if the principal owner (or one of the principal owners) is a female. 
Small firm is a dummy equal to 1 if the firm has less than 20 employees. Large firm is a dummy equal to 1 if the 
firm has more than 100 employees. Originally private is a dummy equal to 1 if the firm was founded as a private 
company rather than privatized. Exporter is a dummy equal to 1 if the firm does not have access to foreign 
markets. Competition is a dummy equal to 1 if the firm faces fairly, very, or extremely strong competition. 
Subsidized is a dummy equal to 1 if the firm has received subsidies during the last 3 years from the central or local 
government. Audited is a dummy equal to 1 if the firm employs external auditing services. Omitted category for 
firm size is Medium firm. See Appendix for variable definitions and data sources. All regressions include fixed 
effects as specified. White (1980) robust standard errors, clustered at the country level, are reported in 
parentheses, where *** indicates significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
47


Table 7. Culture, gender, and loan terms 
 
 
Log days to 
negotiate 
loan 
Loan not 
collateralized 
Log 
collateral as 
% of loan 
Loan in 
foreign 
currency 
Annualized 
loan rate 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
Traditional gender roles u 
0.041 
-0.101 
-0.057 
0.388* 
-0.185 
Female owner 
(0.091) 
(0.157) 
(0.040) 
(0.220) 
(0.259) 
Female owner 
-0.124* 
0.080 
0.006 
-0.398* 
-0.063 
 
(0.068) 
(0.067) 
(0.019) 
(0.206) 
(0.172) 
Small firm 
-0.238*** 
0.248** 
0.021 
-0.014 
0.691** 
 
(0.071) 
(0.115) 
(0.032) 
(0.119) 
(0.238) 
Large firm 
0.083 
0.055 
0.012 
0.319* 
-0.921* 
 
(0.136) 
(0.128) 
(0.051) 
(0.178) 
(0.491) 
Originally private 
0.099 
-0.195* 
0.043 
0.118 
0.124 
 
(0.092) 
(0.116) 
(0.039) 
(0.160) 
(0.385) 
Exporter 
-0.089* 
-0.021 
0.052 
0.349*** 
-0.740** 
 
(0.046) 
(0.100) 
(0.034) 
(0.101) 
(0.359) 
Competition 
-0.040 
-0.194 
0.033 
0.016 
0.344 
 
(0.062) 
(0.153) 
(0.022) 
(0.070) 
(0.342) 
Subsidized 
0.153*** 
-0.143 
-0.037** 
-0.375** 
-0.179 
 
(0.048) 
(0.155) 
(0.016) 
(0.118) 
(0.444) 
Audited 
-0.015 
0.130 
-0.028 
0.094 
-0.009 
 
(0.057) 
(0.135) 
(0.034) 
(0.122) 
(0.310) 
Private credit to GDP 
-0.002 
0.005 
0.004** 
0.003 
0.032 
 
(0.005) 
(0.005) 
(0.002) 
(0.015) 
(0.036) 
Bank concentration 
0.195 
0.185 
-0.077 
1.230 
0.392 
 
(0.489) 
(0.540) 
(0.139) 
(1.025) 
(1.929) 
Information sharing 
0.070* 
0.034 
0.025 
0.065 
-0.070 
 
(0.036) 
(0.032) 
(0.018) 
(0.093) 
(0.147) 
Log GDP per capita 
0.063 
0.390 
-0.359 
-2.547 
1.281 
 
(0.638) 
(0.823) 
(0.279) 
(2.621) 
(3.591) 
GDP growth 
0.025 
-0.001 
0.020** 
0.037 
-0.030 
 
(0.025) 
(0.033) 
(0.009) 
(0.052) 
(0.093) 
Creditors’ rights 
-0.194** 
0.068 
-0.055 
-0.194 
0.410 
 
(0.084) 
(0.102) 
(0.041) 
(0.338) 
(0.712) 
Contract enforcement 
0.184*** 
-0.016 
-0.010 
-0.296 
-0.475 
 
(0.059) 
(0.169) 
(0.039) 
(0.275) 
(0.343) 
Inflation 
-0.007 
0.006 
0.004 
-0.012 
0.079 
 
(0.006) 
(0.012) 
(0.003) 
(0.012) 
(0.075) 
Entry time 
-0.018 
0.057 
0.020** 
-0.258 
0.169* 
 
(0.022) 
(0.102) 
(0.008) 
(0.306) 
(0.094) 
Fixed effects 
CountryuIndustry 
 
Year 
Observations 
2,158 
2,199 
1,708 
2,114 
2,119 
R-squared 
0.21 
0.15 
0.17 
0.23 
0.59 
Note: This table presents regression results of loan terms on firm-level and country-level characteristics. All firms 
in the final sample are individually owned or family owned. The dependent variable is the logarithm of Days to 
negotiate loan (column (1)), Loan not collateralized (column (2)), the logarithm of Collateral as % of loan (column 
(3)), Loan in foreign currency (column (4)), and Nominal interest rate (column (5)). Traditional gender roles is a 
country-level measure of inherited views on the role of women in society estimated in Table 5. Female owner is a 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
48


dummy equal to 1 if the principal owner (or one of the principal owners) is a female. Small firm is a dummy equal 
to 1 if the firm has less than 20 employees. Large firm is a dummy equal to 1 if the firm has more than 100 
employees. Originally private is a dummy equal to 1 if the firm was founded as a private company rather than 
privatized. Exporter is a dummy equal to 1 if the firm does not have access to foreign markets. Competition is a 
dummy equal to 1 if the firm faces fairly, very, or extremely strong competition. Subsidized is a dummy equal to 1 
if the firm has received subsidies during the last 3 years from the central or local government. Audited is a 
dummy equal to 1 if the firm employs external auditing services. Omitted category for firm size is Medium firm. 
Foreign bank share denotes the assets held by all foreign banks as a share of the assets of all commercial banks. 
Private credit to GDP denotes the ratio of private credit by deposit money banks and other financial institutions 
to GDP. Bank concentration denotes the assets held by the three largest banks as a share of the assets of all 
commercial banks. Information sharing denotes the maximum of an index for private credit bureaus and an index 
for public credit registers. Log GDP per capita denotes the natural logarithm of per capita GDP. GDP growth 
denotes annual growth in gross domestic product per capita, average over the past three years. Creditors’ rights 
denotes the degree of protection of creditors’ rights. Contract enforcement denotes the number of days it takes 
to enforce a legal contract. Inflation denotes annual inflation, averaged over the past three years. Entry time 
denotes the time in days necessary to register a new business. See Appendix for variable definitions and data 
sources. All regressions include fixed effects as specified. White (1980) robust standard errors, clustered at the 
country level, are reported in parentheses, where *** indicates significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, 
and * at the 10% level.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
49


Table 8. Culture, gender, and credit access: Propensity score matching results 
 
Panel A. Choosing variables for the estimation of the propensity score 
 
Female owner 
Small firm 
0.423*** 
 
(0.113) 
Large firm 
0.254 
 
(0.204) 
Originally private 
0.271* 
 
(0.144) 
Exporter 
-0.044 
 
(0.089) 
Competition 
-0.168** 
 
(0.084) 
Subsidized 
-0.078 
 
(0.132) 
Audited 
-0.001 
 
(0.075) 
Fixed effects 
CountryuIndustry 
Observations 
5,367 
R-squared 
0.09 
 
Panel B. Second stage  
 
Share working capital  
financed with bank 
credit 
Share working capital  
financed with trade 
credit 
Firm discouraged  
from applying for a 
loan 
Loan 
application 
rejected 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
Traditional gender roles u 
-0.014 
0.016* 
0.172** 
0.316* 
Female owner 
(0.012) 
(0.009) 
(0.089) 
(0.167) 
Female owner 
-0.023*** 
0.005 
0.008 
0.075 
 
(0.005) 
(0.008) 
(0.056) 
(0.139) 
Firm controls 
Yes 
Fixed effects 
CountryuIndustry 
Observations 
4,167 
4,167 
2,088 
1,307 
R-squared 
0.10 
0.08 
0.18 
0.12 
Note: This table presents regression results of indicators of credit market experience by firms on firm-level 
characteristics. All firms in the final sample are individually owned or family owned. The dependent variable in 
Panel A is Female owner. The dependent variable in Panel B is Share working capital financed with bank credit 
(column (1)), Share working capital financed with trade credit (column (2)), Firm discouraged from applying for 
a loan (column (3)), and Loan application rejected (column (4)). Traditional gender roles is a country-level 
measure of inherited views on the role of women in society estimated in Table 5. Female owner is a dummy 
equal to 1 if the principal owner (or one of the principal owners) is a female. Small firm is a dummy equal to 1 if 
the firm has less than 20 employees. Large firm is a dummy equal to 1 if the firm has more than 100 employees. 
Originally private is a dummy equal to 1 if the firm was founded as a private company rather than privatized. 
Exporter is a dummy equal to 1 if the firm does not have access to foreign markets. Competition is a dummy 
equal to 1 if the firm faces fairly, very, or extremely strong competition. Subsidized is a dummy equal to 1 if the 
firm has received subsidies during the last 3 years from the central or local government. Audited is a dummy 
equal to 1 if the firm employs external auditing services. Omitted category for firm size is Medium firm. See 
Appendix for variable definitions and data sources. All regressions include fixed effects as specified. White 
(1980) robust standard errors, clustered at the country level, are reported in parentheses, where *** indicates 
significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level. 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
50


Table 9. Culture, gender, and credit access: Robust measures of gender bias 
 
Panel A. Continuous measure of gender bias 
 
Share working capital  
financed with bank 
credit 
Share working capital  
financed with trade 
credit 
Firm discouraged  
from applying for a 
loan 
Loan 
application 
rejected 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
Traditional gender roles u 
-0.048 
0.108** 
0.761* 
1.914 
Female owner 
(0.085) 
(0.055) 
(0.406) 
(1.587) 
Female owner 
-0.027*** 
0.004 
0.015 
0.120 
 
(0.005) 
(0.007) 
(0.058) 
(0.143) 
Firm controls 
Yes 
Fixed effects 
CountryuIndustry 
Observations 
5,307 
5,307 
2,817 
1,837 
R-squared 
0.10 
0.09 
0.20 
0.13 
 
Panel B. Excluding medium-bias countries  
 
Share working capital  
financed with bank 
credit 
Share working capital  
financed with trade 
credit 
Firm discouraged  
from applying for a 
loan 
Loan 
application 
rejected 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
Traditional gender roles u 
-0.003 
0.017* 
0.187** 
0.213 
Female owner 
(0.011) 
(0.010) 
(0.082) 
(0.226) 
Female owner 
-0.030*** 
0.003 
-0.025 
0.125 
 
(0.005) 
(0.009) 
(0.048) 
(0.197) 
Firm controls 
Yes 
Fixed effects 
CountryuIndustry 
Observations 
3,916 
3,916 
2,190 
1,352 
R-squared 
0.11 
0.08 
0.19 
0.15 
Note: This table presents regression results of indicators of credit market experience by firms on firm-level 
characteristics. All firms in the final sample are individually owned or family owned. In Panel A, Gender bias 
denotes the continuous measure of gender bias. In Panel B, Germany, Greece, and Portugal are dropped from 
the tests. The dependent variable is Share working capital financed with bank credit (column (1)), Share 
working capital financed with trade credit (column (2)), Firm discouraged from applying for a loan (column (3)), 
and Loan application rejected (column (4)). Traditional gender roles is a country-level measure of inherited 
views on the role of women in society estimated in Table 5. Female owner is a dummy equal to 1 if the principal 
owner (or one of the principal owners) is a female. All other variables from Table 6 are included in the 
regressions (coefficients are not reported for brevity). See Appendix for variable definitions and data sources. 
All regressions include fixed effects as specified. White (1980) robust standard errors, clustered at the country 
level, are reported in parentheses, where *** indicates significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at 
the 10% level. 
 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
51


Table 10. Gender bias and entrepreneurship: GEM data 
 
 
Intention to start a business, ѐ (Male – Female) 
 
(1) 
(2) 
Traditional gender roles 
0.189*** 
0.122** 
 
(0.066) 
(0.059) 
Private credit to GDP 
 
-0.003 
 
 
(0.008) 
Bank concentration 
 
0.019 
 
 
(0.021) 
Information sharing 
 
0.002 
 
 
(0.004) 
Log GDP per capita 
 
-0.018 
 
 
(0.010) 
GDP growth 
 
0.421* 
 
 
(0.223) 
Creditors’ rights 
 
0.010*** 
 
 
(0.002) 
Contract enforcement 
 
0.007*** 
 
 
(0.002) 
Inflation 
 
0.002* 
 
 
(0.001) 
Entry time 
 
-0.108*** 
 
 
(0.028) 
Observations 
28 
28 
R-squared 
0.21 
0.68 
Note: This table presents regression results of loan terms on firm-level and country-level characteristics. All 
firms in the final sample are individually owned or family owned. The dependent variable is the difference in 
the share of male and female non-entrepreneurs who declared an intention to become entrepreneurs in the 
next three years, from the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM). Traditional gender roles is a country-level 
measure of inherited views on the role of women in society estimated in Table 5, for all countries in both the 
GSS and the GEM. Private credit to GDP denotes the ratio of private credit by deposit money banks and other 
financial institutions to GDP. Bank concentration denotes the assets held by the three largest banks as a share 
of the assets of all commercial banks. Information sharing denotes the maximum of an index for private credit 
bureaus and an index for public credit registers. Log GDP per capita denotes the natural logarithm of per 
capita GDP. GDP growth denotes annual growth in gross domestic product per capita, average over the past 
three years. Creditors’ rights denotes the degree of protection of creditors’ rights. Contract enforcement 
denotes the number of days it takes to enforce a legal contract. Inflation denotes annual inflation, averaged 
over the past three years. Entry time denotes the time in days necessary to register a new business. See 
Appendix for variable definitions and data sources. All regressions include fixed effects as specified. White 
(1980) robust standard errors, clustered at the country level, are reported in parentheses, where *** 
indicates significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.  
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
52


Table 11. Culture, gender, and credit access: Disentangling the components of discouragement 
 
 
Application 
procedures too 
burdensome 
Collateral 
requirements 
too strict 
Interest rates 
too high 
Did not think 
application would 
be approved 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(5) 
Traditional gender roles u 
0.043 
0.090 
0.169 
0.679** 
Female owner 
(0.208) 
(0.186) 
(0.186) 
(0.349) 
Female owner 
-0.066 
0.140 
0.037 
-0.182 
 
(0.090) 
(0.124) 
(0.109) 
(0.302) 
Firm controls 
Yes 
Fixed effects 
CountryuIndustry 
Observations 
1,568 
1,378 
1,428 
1,450 
R-squared 
0.17 
0.19 
0.19 
0.19 
Note: This table presents regression results of various reasons for firms’ being discouraged from applying for 
a loan even though they need one. All firms in the final sample are individually owned or family owned. The 
dependent variable is Application procedures too burdensome (column (1)), Collateral requirements too strict 
(column (2)), Interest rates too high (column (3)), and Did not think application would be approved (column 
(4)). Traditional gender roles is a country-level measure of inherited views on the role of women in society 
estimated in Table 5. Female owner is a dummy equal to 1 if the principal owner (or one of the principal 
owners) is a female. All other variables from Table 6 are included in the regressions (coefficients are not 
reported for brevity). See Appendix for variable definitions and data sources. All regressions include fixed 
effects as specified. White (1980) robust standard errors, clustered at the country level, are reported in 
parentheses, where *** indicates significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level. 
 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
53


Table 12. Culture, gender, credit access, and firm performance 
 
 
Sales growth 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
Female owner 
0.629 
1.459 
 
 
 
(0.742) 
(1.360) 
 
 
Traditional gender roles u Female owner 
 
-1.725 
 
 
 
 
(1.356) 
 
 
Constrained female vs unconstrained male 
 
 
-1.709 
-1.173 
 
 
 
(1.999) 
(3.735) 
Traditional gender roles u 
 
 
 
-1.098 
Constrained female vs unconstrained male 
 
 
 
(4.493) 
Firm controls 
Yes 
Fixed effects 
CountryuIndustry 
Observations 
3,173 
3,173 
1,251 
1,251 
R-squared 
0.06 
0.06 
0.11 
0.11 
Note: This table presents regression results of indicators of credit market experience by firms on firm-level 
characteristics. All firms in the final sample are individually owned or family owned. The dependent variable 
in all columns is Sales growth. Female owner is a dummy equal to 1 if the principal owner (or one of the 
principal owners) is a female. Traditional gender roles is a country-level measure of inherited views on the 
role of women in society estimated in Table 5. Constrained female vs unconstrained male is a dummy 
variable equal to 1 if the principle owner (or one of the principal owners) is a female and does not have a 
bank loan because she was rejected or was discouraged from applying, and is equal to 0 if the principle 
owner (or one of the principal owners) is a male whose loan application was approved. All other variables 
from Table 6 are included in the regressions (coefficients are not reported for brevity). See Appendix for 
variable definitions and data sources. All regressions include fixed effects as specified. White (1980) robust 
standard errors, clustered at the country level, are reported in parentheses, where *** indicates 
significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
54


Appendix 
Variables: Definitions and sources 
Variable Name 
Definition 
Source 
Firm characteristics 
Female 
Dummy = 1 if the principal owner (or one of the principal owners) of the firm is a female. 
BEEPS 2004/05  
Small firm 
Dummy = 1 if firm has less than 20 employees. 
BEEPS 2004/05 
Medium firm 
Dummy = 1 if the firm has between 20 and 100 employees. 
BEEPS 2004/05 
Large firm 
Dummy = 1 if firm has more than 100 employees. 
BEEPS 2004/05 
Originally private 
Dummy = 1 if firm was founded as a private company rather than through privatization. 
BEEPS 2004/05 
Exporter 
Dummy = 1 if the firm has access to foreign markets. 
BEEPS 2004/05  
Competition 
Dummy = 1 if the firm faces fairly, very, or extremely strong competition. 
BEEPS 2004/05 
Subsidized 
Dummy = 1 if the firm has received subsidies during the last 3 years from the central or 
local government. 
BEEPS 2004/05 
Audited 
Dummy = 1 if the firm employs external auditing services. 
BEEPS 2004/05 
Sales growth 
The percentage change in sales in the past three years. 
BEEPS 2004/05 
Constrained female vs 
unconstrained male 
Dummy = 1 if the principle owner (or one of the principal owners) is a female who does not 
have a bank loan because she was rejected or was discouraged from applying, and = 0 if 
the principle owner (or one of the principal owners) is a male whose loan application was 
approved. 
BEEPS 2004/05 
Credit access 
Share working capital financed 
with bank credit 
The proportion of the firm’s working capital that has been financed by borrowing from 
private commercial banks in the past 12 months. 
BEEPS 2004/05  
Share working capital financed 
with trade credit 
The proportion of the firm’s working capital that has been financed with trade credit from 
suppliers or customers in the past 12 months. 
BEEPS 2004/05  
Loan application rejected 
Dummy = 1 if the firm applied for credit and had its loan application rejected. 
BEEPS 2004/05 
Firm discouraged from applying  
for a loan 
Dummy = 1 if a firm that declared positive demand for credit did not apply for a bank loan 
because it was discouraged by adverse credit market conditions. Self-reported reasons for 
BEEPS 2004/05 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
55


discouragement include: (a) application procedures are too burdensome, (b) collateral 
requirements are too high, (c) interest rates are too high, (d) informal payments are 
necessary, or (e) the firm did not think their application would be approved. 
Application procedures too 
burdensome 
Dummy = 1 if a firm that declared positive demand for credit was discouraged from 
applying for credit because application procedures are too burdensome. 
BEEPS 2004/05 
Collateral requirements too strict 
Dummy = 1 if a firm that declared positive demand for credit was discouraged from 
applying for credit because collateral requirements are too strict. 
BEEPS 2004/05 
Interest rates too high 
Dummy = 1 if a firm that declared positive demand for credit was discouraged from 
applying for credit because interest rates are too high. 
BEEPS 2004/05 
Did not think application would be 
approved 
Dummy = 1 if a firm that declared positive demand for credit was discouraged from 
applying for credit because it did not think that its application would be approved. 
BEEPS 2004/05 
Loan terms 
Days to negotiate loan 
The number of days it took to negotiate the loan with the bank from the day of application. 
BEEPS 2004/05  
Loan not collateralized 
Dummy = 1 if the financing of the loan did not require collateral. 
BEEPS 2004/05 
Collateral as % of loan 
The value of the collateral required as a percentage of the loan value. 
BEEPS 2004/05 
Loan in foreign currency 
Dummy = 1 if the loan is denominated in foreign currency. 
BEEPS 2004/05 
Annualized loan rate 
The loan’s annual rate of interest. 
BEEPS 2004/05 
Country variables 
Traditional gender roles 
The inherited views on the role of women in society by U.S. descendants of European 
immigrants. It is measured from the answer to the question: “It is much better for everyone 
involved if the man is the achiever outside the home and the woman takes care of the home 
and family.” The answers are given on a scale from 1 to 4, which corresponds to “Strongly 
agree,” “Agree,” “Disagree,” and “Strongly disagree.” The gender bias indicator is equal to 
1 if the respondent agrees or strongly agrees, and to 0 if the respondent disagrees or 
strongly disagrees. 
GSS 
Private credit 
The ratio of private credit by deposit money banks and other financial institutions to GDP. 
WB FDSD 
Bank concentration 
The assets held by the three largest banks as a share of the assets of all commercial banks. 
WB FDSD 
Information sharing 
The maximum of an index for private credit bureaus and an index for public credit 
registers. 
WB DBD 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
56


GDP growth 
Annual growth in gross domestic product per capita, average over the past three years. 
PWT 6.3 
Creditors’ rights  
Degree of protection of creditors’ rights. 
WB DBD 
Contract enforcement 
The number of days it takes to enforce a legal contract. 
WB DBD 
Inflation 
Annual inflation, average over the past three years. 
EBRD TR 
Entry time 
Time in days necessary to register a new business. 
WB DBD 
Intention to start a business, ѐ 
(Male – Female) 
The difference in the share of male and female non-entrepreneurs who declared an 
intention to become entrepreneurs in the next three years. 
GEM 
Note: The Table uses the following sources: Business Environment and Enterprise Performance Survey (BEEPS), 2005; General Social Survey (GSS); 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development Transition Report (2000-2005 EBRD TR); World Bank Financial Development and Structure Database 
by Thorsten Beck, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, and Vojislav Maksimovic, 2010 (WB FDSD); Penn World Tables (PWT 6.3); World Bank Doing Business database 
(WB DBD); Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM). 
 
ECB Working Paper 1822, July 2015
57


 
Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank Thorsten Beck, Allen Berger (FIRS discussant), Andre Guttler, Byeongju Jeong, Stepan Jurajda, and seminar 
participants at CERGE and at the 2013 FIRS (Dubrovnik) for useful discussion. The opinions expressed herein are those of the authors 
and do not necessarily reflect those of the ECB or the Eurosystem. 
 
Steven Ongena 
University of Zurich, SFI and CEPR; Institute for Banking and Finance, Zürich, Switzerland; 
e-mail: steven.ongena@bf.uzh.ch  
 
Alexander Popov 
European Central Bank; Frankfurt am Main, Germany; 
e-mail: alexander.popov@ecb.int  
 
 
 
© European Central Bank, 2015  
Postal address 
 
60640 Frankfurt am Main, Germany 
Telephone 
 
+49 69 1344 0 
Internet  
 
www.ecb.europa.eu 
All rights reserved. Any reproduction, publication and reprint in the form of a different publication, whether printed or produced 
electronically, in whole or in part, is permitted only with the explicit written authorisation of the ECB or the authors.  
This paper can be downloaded without charge from www.ecb.europa.eu, from the Social Science Research Network electronic library at 
http://ssrn.com or from RePEc: Research Papers in Economics at https://ideas.repec.org/s/ecb/ecbwps.html.  
Information on all of the papers published in the ECB Working Paper Series can be found on the ECB’s website, 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/scientific/wps/date/html/index.en.html. 
ISSN 
 
 
1725-2806 (online) 
ISBN 
 
 
978-92-899-1635-6 
DOI 
 
 
10.2866/875691 
EU catalogue number 
QB-AR-15-062-EN-N