Working Paper Number:   CES-25-45
	
	
We construct new population-level linked administrative data to study households' access to credit in the United States. These data reveal large differences in credit access by race, class, and hometown. By age 25, Black individuals, those who grew up in low-income families, and those who grew up in certain areas (including the Southeast and Appalachia) have significantly lower credit scores than other groups. Consistent with lower scores generating credit constraints, these individuals have smaller balances, more credit inquiries, higher credit card utilization rates, and greater use of alternative higher-cost forms of credit. Tests for alternative definitions of algorithmic bias in credit scores yield results in opposite directions. From a calibration perspective, group-level differences in credit scores understate differences in delinquency: conditional on a given credit score, Black individuals and those from low-income families fall delinquent at relatively higher rates. From a balance perspective, these groups receive lower credit scores even when comparing those with the same future repayment behavior. Addressing both of these biases and expanding credit access to groups with lower credit scores requires addressing group-level differences in delinquency rates. These delinquencies emerge soon after individuals access credit in their early twenties, often due to missed payments on credit cards, student loans, and other bills. Comprehensive measures of individuals' income profiles, income volatility, and observed wealth explain only a small portion of these repayment gaps. In contrast, we find that the large variation in repayment across hometowns mostly reflects the causal effect of childhood exposure to these places. Places that promote upward income mobility also promote repayment and expand credit access even conditional on income, suggesting that common place-level factors may drive behaviors in both credit and labor markets. We discuss suggestive evidence for several mechanisms that drive our results, including the role of social and cultural capital. We conclude that gaps in credit access by race, class, and hometown have roots in childhood environments.
Working Paper
Investments under Risk: Evidence from Hurricane Strikes
            
            
            Firms with plants in areas subject to a hurricane reduce capital expenditures at these plans and shift capital expenditures to plants in non-affected areas.
            An Anatomy of U.S. Establishments’ Trade Linkages in Global Value Chains
            
            
            We develop new measures of the linkages between U.S. manufacturing establishments' exports and imports.
            Trade Within Multinational Boundaries
            
            
            Using novel data on U.S. multinationals’ customs transactions and production structure, we show that input-output linkages strongly predict intra-firm trade.
            
	Page Last Revised - February 12, 2026