| Grants for Women |  | 
There are thousands of federal grants that will benefit women. However, you will be disappointed if you think the U.S. government will give a woman a direct grant just because she is a woman. It doesn't work that way. The U.S. federal government has over 900 federal grant programs. Some of these grants are designed to help women with specific needs or living in specific geographic locations. If your nonprofit agency's mission is to help women, then the first resource you should check out is our FederalGrants.com Federal Grant Search.
As you will see from the lists below, the U.S. federal government offers a wide range of diverse grant opportunities which address issues for women not only in America, but around the world. In order to qualify for a federal grant such as these, nonprofit organizations should be stable and mature entities who have been in the business of helping women for at least 3-5 years and have a good record of developing community partnerships with other helping organizations. The agency should have case histories of women who have been helped by their program, have kept track of the numbers of women served during the previous years, and be stable financially before applying for a federal grant.
The following grants for women are available to groups across the United States that assist women:
- 
WomensNet Amber Grant Foundation
The Amber Grant Foundation by WomensNet offers a yearly grant of $25,000 along with monthly grants which range from $5,000 to $10,000. To apply, fill out the form which requests your contact details, business idea, and what you'll do with the grant money. One negative to this grant is the $15 application fee.
- 
Mary Kay Domestic Violence Shelter Grant Program
Each year the Mary Kay Foundation awards grant money directly to domestic violence shelters. Last year, $3 million in grants was awarded to 150 shelters throughout the nation.
- 
J.Jill Compassion Fund Grant
Fashion retailer J.Jill offers this grant to fund organizations that help disadvantaged and homeless women become self-sufficient by providing job training, education, or affordable housing.
- 
The Kroger Company Community Rewards
Kroger provides grants to assist local organizations help feed the hungry, prevent breast cancer, and provide disaster relief services. Non-profits that help women in areas near a Kroger retail location may apply. There is no deadline to apply for this grant for women.
- 
Eleanor Roosevelt Fund Award
AAUW (American Association of University Women) awards this grant to the person or organization it feels has contributed greatly over the past year towards equality and education for women.
- 
Avon Breast Cancer Safety Net Program
Health care institutions and organizations can apply for up to $100,000 to provide cancer diagnostic and treatment services to the medically underserved. The deadline to apply depends on your location. Avon has also provided millions in grants under its Speak Out Against Domestic Violence initiative.
- 
Open Meadows Foundation
Open Meadows makes grants up to $2000 available to projects that assist, and are led by, women and girls. The goal is to promote gender, economic, and racial justice. Small organizations are giving a priority over larger ones.
Futhermore, a recent review of grant opportunities listed at FederalGrants.com revealed the following federal grants for women:
- The Office of Public Health and Science: Minimum $300,000 grant for new pilot programs which will develop cross-generational HIV/AIDS education approaches to women at risk or living with HIV/AIDS and other members of her family. Up to four awards available.
- The U.S. Agency for International Development: $300,000-$500,000 grant to implement activities in support of creative and timely responses which will encourage the abandonment of traditional practices that promote and condone gender-based violence. Geographic focus is Africa, Asia and the Near East.
- The Employment and Training Administration: Maximum $300,000 grant to community-based organizations to assist them in conducting innovative projects to improve the recruitment, selection, training, employment, and retention of women in apprenticeships in the construction industry. three awards available.
- Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs: Grants up to $150,000 to address women's economic empowerment, to foster political participation, and/or contribute to women/girls' freedom from violence. Minimum 3 awards available.
- Small Business Administration: Maximum $150,000 funding to start new, community-based women's business centers. WBCs provide long-term business skills training, counseling and mentoring to benefit nascent and existing small businesses that are owned and controlled by women, especially those who are socially or economically disadvantaged. Up to 80 awards available.
- Administration on Aging: One award of $240,000 available for a comprehensive program addressing retirement planning assistance for women.
- National Institutes of Health: $200,000 for exploratory/developmental (R21) research grant applications on women's mental health and sex/gender differences in mental health across the lifespan.
- Office of Public Health and Science: $100,000 for HIV Prevention Programs for Women living in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. Up to 4 awards available.
Since the United States government mainly gives grants to non-profit organizations that help women, rather than to individual women, it may be easier to obtain a grant through such an organization. Keep in mind federal bank holidays when contacting these grant-giving organizations, as they may be closed on these dates.
If however, you are a woman looking for a grant to help you pay for your education, there are government programs that are ready to assist individual women. These government grants for women help American women from all walks of life. Many women earn their degree online while taking care of their children at home or while working a daytime job. Click here to search for a school that accepts education grants.