Gender dysphoria as a disability under the ADA is in a state of flux, but you may be able to get accommodations for related conditions as well as SSDI or SSI disability benefits.
Gender dysphoria (dis-FORE-ee-uh) is a term referring to the distress a person experiences when their gender identity—the internal sense of being male, female, or somewhere else on the gender spectrum—doesn’t match their assigned sex at birth. This mismatch may cause feelings of anxiety, depression, and other mental health symptoms that can significantly interfere with the ability to complete work tasks in a timely manner.
If you have symptoms of gender dysphoria resulting in functional limitations that affect your job performance, you may have certain protections under the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). And if these limitations keep you from working full-time for at least a year, you might qualify for Social Security disability benefits (SSDI or SSI). In order to protect your rights, it’s important to learn how the legal and medical communities currently understand gender dysphoria.
When Is Gender Dysphoria a Disability?
Having a diagnosis of gender dysphoria doesn’t automatically make the condition a disability under either of the definitions used by the ADA or the Social Security Administration (SSA). Both legal frameworks are more concerned with how a medical impairment causes functional limitations that impact your daily routine. According to the SSA, the impairment must keep you from working full-time for at least one year, while the ADA definition requires that the impairment substantially limit a major life activity. (20 C.F.R. §404.1505, 42 U.S.C. §12102 (2026).)
Medical Views on Gender Dysphoria
To see how gender dysphoria can be considered a disability, it’s useful to look at how different professional medical associations view the condition. The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5), a tool published by the American Psychiatric Association that serves as the principal authority for assessing mental health issues, views gender dysphoria as a psychiatric diagnosis, with the cognitive discomfort between gender identity and assigned sex being the main factor behind symptoms of the condition.
Some mental health professionals disagree with this approach, instead preferring the method used by the International Classification of Diseases, 11th Revision (ICD-11), published by the World Health Organization. The ICD-11 uses the term “gender incongruence” rather than “gender dysphoria,” and moved it to the new “Conditions Related to Sexual Health” chapter instead of the “Mental and Behavioral Disorders” chapter where it was previously classified.
Both the DSM-5 and the ICD-11 recognize the defining characteristic of gender dysphoria to be a marked, persistent incongruence between one’s assigned sex and their experienced gender. Gender dysphoria is usually associated with a desire to align sex and gender through physical transitioning, although it’s important to realize that not all transgender people have gender dysphoria.
While gender dysphoria or incongruence may not be inherently disabling, living with the condition can be very challenging and may take a significant emotional toll. Along with the fundamental distress of having your assigned sex not reflect your gender identity, social stigmas create an atmosphere that’s often hostile to people with gender dysphoria. Acts of discrimination, like being the victim of a hate crime, can lead to lasting signs of anxiety and depression.
Many people with gender dysphoria are ostracized by their family and friends, leaving them without a supportive safety net that can result in a higher risk of self-harm and substance abuse issues. Exposure to a gender-affirmative environment with an experienced professional can often decrease these risks and alleviate mental health symptoms.
Gender Dysphoria as a Disability Under the ADA
The ADA defines disability broadly as a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits major life activities, but it also carves out an express exclusion for "gender identity disorders not resulting from physical impairments.” (42 U.S.C. §12211 (2026).) The statutory use of the term “gender identity disorder”—and the caveat that it must result from a physical impairment—have been the focus of several recent court decisions that have examined whether gender dysphoria counts as a disability under the ADA.
Courts that have addressed how the ADA treats gender dysphoria have been split on the issue. In Williams v. Kincaid, 45 F.4th 759 (4th Cir. 2022), the court drew a distinction between “gender identity disorder” and “gender dysphoria,” the latter term not having been in use at the time the ADA was enacted in 1990. Using accepted principles of statutory interpretation, the court concluded that a diagnosis of “gender dysphoria” reflected a shift in medical understanding since 1990 and that “gender identity disorder” was an outdated classification of being transgender as a mental illness. The court then found that because gender dysphoria was different from gender identity disorder, it wasn’t excluded from ADA protections and could be considered a disability.
Keep in mind that the Supreme Court “denied cert” (declined to review) the outcome in Williams, limiting its application to residents of the 4th Circuit. (The 4th Circuit covers Maryland, North Carolina, South Carolina, Virginia, and West Virginia.) That means that there can be some jurisdictions that treat gender dysphoria as an unprotected “gender identity disorder” under the ADA. For example, the United States District Court for the Western District of Missouri in Duncan v. Jack Henry & Assocs. (617 F. Supp. 3d 1011 (2022)) found that “gender identity disorder” as a term did encompass gender dysphoria (which wasn’t alleged in this case to result from a physical impairment) and declined to extend ADA protections as a result.
SSDI or SSI Disability Benefits for Gender Dysphoria
Unlike the ADA, Social Security doesn't carve out an exception for gender dysphoria, treating it just like any other medical condition for purposes of getting disability benefits. That means the SSA needs to see medical evidence of gender dysphoria symptoms that are either serious enough to meet a listed impairment or result in a residual functional capacity that rules out all full-time employment.
Listed Impairments Related to Gender Dysphoria
Gender dysphoria as a diagnosis isn’t one of the Blue Book listed impairments that can automatically qualify somebody for benefits, but symptoms of the condition often manifest as one of the mental health disorders included in the Blue Book. Therefore, applications for adult disability benefits due to gender dysphoria may be evaluated under one or more of the following listings:
- 12.04 for depression
- 12.06 for anxiety disorders (such as agoraphobia)
- 12.13 for eating disorders, and
- 12.15 for trauma and stressor-related disorders (like PTSD).
Children and adolescents can display signs of gender dysphoria just as adults can, and they too may qualify for disability benefits if symptoms of depression, anxiety, or trauma begin to affect their social and academic achievement relative to others their age. Unlike adults, however, minors under the age of 18 can only get SSI, which is available only to children and teens from low-income households. For more information, see our articles on getting disability for childhood anxiety and childhood depression.
Gender Dysphoria and Its Effect on Residual Functional Capacity
Even if you don’t meet the requirements of a mental health listing, you can still qualify for disability benefits if restrictions in your residual functional capacity (RFC) rule out all full-time jobs. Your RFC is an assessment of what you can and can’t do at work, despite your symptoms of gender dysphoria. Social Security looks at both your medical records and your self-reported activities of daily living to determine what restrictions to include in your RFC. For example:
- Documented anxiety about being misgendered or questioned about your appearance may result in a restriction against doing jobs involving regular public interactions.
- If you have PTSD symptoms (such as hypervigilance or being easily startled) after experiencing an assault or attack, your RFC may contain limitations on the number of people you can directly work with and how long you can maintain focus on job duties.
- Severe agoraphobia that makes it difficult for you to leave the house and get to work on time may result in limitations on your ability to be punctual or maintain attendance.
- Depression from living with a sustained dissonance between your assigned sex and expressed gender can result in restrictions that reduce the amount of time you can stay “on-task” without interruption from psychologically based symptoms.
Physical limitations from gender-affirming treatment can also be included in your RFC. Side effects from hormone therapy or complications following surgery may limit your ability to perform basic movements at work such as lifting and carrying objects or sitting down for several hours at a time. Make sure that you submit any records documenting these limitations to the SSA—the agency can’t include anything in your RFC that isn’t supported by the medical evidence.
Social Security will compare the restrictions in your RFC to the duties of your past work to see if you could still perform those jobs today. If you can’t, then the agency will determine whether any other work exists that you can do despite your current limitations. For people younger than 50, that generally means needing to show that you can’t do even the simplest sit-down jobs in order to qualify for disability benefits. Applicants who are at least 50 may have an easier time showing they can’t do other work thanks to a special set of rules called the “medical-vocational grid.”
How to Get Disability Benefits or Accommodations for Gender Dysphoria
Starting an application for SSDI or SSI is a fairly straightforward process. You can file online using Social Security’s official web portal, call 800-772-1213 (TTY 800-325-0778) to apply over the phone, 8 a.m. to 7 p.m., Monday through Friday, or make an appointment with a representative at your local Social Security field office. Once your application is received, the SSA will first check to see that you meet the non-medical criteria for the type of disability benefit you’re applying for before sending it over to a claims examiner for medical review.
Requesting reasonable accommodations under the ADA is a bit more complicated thanks to the unresolved legal status of gender dysphoria as a covered disability on the national level. One workaround may be to request accommodations for any related conditions you have that are comorbid with (meaning they occur at the same time as) gender dysphoria, like anxiety or depression. These mental health impairments are unambiguously considered disabilities under the ADA, so you could ask your employer for accommodations such as a flexible schedule, remote work options, or a quieter office environment.
When to Hire a Lawyer
Not all situations require you to get professional legal help. You can file your application for SSDI or SSI without an attorney, for example, and if you’re approved the first time (uncommon, but not impossible) there’s probably no need for you to get a lawyer. Likewise, if your employer grants your request for a reasonable accommodation right away and you’re satisfied with how it’s working out, you’re unlikely to need an attorney for anything.
A disability lawyer comes in most handy when you’ve been denied Social Security benefits or reasonable accommodations at work. An attorney can help you appeal a disability denial or file an employment discrimination charge if your employer rejected your accommodation request. Because the legal landscape surrounding gender dysphoria protections under the ADA is convoluted, you may need a lawyer who is licensed to appear in the district or circuit court where you reside (depending on how far you want to take your case). For further information, check out our articles on when to get a disability discrimination attorney and how to find a Social Security benefits lawyer.