https://doi.org/10.1177/0002764218768868
American Behavioral Scientist
2018, Vol. 62(5) 657­–675
© 2018 SAGE Publications
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav 
DOI: 10.1177/0002764218768868
journals.sagepub.com/home/abs
Article
Barriers to Employment 
Participation of Individuals 
With Disabilities: Addressing 
the Impact of Employer  
(Mis)Perception and Policy
Paul M. A. Baker1, Maureen A. Linden1,  
Salimah S. LaForce1, Jennifer Rutledge2,  
and Kenneth P. Goughnour1
Abstract
Although progress has been made toward the objective of increased employment 
for people with disabilities, the 17.2% employment rate of people with disabilities 
stands in distressing contrast to the 65% rate of those without disabilities. This article 
summarizes the results of a comparative survey of representative academic literature 
and industry publications related to employer policies and practices that can affect 
workforce participation of individuals with disabilities. Emergent themes include 
variance in employer perspectives on hiring of individuals with disabilities, impact 
of perceived versus actual cost as a hiring barrier, and the perceived mismatch of 
education and/or skills to job qualifications among applicants with disabilities. These 
themes represent key areas to probe in subsequent research. The research objective 
is to identify focal points in the industry literature, representative of employer and 
industry (demand side) points of view that differ from those generally portrayed in the 
academic literature (more generally, supply side). Findings from a thematic analysis of 
industry publications can provide (1) evidenced based background to assist in crafting 
targeted policy to address employer awareness, (2) informed development of industry 
guidance on topics that may assist employers to achieve a more inclusive workplace, 
and (3) insights applicable to addressing barriers to broadening participation by 
technical, scientific, and engineering trained individuals with disabilities.
1Georgia institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA
2Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA
Corresponding Author:
Paul M. A. Baker, Center for Advanced Communications Policy, Georgia institute of Technology, 500 
10th Street, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA. 
Email: paul.baker@gatech.edu
768868 ABSXXX10.1177/0002764218768868American Behavioral ScientistBaker et al.
research-article2018


658	
American Behavioral Scientist 62(5) 
Keywords
disability, employer perceptions, employment, participation, policy
Although progress has been made toward the objective of increased employment for 
people with disabilities, the 17.2% employment rate of people with disabilities stands 
in distressing contrast to the 65% rate of those without disabilities (U.S. Bureau of 
Labor Statistics, 2017). A comparative review of industry and academic literature sug-
gests that a disconnect still exists between the perceptions employers have of individu-
als with disabilities and the reality of employees with disabilities, a key factor in 
employment differences. This apparent gap between the assumed abilities and the 
actual capacities of people with disabilities can affect the hiring and postemployment 
experiences of people with disabilities (Ameri et al., 2015). One concern, not infre-
quently expressed, was that employees with disabilities would not be able to perform 
as well as employees without disabilities along the dimensions of efficiency, accuracy, 
and participation in the workplace environment (Ju, Roberts, & Zhang, 2013).
Until relatively recently, employers have had the misperception that workers with 
disabilities tended to be undereducated or unqualified, unproductive, and expensive to 
hire (U.S. Department of Labor, 2014b). Strikingly, 43% of employees with disabili-
ties report experiencing discrimination within the workforce (United States Department 
of Labor, 2014a). Overall, there is a sense in academic literature and industry publica-
tions that these employer attitudes are a significant impediment to increasing positive 
employment outcomes for people with disabilities (Bendick & Nunes, 2012; Davaki, 
Marzo, Narminio, & Arvanitidou, 2013; U.S. Department of Labor, 2014a). Evidence 
of the presence of these attitudes were to an extent supported by the results of a field 
experiment where identical resumes from well-qualified applicants for accounting 
positions were submitted. One third of the cover letters disclosed that the applicant had 
spinal cord injury, one third disclosed Asperger’s syndrome, and the remaining third 
did not mention disability. Applicants with disabilities received 26% fewer expres-
sions of interest than those without disabilities.
Data and Method
In an effort toward identifying potential factors that relate to the apparent disconnect 
between employer perceptions and generally accepted conditions as described by spe-
cialists in the field, an environmental scan was conducted of (1) printed and online 
industry publications either aimed at, or commonly read by, business and nonprofit 
professionals (i.e., “industry”) and (2) the research literature primary produced and 
used by academics and researchers (“academic”). Publication sources were generated 
from Google searches of online materials, searches of LexisNexis and Pew Research 
Center sources, and from standard academic indices including EBSCO and ProQuest 
to find pertinent publications between 2010 and 2016. In general, the geographic 


Baker et al.	
659
domain focused on articles with relevance to the United States, with the exception of 
those related to the United Kingdom. This exception was made due to similarity 
between U.S. and U.K. laws.
To find relevant publication matches in data sources, a master list of potential 
search terms was developed. Search terms were combined with the word “disability” 
and included employment, perspective, hiring, legislation/policy, accommodations, 
cost, mental illness, race–class–gender–minorities, discrimination, vocational rehab 
services, vision disability, telework, and aging. For the initial survey, 587 articles were 
identified that focused broadly on the target concepts, using the key words listed 
above. Of these, the 200 most relevant articles were further reviewed for content, fit-
to-research objectives, and utility in the subsequent analysis. Further review of each 
article was completed to make sure the topic of disability in employment and/or the 
workforce was directly addressed.
The search term list was generated based on a preliminary review of the litera-
ture conducted prior to the current survey. The set of key topics were categorized 
into two broad categories and the most-addressed topics, as well as topics that were 
least addressed, that is, topics which did not regularly appear to be addressed in the 
articles. This categorization is of interest in that the latter (under-referenced) topics 
are generally accepted in the disability research field as being of significant impact 
in terms of employment and disability, yet not frequently discussed in the identified 
academic literature. Researchers further collapsed the keyword variables by coding 
similar keywords to be grouped and counted together (e.g., telework, telecommut-
ing, and home-based work were all coded as telework), the list was still too unwieldy 
for the least frequently occurring keywords. The list was pared down to only include 
topics that could, if further researched, yield new information and data that would 
better inform employer strategies and policies to not only hire but also retain and 
promote people with disabilities. As a side observation, the absence of literature on 
employer awareness of specific disability types (other than those with mental ill-
ness and impaired vison) suggests that employers may not have sufficient guidance 
on how to include certain populations in their workforces.
In general, the industry literature surveyed did not reference the academic litera-
ture and vice versa. This finding suggests a gap in the knowledge translation from the 
findings of academic literature to utilization in business and industry. This suggests 
that it may be productive to expand engagement with policy makers, employers, and 
universities to share knowledge and collaboratively work toward more inclusive 
workplaces. We recommend that policy makers and employers adopt a more holistic 
view of disability that recognizes the mutual benefits and joint impacts of employing 
people with disabilities.
To better understand some of the barriers that persist and how policy makers and 
employers might remediate them, this article identifies key approaches for addressing 
these issues and proposes feasible policy options. Despite policy making to support 
the provision of workplace accommodations, challenges persist to full participation 
and inclusion of individuals with disabilities within the workforce.


660	
American Behavioral Scientist 62(5) 
Employer Perspectives
Research has shown that up to 96% of people with disabilities have an “invisible dis-
ability,” meaning one that employers and colleagues may not readily see (RespectAbility, 
2016). As a result, it is possible that employers have already met, hired, and promoted 
people with disabilities without knowing it. Some studies suggest the use of disability 
awareness and sensitivity programs to educate all employees on how to reduce nega-
tive attitudes toward employees with disabilities (Martinez, 2013; Novak, Feyes, & 
Christensen, 2011). Collapsing the range of characteristics, capabilities and limitations 
of people with disabilities into a single category may perpetuate stereotypes and hin-
der the increased hiring and advancement of people with disabilities. The academic 
literature suggests that employers have expressed “greater concerns” related to hiring 
an applicant with a mental or emotional disability as opposed to one with a physical 
disability (Khalema & Shankar, 2014). However, industry literature shows that 
employers are making efforts to address negative stereotypes by offering mental health 
services through employee assistance programs, increasing awareness by incorporat-
ing mental health and behavioral health services into newsletters, and training supervi-
sors about mental health (Andors, 2010; Miller, 2015). Employer strategies and 
interventions should include discussion on the different types of disabilities, as 
opposed to referring to disability in a uniform sense.
One method for addressing negative stereotypes is to enhance participation, and 
hence visibility, of people with disabilities in mainstream activities and standard busi-
ness practices. As a consequence of the adoption of new assistive technologies, the 
options have increased to include, among others, information technology (IT) and 
programming work, software development, and specialized services such as interpre-
tation and consulting. Changing these perceptions could lead to an expansion of 
employment opportunities for people with disabilities. Along these lines, Section 508 
of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 stipulates that federal agencies develop, maintain, 
procure, and use information and communication technology (ICT) that is accessible 
to people with disabilities, including their own employees (U.S. Bureau of Statistics, 
2004). While Section 508 only applies to federal agencies, and federal contractors, 
such agencies serve as important implementation examples and may help private busi-
nesses understand the benefit of implementing a comparable electronic information 
and technology policy requiring accessibility. Accessible digital environments enable 
employees to produce high-quality deliverables more efficiently. Additionally, online 
resources, such as TalentWorks, a tool developed by the U.S. Department of Labor’s 
Office of Disability Employment Policy’s PEATWorks’ initiative, provides employers 
with tools to increase accessibility of their online application process (Partnership on 
Employment & Accessible Technology, 2016). In parallel, the policies and partner-
ships mentioned above may positively affect employer perspectives of people with 
disabilities by enabling a barrier-free environment where employees with disabilities 
can seamlessly integrate with the workplace culture.
In addition to policy, ICT also has application as an accommodation for the work 
environment. For instance, ICT-enabled telework can facilitate employment by 


Baker et al.	
661
minimizing the impact of architectural and transportation barriers for workers with 
disabilities while allowing them to work without being tied to an employer’s physical 
locale (Linden & Milchus, 2014). Telework may allow employees to accommodate 
fatigue and pain-related barriers to traditional work and give individuals access to 
personal care services often not paid for by insurance in environments other than the 
home (Baker, Moon, & Ward, 2006; Linden, 2014). Unfortunately, employer perspec-
tives and policies on telework can create barriers to use of telework as an accommoda-
tion. Almost half (45%) of employers surveyed have policies requiring a probationary 
period during which telework was not allowed, and 25% require workers to establish 
an office schedule while teleworking (U.S. Department of Labor, 2013). Furthermore, 
some employers view in-person interaction with coworkers as an essential function 
and thus do not grant requests for telework as an accommodation (Piper, 2015).
In addition to creating an accessible and inclusive workplace via digital access, 
another available policy-related tool is the use of quotas to advance employment of 
individuals with disabilities, thereby increasing opportunities for meaningful, produc-
tive stereotype-defying interactions. Although somewhat controversial, adoption of 
quotas, as referenced in the industry literature, may benefit the integration of employ-
ees with disabilities into the workforce (Davaki et al., 2013). According to the U.S. 
Office of Personnel Management’s Report on the Employment of Individuals with 
Disabilities in the Federal Executive Branch (2013), the agencies with the highest hir-
ing rates for all disabilities included the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
(18.32%), the Department of Veterans Affairs (14.05%), and the Railroad Retirement 
Board (13.55%; U.S. Office of Personnel Management, 2014). The fact that all three 
agencies have missions to serve populations that have proportionally higher incidences 
of disability provides some indication that policy objectives to encourage greater 
awareness and exposure to people with disabilities as a way of reducing negative ste-
reotypes results in improved employment rates for people with disabilities.
Additionally, workplace culture may contribute to an increase in the hiring and 
retention of employees with disabilities. Some suggest that a culture of inclusion is 
most effectively initiated and propagated by the leadership within an organization 
(Dunst, Shrogren, & Wehmeyer, 2015; Hernandez & Watt, 2014; Linkow, Barrington, 
Bruyère, Figueroa, & Wright, 2013; Waxman, 2015). According to Deloitte Canada 
(2013), senior employees can set an example by setting a high standard of respect and 
inclusion of employees with disabilities. To achieve a culture of inclusion, the 
Department of Labor’s Office of Disability Employment Policy (ODEP) and University 
of Pennsylvania’s Wharton School of Business (Wharton) recommend developing a 
marketing plan or inclusive brand for employees with disabilities to alter many employ-
ers’ negative behavioral and psychological responses (U.S. Department of Labor, 
2014a). This brand should highlight similarities between employees with disabilities 
and those without, emphasizing relevant capabilities and qualifications as well as show-
ing employees with disabilities engaged in jobs not normally perceived by employers 
as those people with disabilities would do (U.S. Department of Labor, 2014b).
As discussed, misperceptions about the hiring of people with disabilities can stem 
from a lack of awareness that is perpetuated by limited opportunities to interact with 


662	
American Behavioral Scientist 62(5) 
people with disabilities. Smedema, Ebener, and Grist-Gordon (2012) observed that an 
outcome of the anxiety felt by some people when thinking about and/or interacting 
with people with disabilities was social avoidance. Social avoidance restricts interac-
tions and contributes to the maintenance of negative associations. To circumvent social 
avoidance and address this lack of personal connection, ethnographic narratives can 
present stories that personalize individuals with disabilities. Such narratives have been 
shown to help move policy change forward (Hansen, Holmes, & Lindemann, 2013). 
Narratives describing the economic contributions of prominent people with disabili-
ties may shift perceptions among those making hiring and advancement decisions. 
Potential example profiles could include Dr. Temple Grandin, an engineer with autism 
who revolutionized the food industry, or Ralph Braun, an inventor with muscular dys-
trophy who created the first wheelchair-accessible van (Gold, 2014; Kintzinger, 2016). 
Additionally, the Advisory Committee on Increasing Competitive Integrated 
Employment for Individuals with Disabilities has recommended the dissemination of 
success stories told from businesses that have included people with disabilities in their 
workforce (U.S. Department of Labor, 2015).
Actual Versus Perceived Costs and Benefits
Employers are often uncertain about the cost and benefits associated with employing 
people with disabilities. Some employers believe the benefits of hiring applicants with 
disabilities include the addition of quality workers, increased profits, reduced potential 
cost of onboarding new workers, and enhanced employers’ cultural reputation (Ju 
et al., 2013; Owen, 2012; Yin, Shaewitz, & Megra, 2014). Conversely, issues of absen-
teeism and conditions that potentially disturb the workplace (e.g., posttraumatic stress 
disorder) have been cited as a high-cost concern (Fuerstenberg, Fleury, & Connolly, 
2011; Rudstam, Strobel-Gower, & Cook, 2012). Another cost-related misperception 
expressed by industry is that people with disabilities are more likely to have high and 
unpredictable medical expenses (Guant & Lengnick-Hall, 2014). These issues, as 
noted in the academic literature, however, are at odds with observations made in the 
industry literature, which indicates that hiring employees with disabilities may actu-
ally save money (Linkow et al., 2013; Inclusion NL, 2015).
Policy implementation can help change and address employer concerns to more 
closely align perceived costs with current realities. First, creating and strengthening 
existing educational and training programs that address economic factors are needed 
(Yoshino & Smith, 2013). Employers appear to be unaware that the majority of 
employees with disabilities require no workplace accommodations; and if required, 
the average cost associated with providing accommodations is relatively low, which 
parallels findings reported in the academic literature (DePaul University, 2007; 
Rosenthal et al., 2012). A study completed by the U.S. Department of Labor–funded 
Job Accommodation Network reveals that 58% of workplace accommodations require 
zero cost, and the remaining require $500 or less (Loy, 2015). Typical workplace 
accommodations include flexible work hours, provision of auxiliary aids or physical 
changes in the workplace (Davaki et al., 2013). Employer-targeted education about the 


Baker et al.	
663
actual cost of accommodations will reduce misperceptions that create barriers to hiring 
and retaining employees with disabilities.
Demand-side economic incentives can also be used to increase the hiring and reten-
tion of employees with disabilities. The provision of tax credits, for instance, has been 
purported to stimulate the hiring of employees with disabilities. While an evaluation of 
Internal Revenue Service data suggests inconclusive efficacy based on the observation 
that a very small proportion of corporate and individual taxpayers with a business affili-
ation used the two tax credits available to encourage the hiring, retention and accom-
modation of workers with disabilities, a U.S. General Accounting Office study (2002) 
noted the evaluations focused on disadvantaged workers as opposed to workers with 
disabilities, due to data limitations. Subsequent studies (Heaton, 2012;  Houtenville & 
Kalargyrou, 2015; Simonsen, Fabian, Buchanan, & Luecking, 2011) suggest that tax 
credits can have an impact on employer decision making related to hiring people with 
disabilities (Heaton, 2012; Houtenville & Kalargyrou, 2015; Simonsen et al., 2011).
A meta-analysis of existing literature determined that employers are interested in 
receiving information about tax benefits and that it would affect their decision making 
(Houtenville & Kalargyrou, 2015; Simonsen et al., 2011). A cross-industry survey by 
Houtenville and Kalargyrou (2015) found that small- and medium-sized companies 
saw tax credits as a potential offset to the costs of workplace accommodations. A 
quantitative comparative analysis of changes in employment rates over time showed 
that tax credits caused a small, but statistically significant (2%) increase in employ-
ment among veterans with disabilities (Heaton, 2012). This increase resulted in 32,000 
additional jobs per year for veterans with disabilities, particularly for those older than 
40 years (Heaton, 2012). These studies indicate that employer tax credits can be an 
effective means of enhancing employment outcomes among people with disabilities. 
Recurring employer training and education regarding the tax credits could result in 
increased utilization.
Mismatch Between Education/Skills and Employment 
Opportunities
A survey of industry literature showed that many opportunities are missed when 
recruiting and hiring college students with disabilities. Employers need to overcome 
stereotypes associated with employees with disabilities to facilitate an environment 
that best matches the skills of employees with disabilities with job requirements 
(Dunst et al., 2015). For instance, in collaborating with college and university offices 
of career services, employers typically fail to build additional relationships with the 
universities’ office of disability services, perhaps not realizing that the two divisions 
often have minimal relationships with each other (National Organization on Disability, 
2014). This misunderstanding may contribute to the fact that three-in-five graduates 
(some 1.4 million) with disabilities are not working; not developing this relationship 
is a missed opportunity to help students with disabilities when universities pursue job 
opportunities with employers (National Organization on Disability, 2014).


664	
American Behavioral Scientist 62(5) 
Community, corporate, and university/college partnerships could positively affect 
employment opportunities for recent graduates with disabilities. Such partnerships 
have been shown to be beneficial. The City University of New York (CUNY) Office 
of Disability Services has a career services partnership called CUNY leads (Linking 
Employment, Academics, & Disability Services) and the University of Minnesota’s 
Disability Resource Center, part of the Office for Equity and Diversity, has success-
fully partnered with campus career services’ efforts in placing students with disabili-
ties with internships and full-time employment (CUNY, 2016; University of Minnesota, 
2012). Designating an employer liaison with university career services’ offices and 
with the offices of disability services is another way to address the mismatch between 
education, skills, and employment opportunities (National Organization on Disability, 
2014). Additionally, companies should cultivate partnerships within the community to 
help meet their hiring goals (Deloitte Canada, 2013). Such partnerships may include 
collaborative activities with local, state, national, and international government offices 
and agencies; community organizations; private clubs and associations; and/or aca-
demic organizations (Community Partners Public Health Partners, 2016).
Federal and state government initiatives could facilitate businesses in attracting and 
retaining employees with disabilities. A report by the National Governors Association 
(2012) suggested that state governments and businesses can help improve employment 
outcomes by supporting businesses in their efforts to employ people with disabilities 
and by preparing youth with disabilities for careers that use their full potential, thereby 
providing employers with a pipeline of skilled workers. Private companies’ implemen-
tation of federal policies into their operations could increase hiring outcomes for people 
with disabilities, as well. One such example is the integration of supported employment 
as an option to bridge the divide between applicants with disabilities and hiring manag-
ers. Supported employment, a service provision created by the Federal Government, 
“provides people with severe disabilities the appropriate, ongoing support that is neces-
sary for success in a competitive work environment” (American Foundation for the 
Blind, 2016). And employers should take more advantage of supported employment as 
it has proven to be a helpful tool in meeting the demands that constitute employers’ 
daily needs, yielding security, ownership of work product, and establishment of colle-
giate relationships (Gustafsson, Peralta, & Danermark, 2013).
Another underutilized approach, the use of “workforce analytics” and “job testing,” 
may help employers avoid the missed opportunities mentioned above. Workforce ana-
lytics refers to insights by software that uses statistical data to measure workforce 
performance (IBM, 2009). To address the potential of a mismatch between skills and 
job opportunities, and in an effort to focus on applicants’ abilities to provide quality 
work, employers are increasingly using workforce analytics and “job testing” in their 
hiring process to help hire applicants with disabilities (Hoffman, Kahn, & Li, 2015). 
While this may work as an assurance for employers’ decision making, it is critical that 
the testing software be accessible. If not, it could introduce bias and reinforce negative 
perceptions, as noted in the industry literature (Lazar, Olalere, & Wentz, 2012).
Table 1 presents themes identified in both academic and industry literature. The 
table highlights topics the academic literature focused on, in comparison to those 


665
Table 1.  Comparative Themes from Academic and Industry Literature.
Themes
Academic
Industry
Commentary
Reference
College career 
services office
No
Yes
Articles identified in the industry literature surveys 
point out that many opportunities to hire employees 
with disabilities from college campuses are missed.
CUNY (2016); University of 
Minnesota (2012)
Cost–benefit
Yes
Yes
Articles identified in the academic literature surveys 
identified, for instance, absenteeism and posttraumatic 
stress disorder as a high-cost concern for employers. 
Conversely, industry literature highlights data that 
dispels employer concerns mentioned by academic 
literature, such as higher retention rates and lower 
absenteeism among employees with disabilities.
Owen (2012)
Disability 
awareness/
sensitivity training 
programs
Yes
Yes
Articles from both academic and industry literature 
suggest that disability awareness and sensitivity 
programs help reduce negative attitudes toward 
employees with disabilities.
Rudstam, Strober, and Cook 
(2012); U.S. Office of Personnel 
Management (2014); Waxman 
(2015)
Discrimination
Yes
Yes
Both academic and industry literature report that 
qualified applicants with disabilities continue to receive 
significantly less interest from potential employers 
than those without disabilities.
Ameri, Shur, Adya, Bentley, McKay, 
& Kruse (2015); Andors (2010); 
Davaki, Marzo, Narminio, and 
Arvanitidou (2013)
Employer 
perspective
Yes
Yes
Articles in both academic and industry literature 
recognize that employer attitudes, awareness, and 
perspectives continue to act as a barrier to the hiring 
of employees with disabilities.
Grist-Gordon (2012); Gustafsson, 
Peralta, and Danermark (2013); 
Houtenville and Kalagyrou (2015); 
Ju, Roberts, and Zhang (2013); 
Smedema, Ebener and (2014)
Leadership
No
Yes
Some findings from the industry literature survey 
suggest that commitment to inclusion begins with 
leadership and trickles down to lower level employees.
Hernandez and Watt (2014); 
Kalargyrou (2014); Novak, Feyes, 
and Christensen (2011)
 (continued)


666
Themes
Academic
Industry
Commentary
Reference
Marketing plan/
inclusive brand
No
Yes
ODEP and the Wharton School of Business recommend 
development of a marketing plan or inclusive brand 
for employees with disabilities, in an attempt to alter 
negative attitudes and perceptions held by employers.
Office of Disability Employment 
Policy (2013); U.S. Department of 
Labor (2014a, 2014b, 2015)
Mental illness
Yes
Yes
Both academic and industry literature indicate that 
applicants and/or employees with mental illness have 
reportedly experienced discrimination in employment.
Andors (2010); Khalema and Shankar 
(2014); Miller (2015)
Open dialogue/
advocacy
Yes
Yes
Articles from both academic and industry literature 
reference open dialogue, and industry literature 
suggests that campus career services’ offices 
encourage open dialogue that advocates hiring 
students with disabilities.
National Organization on Disability 
(2014); University of Minnesota 
(2012)
Quota systems
No
Yes
One article within the industry literature suggests 
that quota systems may benefit the integration of 
employees with disabilities into the workforce. 
However, more data are needed to gauge their actual 
effectiveness. Implementation of revised Section 503 
regulations should provide additional data.
U.S. Department of Labor (2004)
Reentry to 
workforce: 
medical 
professional 
recommendation/
facilitators
No
Yes
Industry literature recommends that employers rely 
on facilitators, such as medical professionals, when 
meeting with employees who would like to return 
from illness.
Andors (2010); Khalema and Shankar 
(2014); Rosenthal et al. (2012)
Table 1.  (continued)
 (continued)


667
Themes
Academic
Industry
Commentary
Reference
Self-employment
Yes
Yes
Self-employment for the entrepreneurial inclined offers 
another option. Self-employment allows people to 
customize their work experiences specifically to 
their needs and to design a work environment that 
optimizes flexibility and accommodation.
Office of Disability Employment 
Policy (2013); Piper (2015)
Tax credits
No
Yes
Industry literature suggests that tax credits may 
stimulate the hiring of employees with disabilities.
Heaton (2012); U.S. General 
Accounting Office (2002)
Telework
Yes
Yes
Both academic and industry literature mention telework 
as a workplace accommodation that may be offered to 
employees with disabilities. However, there have been 
some concerns expressed about social capital loss in 
the workplace as a consequence.
Baker, Moon, and Ward (2006); 
Linden (2014); Piper (2015)
Undergraduate 
coursework/
technology 
programs
No
Yes
Recommendations from industry literature include 
requiring coursework in accessibility compliance and 
technology in undergraduate technology programs.
University of Minnesota (2012); 
National Organization on Disability 
(2014)
Workplace 
accommodations
Yes
Yes
Evidence from both academic and industry literature 
suggests that the majority of employees with 
disabilities require no workplace accommodations, 
and if requested, the average cost associated with 
providing accommodations is relatively low. However, 
some industry literature suggests this is still not widely 
known among employers.
Baker et al. (2006); Linden (2014); 
Loy (2015); Moon  and Baker 
(2012)
Table 1.  (continued)
 (continued)


668
Themes
Academic
Industry
Commentary
Reference
Workforce 
analytics/job 
testing
No
Yes
Industry literature suggests that employers, in an effort 
to focus on applicants’ ability to provide quality work, 
are using “workforce analytics” and “job testing” 
in their hiring process. The absence of literature 
applying this to hiring and advancement of people with 
disabilities is a noticeable gap.
IBM (2009); Owen (2012)
Workplace and 
community/
community 
partnerships
Yes
Yes
Articles identified in industry literature surveys 
suggest that companies should identify “community 
partnerships” to help meet their goals. Academic 
literature points to the importance of social capital 
and workplace community engagement as a means of 
enhancing employee awareness, a mode to support 
retention, and transmission of knowledge necessary 
for advancement.
Partnership on Employment & 
Accessible Technology (2016); 
Public Health Partners (2016)
Note. ODEP = Office of Disability Employment Policy.
Table 1.  (continued)


Baker et al.	
669
appearing in the industry literature, with an explanation of where both sectors con-
verged and diverged. Both reveal opportunities for more in-depth, and employer-centric 
academic research, and for the creation of content-specific outreach resources for 
employer needs.
General Observations
Several points solely addressed in articles in the industry literature are ones which not 
only merit conveying to employers but are also applicable to developing policy 
approaches to broadening participation of individuals with disabilities in critical areas 
such as STEM-related employment. First, the industry literature points out that many 
opportunities to hire students with disabilities from college campuses are missed. 
Therefore, employers should be aware of literature that reports on the utility of encour-
aging them to align with offices of disability services on college and university cam-
puses. Employers could perhaps develop or amend their recruitment policies to include 
such relationship development, focusing on schools with academic areas relevant to 
their industry. In addition, employers could increase recruitment of people with dis-
abilities by creating partnerships with community stakeholders, such as organizations 
that work with and on behalf of people with disabilities. Next, employers should be 
mindful of literature focusing on the important role corporate leaders play in showing 
all of their employees how to treat employees with disabilities. Finally, the potential 
benefits of taking a wider view of effective workplace practices and approaches (e.g., 
virtual collaboration, telework, the use of consultants such as vocational professionals 
to devise plans for employees with disabilities to reenter employment) are ideas that 
should reach employers as well.
Another possibility, currently underutilized is expansion of the use of descriptive 
(ethnographic) narratives tailored for employers—or as is not infrequently noted in 
business “stories sell.” These narratives should highlight people with disabilities doing 
jobs that most employers do not perceive them as doing, or in areas requiring high 
specialized scientific, or technical expertise. The narratives can also focus on the posi-
tive impact made by employees with disabilities on firms’ overall productivity, turn-
over or absenteeism (Inclusion NL, 2015; Kalargyrou, 2014). As noted earlier, 
exposure to such narratives may positively affect perception of people with disabilities 
and diminish discriminatory actions, thereby increasing the employment of individu-
als with disabilities.
Finally, targeted messaging about the prevalence of employment of individuals 
with invisible disabilities will help employers realize that they likely already 
employ people with disabilities but are unaware of it. Similarly, encouraging 
employers to engage with organizations that conduct advocacy for people with dis-
abilities will dispel misperceptions about the capabilities of people with disabili-
ties. These activities could increase the employment rate for people with all 
disabilities, affecting employer perceptions during recruitment, hiring, and promo-
tion processes.


670	
American Behavioral Scientist 62(5) 
Policy Recommendations
One of the most thought-provoking conclusions generated by our comparative analy-
sis is that the industry literature surveyed did not generally reference the academic 
literature and vice versa. This finding suggests a gap in the knowledge translation from 
the findings of academic literature to utilization in business and industry. Conversely, 
researchers in the academic arena may not be fully drawing on practical experience or 
conditions that are reported by companies and employers. Furthermore, an absence of 
discussion on employment facilitators, in both the industry and academic literature, 
appears to suggest that both are focused more on barriers to hiring rather than on using 
success stories and best practices to enhance employment inclusion, expand network-
ing opportunities, and broaden workplace capacity by expanding participation by 
engineers and scientists with disabilities.
Based on these observations, the following is a set of tools and activities that could 
be developed to bridge both the perceptual and industry–academic gaps: (1) create a 
venue or platform that increases the flow of information between the different bodies 
of knowledge (theoretical and applied); (2) develop and disseminate short, targeted 
documents to inform and enhance employer awareness of actual costs and benefits of 
hiring people with disabilities; (3) create a collection of best practices and practical 
narratives (stories talking about “what works”) to alter misperceptions; and (4) create 
organizational policy templates (covering process and requirements) and explanatory 
briefs explaining tax credits, supported employment, diversity management strategies, 
and other efforts to raise awareness amongst employers on methods to realize an inclu-
sive workplace; and (5) investigate the role of social, professional, and technical net-
works, bidirectionally, in enhancing awareness both of the wide range underfilled 
work opportunities, and conversely, of the tremendous pool of underemployed STEM 
trained individuals with disabilities. The proposed policy approaches could be under-
taken by either/or a combination of a governmental agency or NGOs, foundation and/
or advocacy groups, or coalitions of industry partners.
Authors’ Note
The contents of this article do not necessarily represent the policy or opinions of EARN, the 
Viscardi Center, U.S. Department of Labor, or Office of Disability Policy Employment, and 
endorsement by the Federal Government should not be assumed.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, 
and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship, 
and/or publication of this article: The research presented here, conducted by the Georgia 
Institute of Technology, Center for Advanced Communications Policy, was supported in part by 
the Employer Policy, Research, & Technical Assistance Center (DBA, Employer Assistance 


Baker et al.	
671
and Resource Network on Disability Inclusion [EARN]), operated by the Viscardi Center under 
a cooperative agreement with the U.S. Department of Labor, Office of Disability Policy 
Employment (ODEP) (Grant No. OD-26451-14-75-4-36).
References
Ameri, M., Schur, L., Adya, M., Bentley, S., McKay, P., & Kruse, D. (2015). The disabil-
ity employment puzzle: A field experiment on employer hiring behavior (NBER Working 
Paper No. 21560). Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research. Retrieved 
from http://www.nber.org/papers/w21560
American Foundation for the Blind. (2016). What parents need to know about supported 
employment. Retrieved from http://www.familyconnect.org/info/multiple-disabilities/the-
future-starts-now/supported-employment/135
Andors, A. (2010, October). Dispel the stigma of mental illness: More employers are helping 
workers identify and treat such conditions. HR Magazine, 55(10), 83. Retrieved from 
https://www.shrm.org/hr-today/news/hr-magazine/pages/1010agenda_diversity.aspx
Baker, P. M. A., Moon, N. W., & Ward, A. C. (2006). Virtual exclusion and telework: Barriers 
and opportunities of technocentric workplace accommodation policy. Work, 27, 421-430.
Bendick, M., & Nunes, A. (2012). Developing the research basis for controlling bias in hiring. 
Journal of Social Issues, 68, 238-262.
The City University of New York. (2016). CUNY leads. Retrieved from http://www2.cuny.edu/
current-students/student-affairs/student-services/disability/cuny-leads/
Davaki, K., Marzo, C., Narminio, E., & Arvanitidou, M. (2013). Discrimination generated 
by the intersection of gender and disability. Brussels, Belgium: European Parliament: 
Policy Department C–Citizens Rights and Constitutional Affairs. Retrieved from 
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/STUD/2013/493006/IPOL-FEMM_
ET(2013)493006_EN.pdf
Deloitte Canada. (2013). Our journey to inclusion: Deloitte’s annual diversity report for 2013. 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada: Author. Retrieved from https://www2.deloitte.com/ca/en/pages/
about-deloitte/articles/our-journey-to-inclusion.html
DePaul University. (2007). Exploring the bottom line: A study of the costs and benefits of 
workers with disabilities. Retrieved from http://bbi.syr.edu/_assets/staff_bio_publications/
McDonald_Exploring_the_Bottom_Line_2007.pdf
Dunst, M., Shrogren, K., & Wehmeyer, M. (2015). What every employer needs to know: Key 
success factors for hiring people with disabilities. Hartford, CT: Employee Benefits, The 
Hartford. Retrieved from https://www.thehartford.com/sites/the_hartford/files/ku-whitepa-
per.pdf
Fuerstenberg, R., Fleury, D., & Connolly, S. (2011). Disability, absence and the health reform 
era. Benefits Quarterly, 27(3), 9.
Gold, S. (2014, October). Coming soon: Personalized factory workstations. Retrieved from 
https://www.siemens.com/innovation/es/home/pictures-of-the-future/industry-and-auto-
mation/digital-factories-personalized-workstations.html
Guant, P., & Lengnick-Hall, M. (2014). Overcoming misperceptions about hiring people with 
disabilities. New York, NY: The Cerebral Palsy Foundation. Retrieved from http://www.
cprf.org/studies/overcoming-misperceptions-about-hiring-people-with-disabilities/
Gustafsson, J., Peralta, J., & Danermark, B. (2013). The employer’s perspective on supported 
employment for people with disabilities: Successful approaches of supported employment 
organizations. Journal of Vocational Rehabilitation, 38, 99-111.


672	
American Behavioral Scientist 62(5) 
Hansen, H., Holmes, S., & Lindemann, D. (2013). Ethnography of health for social change: 
Impact on public perception and policy. Social Science & Medicine, 99, 116-118.
Heaton, P. (2012). The effects of hiring tax credits on employment of disabled veterans (RAND 
Occasional Paper Series, OP-366-OSD). Retrieved from https://www.rand.org/pubs/occa-
sional_papers/OP366.html
Hernandez, R., & Watt, S. (2014). A top-down approach for diversity and inclusion in chemistry 
departments. In H. N. Cheng, S. Shah, & M. Li Wu (Eds.), Careers, entrepreneurship, and 
diversity: Challenges and opportunities in the global chemistry enterprise (pp. 207-224). 
Washington, DC: American Chemical Society.
Hoffman, M., Kahn, L. B., & Li, D. (2015). Discretion in hiring (NBER Working Paper No. 
21709). Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research. Retrieved from: http://
www.nber.org/papers/w21709
Houtenville, A., & Kalargyrou, V. (2015). Employers’ perspectives about employing people 
with disabilities: A comparative study across industries. Cornell Hospitality Quarterly, 56, 
168-179.
IBM. (2009). Getting smart about your workforce: Why workforce analytics matter. Retrieved 
from 
https://www-935.ibm.com/services/us/gbs/bus/pdf/getting-smart-about-your-work-
force_wp_final.pdf
Inclusion NL. (2015). Why hiring people with disabilities makes good business sense. St. John’s, 
Canada: Author. Retrieved from http://inclusionnl.ca/inclusive-workplaces/business-case-
for-pwds/
Ju, S., Roberts, E., & Zhang, D. (2013). Employer attitudes toward workers with disabilities: A 
review of research in the past decade. Journal of Vocational Rehabilitation, 38, 113-123.
Kalargyrou, V. (2014). Gaining a competitive advantage with disability inclusion initiatives. 
Journal of Human Resources in Hospitality & Tourism, 13, 120-145.
Khalema, N., & Shankar, J. (2014). Perspectives on employment integration, mental illness 
and disability, and workplace health. Advances in Public Health, 2014, Article ID 258614. 
doi:10.1155/2014/258614
Kintzinger, S. (2016, January). How Temple Grandin changed the food industry forever. 
Forbes. 
Retrieved 
from 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/cargill/2016/01/25/temple-
grandin/#57f9fed53458
Lazar, J., Olalere, A., & Wentz, B. (2012). Investigating the accessibility and usability of job 
application web sites for blind users. Journal of Usability Studies, 7, 68-87.
Linden, M., & Milchus, K. (2014). Teleworkers with disabilities: Characteristics and accom-
modation use. Work, 47, 473-483.
Linkow, P., Barrington, L., Bruyère, S., Figueroa, I., & Wright, M. (2013). Leveling the play-
ing field: Attracting, engaging, and advancing people with disabilities (Research Report 
R-l510-12-RR). Retrieved from http://digitalcommons.ilr.cornell.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi
?article=1292&context=edicollect
Loy, B. (2015). Accommodation and compliance series workplace accommodations: Low cost, 
high impact. Morgantown, WV: Job Accommodation Network.
Martinez, K. (2013). Integrated employment, employment first, and US federal policy. Journal 
of Vocational Rehabilitation, 38, 165-168.
Miller, S. (2015). After mental health absence, some face stigma: Formal return-to-work policies 
aid employers and employees. Alexandria, VA: Society for Human Resources Management. 
Retrieved from http://compensationconnections.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/After-
Mental-Health-Absence-Some-Face-Stigma.pdf


Baker et al.	
673
Moon, N., & Baker, P. (2012). Assessing stakeholder perceptions of workplace accommo-
dations barriers: Results from a policy research instrument. Journal of Disability Policy 
Studies, 23, 94-109.
National Governors Association. (2012). A better bottom line: Employing people with disabili-
ties. Washington, DC: National Governors Association. Retrieved from https://www.nga.
org/files/live/sites/NGA/files/pdf/2013/NGA_2013BetterBottomLineWeb.pdf
National Organization on Disability. (2014). Bridging the employment gap for students with 
disabilities. New York, NY: Author. Retrieved from https://www.nod.org/wp-content/
uploads/03_bridging_the_employment_gap_for_students_with_disabilities.pdf
Novak, J., Feyes, K., & Christensen, K. (2011). Application of intergroup contact theory to the 
integrated workplace: Setting the stage for inclusion. Journal of Vocational Rehabilitation, 
35, 211-226.
Owen, J. (2012, May). The benefits of disability in the workplace. Forbes. Retrieved from 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/judyowen/2012/05/12/a-cost-benefit-analysis-of-disability-
in-the-workplace/#7ce5a5af3501
Partnership on Employment & Accessible Technology. (2016). Fostering collaboration and 
action around accessible technology in the workplace. Washington, DC: Author. Retrieved 
from https://www.peatworks.org/blog/2016/nov/resource-alert-ncd-2016-progress-report-
tackles-accessible-workplace-technology-issues
Piper, K. (2015, April). Telecommuting is not a required accommodation for employees 
unable to perform essential job functions. Troy: Michigan Council of the Society for 
Human Resources Management. Retrieved from https://mishrmblog.org/2015/04/15/
telecommuting-is-not-a-required-accommodation-for-employees-unable-to-perform-
essential-job-functions/
RespectAbility. (2016). Advance your disability employment initiatives with NOD’s disability 
employment tracker. Rockville, MD: Author. Retrieved from https://www.respectability.
org/2016/01/28/free-webinar-learn-about-how-to-advance-your-disability-employment-
initiatives-with-nods-disability-employment-tracker/
Rosenthal, D., Hiatt, E., Anderson, C., Brooks, J., Hartman, E., Wilson, M., & Fujikawa, M. 
(2012). Facilitators and barriers to integrated employment: Results of focus group analysis. 
Journal of Vocational Rehabilitation, 36, 73-86.
Rudstam, H., Strobel-Gower, W., & Cook, L. (2012). Beyond yellow ribbons: Are employers 
prepared to hire, accommodate and retain returning veterans with disabilities? Journal of 
Vocational Rehabilitation, 36, 87-95.
Simonsen, M., Fabian, E., Buchanan, L., & Luecking, R. (2011). Strategies used by employment 
service providers in the job development process: Are they consistent with what employers 
want (Technical Report). Rockville, MD: TransCen. Retrieved from http://www.dol.gov/
odep/ietoolkit/publications/500.pdf
Smedema, S., Ebener, D., & Grist-Gordon, V. (2012). The impact of humorous media on atti-
tudes toward persons with disabilities. Disability and Rehabilitation, 34, 1431-1437.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2017). Employment situation summary. Washington, DC: 
Author. Retrieved from https://www.bls.gov/news.release/empsit.nr0.htm
U.S. Department of Labor. (2004). Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973. 
Washington, DC: Author. Retrieved from https://www.section508.gov/content/learn/
laws-and-policies
U.S. Department of Labor. (2013). Self-employment for people with disabilities. Washington, 
DC: Author. Retrieved from https://www.dol.gov/odep/pdf/2014StartUp.pdf


674	
American Behavioral Scientist 62(5) 
U.S. Department of Labor. (2014a). Employer engagement strategy: Workforce inclusion. 
Washington, DC: Author. Retrieved from https://www.dol.gov/odep/pdf/20140604Busin
essCaseEngagementWhitePaper.pdf
U.S. Department of Labor. (2014b). Persons with a disability: Labor force characteristics–2013. 
Washington, DC: Author. Retrieved from http://www.bls.gov/news.release/disabl.nr0.htm
U.S. Department of Labor. (2015). Interim report on increasing competitive integrated employ-
ment for individuals with disabilities. Washington, DC: Author. Retrieved from http://
www.dol.gov/odep/pdf/20150808.pdf
U.S. General Accounting Office. (2002). Business Tax Incentives: Incentives to Employ Workers 
with Disabilities Receive Limited Use and Have an Uncertain Impact. Washington, DC: 
Author. Retrieved from http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d0339.pdf
U.S. Office of Personnel Management. (2014). Report on the employment of individuals with 
disabilities in the Federal Executive Branch for Fiscal Year 2013. Washington, DC: 
Author. Retrieved from https://www.opm.gov/policy-data-oversight/diversity-and-inclu-
sion/reports/disability-report-fy2013.pdf
University of Minnesota. (2012). Disability resource center: Career resources. Retrieved from 
https://diversity.umn.edu/disability/careerresources
Waxman, D. (2015). Employing persons with disabilities: A model of successful corporate 
culture change. Toronto, Ontario, Canada: Disability Rights Promotion International. 
Retrieved from http://drpi.research.yorku.ca/new-report-employing-persons-with-disabili-
ties-a-model-of-successful-corporate-culture-change/
Yin, M., Shaewitz, D., & Megra, M. (2014). An uneven playing field: The lack of equal pay 
for people with disabilities. Washington, DC: American Institutes for Research. Retrieved 
from http://www.air.org/resource/uneven-playing-field-lack-equal-pay-people-disabilities
Yoshino, K., & Smith, C. (2013). Uncovering talent: A new model of inclusion. New York, 
NY: Deloitte University Leadership Center for Inclusion. Retrieved from http://www.
lcldnet.org/media/mce_filebrowser/2014/09/24/Uncovering-Talent-LCLD-Presentation-
KYoshino.pdf
Author Biographies
Paul Manuel Aviles Baker, PhD, is senior director of Research and Strategic Innovation and a 
principal research scientist at Georgia Tech’s Center for Advanced Communications Policy 
(CACP). His research includes work in the areas of information technology, accessibility and 
disability policy; digital media regulation and policy, social aspects of wearable computing; 
virtual work environments, the operation of online and in-person communities, higher education 
and workforce development policy.
Maureen Linden, MSBME, is a senior research engineer at the Center for Advanced 
Communications Policy. Her current research interests include job accommodation use and 
related employment barriers, seating support surface development and characterization, mobil-
ity device use characterization, and facilitators for post-secondary education in science, technol-
ogy, engineering and math (STEM) for students with disabilities. Maureen has been active in 
SAE, ANSI/RESNA, and ISO standards development for over 15 years. 
Salimah LaForce is a senior research analyst with the Center for Advanced Communications 
Policy. She conducts policy and industry research and analysis for a variety of CACP’s research 
initiatives. Additionally, Salimah is the project director for the Wireless RERC’s research proj-
ect, Policy Approaches to Promote Access to Wireless Technologies.


Baker et al.	
675
Jennifer Rutledge Pettie, JD, MPH, is a fellow with the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention. Her work focuses on the intersection of law and policy and its impact on public 
health.  She is passionate about using legal epidemiology to inform policy solutions.
Kenneth Goughnour is completing a Masters of Public Health at the Rollins School of Public 
Health, Emory University. He serves as a graduate research assistant with the Center for 
Advanced Communications Policy at Georgia Tech, working in the areas of accessible wearable 
technology, maternal health, and information policy.