Accessibility of Education for Children with Disabilities in India                                                                                                                       43 
Global Education Review is a publication of The School of Education at Mercy College, New York.  This is an Open Access  article distributed under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-Noncommercial 3.0 Unported License, permitting all non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is 
properly cited. Citation: Limaye, Sandhya (2016). Factors influencing the accessibility of education for children with disabilities in India. Global 
Education Review, 3 (3). 43-56 
 
 
 
Factors Influencing the Accessibility of Education 
for Children with Disabilities in India 
                                                                         
 
Sandhya Limaye  
Tata Institute of Social Sciences, India 
 
Abstract 
The Central and State governments in India have formulated programs and policies over the years for 
children with disabilities in order to help them to enter mainstream society. However, despite these 
policies, children with disabilities are amongst the most disadvantaged in terms of access to schooling and 
completion of elementary education, as their needs are not met effectively.  Based on my personal 
experiences, research, and communication with different stakeholders involved in the field of education 
for children with disabilities over the last 30 years, this paper explores the broader challenges in the 
current education system with respect to issues of quality of education and drop-out rates of primary 
students with disabilities. A number of factors that influence the accessibility of education for children 
with disabilities are presented including: perceptions of parents of children with disabilities and their 
difficulties in helping their children with disabilities, the general attitude of society, government officials, 
school staff and infrastructure, inadequate levels of training of key stakeholders, invisibility of disability in 
community, poverty, lack of acceptance, lack of interest, gender discrimination, lack of awareness, poor 
physical access, availability of various support systems, and government policies focusing on the 
education of children with disabilities in specific.   
 
Keywords 
India, education, educational policy, children with disabilities 
  
 
Introduction 
Education is a right of every child whether 
she/he is disabled or non-disabled as education 
equips children to meet the challenges of the life.  
Education involves growing up knowing the 
environment in which we live in. It is a human 
right with immense power to transform the 
environment in which we live, as it is a powerful 
instrument of social change and often initiates 
upward movement in the social structure. In 
order to make education for all a reality, every 
child must have access to quality education. The 
UNESCO Convention against Discrimination in 
Education (1960) and other international human 
rights treaties like the Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights (1946), Convention on the Rights 
of Child (1989), and UN Convention on the 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities (2006) 
prohibit any sort of exclusion from educational 
opportunities on the basis of sex, ethnic origin, 
language, religion, nationality, socio-economic 
______________________________ 
Corresponding Author: 
Sandhya Limaye , Center For Disability Studies and Action, 
School of Social Work, Tata Institute of Social Sciences, V.N. 
Purav Marg, Deonar, Mumbai, Maharashtra 400088, India  
Email: limaye.sandhya@gmail.com 


44                                                                                                                                                                       Global Education Review 3(3) 
conditions, abilities etc. However, millions of 
children continue to experience exclusion within 
(and from) education systems across the world.  
The educational scene in India has 
undergone major change over the years due to 
efforts of the government, resulting in the better 
provision of education. In the context of India’s 
changing educational landscape, it is important 
to look at education for children with disabilities 
critically. This paper is based on my personal 
experiences, research, and communication with 
different stakeholders involved in the field of 
education for children with disabilities over the 
last 30 years. 
 
Status of Education of Children 
with Disabilities  
According to Census 2011, there are 1.2 billion 
people in India, of which about 833 million 
people live in rural areas. The total number of 
children with disabilities is 164.5 million. 
According to the National Sample Survey 
(NSS) 58th round (Jul.–Dec. 2002), 25 percent 
of the literate population of people with 
disabilities had received education up to the 
primary level (five years of schooling), and 11 
percent up to the middle level (eight years), 
while a mere 9 percent had nine or more years. 
Interestingly, enrolment ratios for those with 
disabilities aged 5 to 18 years in a mainstream 
school were higher in rural areas than in urban 
areas. Education for children with disabilities in 
India suffers either in its efficacy, infrastructure, 
implementation and/or other causes and it is 
very difficult to find reliable data about the 
prevalence of disability in India 
(https://targetstudy.com/articles/education-of-
disabled-children-in-india.html). 
Schooling for students with disabilities in 
India is conducted in regular schools or in 
special schools. The special school was 
introduced in India in the last two decades of the 
19th century by Christian missionaries. Special 
schools are equipped with the resources to 
provide education to children with disabilities, 
and many special schools are concentrated in 
urban areas. Because of the widespread belief 
that children with disabilities cannot be 
educated alongside other children, the schools, 
the special education system was segregated. 
These schools helped to provide education for 
children with disabilities, but did not help them 
to enter mainstream society 
(https://targetstudy.com/articles/education-of-
disabled-children-in-india.html). Furthermore, 
this special school system has major drawbacks 
– it is expensive and has only limited reach. In 
spite of the disadvantages of the special schools 
and the impact on the lives of the children with 
disabilities studying in them, the law still 
provides for setting up of these schools for 
children with disabilities. Ministry of Welfare 
(now Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment) has launched a plan for the 
establishment of special schools and provides 
grants to them to run the schools. Priority under 
the scheme is to set up schools in districts where 
there is no special school at present. At present 
240 odd districts in the country have no special 
schools (Baquer & Sharma, 2006). Presently 
there are about 3000 special schools servicing 
children with different disabilities. It is 
estimated that there are 900 schools for the 
hearing impaired, 400 schools for the visually 
impaired, 1,000 for the mentally retarded and 
700 for the physically disabled children (Bagga, 
2007). These schools are registered with the 
Rehabilitation Council of India and are allowed 
to apply for government support. This small 
number of special schools cannot serve the 
whole population of students with disabilities 
(Byrd, 2010). 
Zacharia (2000) noted that the philosophy 
of “integration” emerged which advocated 
education of children with mild and moderate 
disabilities in general schools along with others 
with adequate resource support. But the children 
under integration method were still treated 
separately in schools and integration was only 


Accessibility of Education for Children with Disabilities in India                                                                                                                      45 
 
partial.  This led to the emergence of the new 
concept called Inclusive Education (IE) which 
argues that all children irrespective of the nature 
and degree of the disability should be educated 
in general schools with non-disabled children. It 
has been introduced in the schools but a lot 
more has yet to be done (Zacharia, 2000). While 
few professionals would question the 
appropriateness of including students with 
disabilities in a regular school, there is a debate 
about which students should be part of general 
education classes and how much time they 
should spend there (Lal, 2005 p. 79). More 
recently, there has been growing awareness 
regarding issues of access and enrolment of the 
children with disabilities into the mainstream 
for their integration into society. Integrated or 
inclusive schools are public schools that allow 
students with disabilities to attend, but these 
schools provide limited support for these 
students. Considering the difficulties of 
accessing special schools, regular local 
neighborhood schools become viable options 
open for most children.  
A vast majority of children with 
disabilities in India are not getting an 
appropriate education.  Therefore, special 
measures have been taken by the Government of 
India expecting the states to take responsibilities 
to ensure that within a specified time frame 
every child, whatever his/her disability, has 
access to formal or non-formal education. The 
Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) is an Indian 
government programme aimed at the 
universalization of elementary education in a 
time bound manner, as mandated by the 86th 
amendment to the Constitution of India making 
the free and compulsory education of children 
between the ages of 6 to 14 a fundamental right.  
There are government efforts through Sarva 
Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) teachers to identify 
students with disabilities who never enrolled in 
the school or who drop out and provide 
education for them. It is estimated that India has 
approximately 35 million children with 
disabilities but less than one percent have access 
to appropriate education (Baquer & Sharma, 
2006).  
Education of children with disabilities 
(CWD) has been a part of policy development in 
India for the past few decades. The policies of 
the government of India towards the education 
of children with disabilities have been reflected 
in the enactments, schemes and through 
institutions established for various relevant 
activities. 
 
Policy Framework for Education 
for Children With Disabilities 
India is bound by human rights treaties like the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1946), 
the UNESCO Convention against Discrimination 
in Education (1960), and Convention on the 
Rights of Child (1989). International policies, 
related to disability and education such as the 
UN Standard Rules on the Equalization of 
Opportunities for Persons with Disabilities 
(1993), the Salamanca Statement and 
Framework for Action on Disability Education 
(1994), United Nations Convention on the 
Rights of Persons with Disability 2006, 
BIWAKO Framework, have influenced Indian 
policies on education for children with 
disabilities. The drafting of the new bill for 
Person with Disabilities Act, (PWD) 2011 which 
replaced the Persons with Disabilities Act, 1995, 
is being implemented to fulfill obligations under 
international treaties and to overcome 
limitations of the previous Act. The bill of 2014 
and the on-going amendment of the National 
Trust Act and the policy for guardianship that 
may extend from offering “limited guardianship” 
to the formation of new support systems are 
products of this. All these enable persons with 
disabilities to make decisions and enhance their 
self-determination. The bill of 2014 promoted 
the goals of an inclusive, barrier-free and rights-
based society for persons with disabilities. 


46                                                                                                                                                                       Global Education Review 3(3) 
The Indian Constitution prohibits any 
exclusion from educational opportunities on the 
basis of sex, ethnic origin, language, religion, 
nationality, socio-economic conditions, abilities, 
etc. The Preamble of the Constitution embodies 
the concept of social justice and equality of 
status and opportunity to all the people of India. 
Article 45 of the Indian Constitution provides 
compulsory and free education of all children 
below 14 years and the 86th amendment of the 
Constitution Act in 2002 made it clear that 
education is a fundamental right of every child 
between the age group of 6 to 14 years. 
 
Focused Efforts to Improve Education for 
Children With Disabilities  
Since independence of 15th August 1947, several 
efforts have been made to take education closer 
to children with disabilities.  
The Kothari Commission of 1964 stressed 
the education of children with disabilities 
(irrespective of the type of disability) being a 
part of the general education system. The 
National Education Policy in 1968 based on 
Kothari Commission recommendations, 
suggested expanding educational facilities for 
children with physically and mentally 
disabilities. In 1986, the National Policy on 
Education brought the fundamental issue of 
equity center stage. Sector 4.9 of this policy 
focused clearly on the needs of children with 
disabilities. This policy also included a provision 
regarding teacher training for all mainstream 
education teachers by “ including a compulsory 
special education component in pre-service 
training of general teachers” (Kohama, 2012:19) 
In 1974, the Ministry of Welfare started 
the Integrated Education of Disabled Children 
(IEDC) to promote the integration and retention 
in regular school systems of students with mild 
and moderate disabilities. However, the 
program fell short of its objectives due to various 
reasons such as a dearth of adequately trained 
educators, equipment and educational material, 
coordination among various departments, etc.   
In 1987, UNICEF and the government-
funded National Council of Educational 
Research and Training (NCERT) launched the 
Project on Integrated Education for Disabled 
(PIED) that focused on teacher training in order 
to encourage integration. PIED was later 
amalgamated with the District Primary 
Education Program (DPEP) and Sarva Shiksha 
Abhiyan (SSA). The enrolment and retention 
rates spiked, however, the coverage was minimal 
and only two to three percent of children with 
disabilities were integrated into regular schools.  
In 1992, the Plan of Action (POA) 
suggested that the children with disabilities who 
can be educated in a regular school should not 
be admitted to a special school. Even children 
who were initially admitted to special schools for 
training in plus curriculum skills should be 
transferred to general schools once they acquire 
daily living skills, communication skills, and 
basic academic skills. This POA was 
strengthened by the enactment of Rehabilitation 
Council of India (RCI) Act 1992.  The main 
objectives of this Act were to establish a 
statutory mechanism for monitoring and 
standardizing courses for the training of 16 
categories of professionals required in the field 
of special education and rehabilitation of 
persons with disabilities. Training of special 
educators and resource teachers that can offer 
support services to children with disabilities in 
regular schools is the responsibility of RCI. 
The District Primary Education Program 
(DPEP) of 1995 focused on increasing the 
number of girls in of primary education. The 
program’s focus was on quantitative targets and 
capacity-building of educational administration.   
Very few children with disabilities were 
integrated due to continued reliance on special 
schools (Alur, 2002 ).  
The most important legislation for the 
rehabilitation of people with disabilities was the 
Persons with Disabilities Act (Equal 
Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full 
Participation) (1995), which covers all the 


Accessibility of Education for Children with Disabilities in India                                                                                                                      47 
 
aspects of the life of a person with a disability- 
education, employment, non-discrimination, 
health care, social security. The Act also required 
the government to make sure that free and 
appropriate education would be accessible to 
every child with disability till the age of 18 years.  
This act promoted integration of children with 
disabilities in a regular school, and special 
schools  for those who need such facilities, 
equipping them with vocational training 
facilities. It also outlined a comprehensive 
scheme for the provision of facilities rights-  
from transportation and infrastructure to 
curriculum restructuring and examination 
systems.  
The government passed yet another act, 
the National Trust for Welfare of Persons with 
Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and 
Multiple Disabilities Act in 1999, focusing on 
inclusion and independence by creating barrier 
free environments, developing functional skills, 
providing economic rehabilitation, as well as to 
bring about a change in perceptions and 
attitudes of others towards persons with 
disabilities.  
Janshala, community schools program, 
started in 1998 was replaced by Sarva Shiksha 
Abhiyan (SSA) in 2002 to achieve universal 
elementary level education.  It is far behind in 
achieving its intended targets and there is 
apparently no sign of accelerated political 
momentum to lend a sense of urgency to the 
task.  A specific feature of SSA is a ‘zero-
rejection’ policy which suggests that no child 
having special needs can be neglected nor denied 
enrolment on the basis of such concerns.  
The year 2005 saw the most recent and 
comprehensive policy push from Government of 
India for education of both children and adults 
with disabilities, in the form of the Minister of 
Human Resources Development’s Policy 
Statement in March 2005.  This was followed by 
the development of a national Action Plan for 
Inclusion in Education of Children and youth 
with disabilities. This policy claimed to create 
opportunities so that children and adults with 
disabilities were not left out of the Government’s 
plan of action on inclusive education, but gaps 
remain in what was expected and what was 
achieved (Baquer & Sharma, 2006). 
The Central and State governments have 
formulated programs and policies over the years, 
offering schemes and facilities to children with 
disabilities in order to enable them to enter 
mainstream society. However, despite the 
presence of these policies, outreach remains 
inadequate, and the educational needs of many 
children with disabilities is not met.  Although 
the concept of inclusive education has been 
promoted internationally for more than a 
decade, multiple barriers remain in India to the 
full participation of children with disabilities in 
education. Lack of information, combined with 
discriminatory attitudes towards persons with 
disabilities at all levels of society, contributes to 
the continued neglect of their right to education. 
This partly explains the minimal rate of progress 
that has been made towards the enrolment and 
participation in the education process of 
children with disabilities. The factors are 
complex and extend beyond the boundaries of 
the school and classroom. 
 
Factors Influencing the Accessibility of 
Educational Facilities 
Children with disabilities in India are among the 
most disadvantaged in terms of access to 
schooling and completion of elementary 
education. The World Bank Report (2009) noted 
that the people with disabilities are subject to 
multiple deprivations and that they are the most 
excluded from education. The 
report noted that children with disabilities are 
about four to five times less likely to go to school 
than the children from scheduled tribes and 
scheduled castes. Due to, school fees, 
transportation cost and parents not having time 
to accompany children to school, parents are 


48                                                                                                                                                                       Global Education Review 3(3) 
often forced to make a choice between providing 
education to a child with a disability and without 
a disability. Findings show that the more the 
severe a child’s disability, the lower the chances 
of the child attending school. The report also 
suggested that people with disabilities have 
much lower educational attainment, with 52 
percent illiterate as opposed to 35 percent 
illiteracy in the general population. Illiteracy 
levels are high across all categories of disability, 
and extremely so for children with visual, 
multiple and mental disabilities (and for 
children with severe disabilities across all the 
categories).  
A position paper drafted by the NCERT 
(2006, p. 7) stated that “the Office of the Chief 
Commissioner of Persons with Disabilities stated 
that not more than 4 percent of children with 
disabilities have access to education”. 
Very little attention has been paid to 
educating the severely disabled. The enrolment 
rates are poor, educational performance is low, 
dropout rates are high (Baquer & Sharma, 
2006). 
Despite having a constitutional, rights-
based policy framework for children with 
disabilities, there are various factors that have 
hindered the progress towards increasing access 
to education.  
With data showing low enrolment and 
completion of schooling among children with 
disabilities in India it is important to understand 
the challenges.  
 
Parents 
Perception of Parents Towards Education and 
Disability.  Parent’s attitude towards children with 
disabilities and their education can be a key 
facilitator or a serious barrier to achieving 
inclusion and participation in a mainstream 
society. Parental perception plays a crucial role 
in determining the overall growth and 
development of a child with a disability. Social 
stigma about disability faced by parents is 
transferred to their children. The understanding 
of a child’s disability goes through a cycle of 
shock, grief, and acceptance for the parents. The 
type, severity, and visibility of disability affect 
parental acceptance of disability. The parents 
faced with the diagnosis of disability, are 
shocked and do not understand its implication. 
Inadequate counseling exists for   parents to 
cope with the shock and to help them to accept 
their children’s disability. As a result, some 
parents may be upset due to slow progress of 
their children. Therefore, they might make the 
child change schools often. Some parents may 
believe that their children cannot be educated 
like   non-disabled children.  Many parents may 
be overprotective which may, in turn, affect their 
child’s educational outcome. 
 
Lack of Awareness About Facilities.  The 
Government of India has many schemes, 
policies, programmes for children with different 
disabilities but such facilities do not reach many 
families especially those who stay in villages or 
remote areas. Even many regular and special 
schools are not fully aware about the facilities 
and they could not provide adequate guidance to 
the parents. Many of the parents are unaware 
about the admissions, educational aids, 
vocational training, exam concessions, etc. That 
lack of awareness of educational facilities 
prevents parents from giving better education to 
their children with disabilities. People including 
parents and school are not aware of funding 
available to include students with disabilities in 
regular schools (Mondal & Mete, N.d. p.64) 
 
Lack of Awareness About Disability Certificate.   
Children with disabilities did not have a 
disability certificate because of various reasons 
such as lack of awareness about the disability 
certificate, lack of awareness about the place 
from where to access disability certificate, a lack 
of awareness about the procedure of it, or even 
lack of awareness about the uses and importance 
of the disability certificate.  Not having a 
disability certificate also is a reason for many 


Accessibility of Education for Children with Disabilities in India                                                                                                                      49 
 
parents not enrolling their children in schools 
because they cannot access the benefits of 
government’s education schemes.  
 
Gender Discrimination 
Gender stereotypes interact with disability 
stereotypes to constitute a deep matrix of 
gendered disability in every culture, developed 
within specific historical contexts, and affecting 
those contexts over time. Girls with disabilities 
are at the intersection of various forms of 
discrimination on the basis of disability and 
gender in India. Parental attitude is changing 
regarding the value of educating and training 
girls with disabilities but the prejudice 
surrounding their ability and value, continue to 
perpetuate the view that educating them is futile. 
This attitude encourages parents to deny the 
opportunity to their girls with disabilities to 
attend school. Many parents prefer training girls 
to be responsible homemakers and taking care of 
family members rather than sending them to 
school as they may also worry about their girls 
with disabilities being vulnerable in their 
community. Girls with disabilities are not 
considered an educational investment because 
they marry into a husband’s family, whereas 
boys stay with and provide for their extended 
families all of their life. As a result, 68% of girls 
with disabilities are not in school. Girls with 
disabilities have a lower enrolment rate in school 
than boys with disabilities across many sectors: 
urban vs. rural, by type of schooling, by level of 
the schooling, and in primary versus secondary 
schooling (Kohama, 2012, p. 32). 
The District Primary Education Program 
(DPEP) of 1995 focused on the universalization 
of primary education, primarily for girls. The 
program’s focus was on quantitative targets and 
capacity-building of educational administration, 
and very few children with disabilities were 
integrated due to continued reliance on special 
schools (Alur, 2002 ). The thrust of SSA was on 
the closing of gender and social gaps and a total 
retention of all children in schools. However, not 
much seems to have changed.  
One report on women with disabilities in 
the Raichur district of Karnataka state indicated 
that the literacy rate of such women was 7 
percent compared to a 46 percent general 
literacy rate for the state.   Girls with disabilities 
have remained invisible both in the writings on 
gender and on disability. Therefore, the needs of 
girls with disabilities may be more severe than 
needs of any other group, and have to be 
addressed in all spheres of education (NCERT, 
2005).  
 
Civil Society 
Social Stigma.    Children with disabilities in 
India face stigma since birth due to several 
socio-religious beliefs. They also have to face 
patriarchal norms, traditional caste divide and 
class and religious community differences, thus 
facing manifold burdens in the process of 
education.  
Age- old beliefs that if a child has a 
disability, it is due to child’s or parents’ “karma” 
(fate) or it is because of sins in the previous birth 
or that the mother has observed sun eclipse 
during her pregnancy are still commonly held.   
The stigma also comes from the influence of 
mythology and religious belief. In Hindu 
mythology, a person with disability is wicked 
and useless; and it is better to avoid such people 
in order to protect nondisabled people. Any 
attempts to improve the life of a person with a 
disability may be considered as an interference 
with a person’s “karma” or defiance of the will of 
Allah (Mondal & Mete, N.d., p. 64). Society looks 
down upon the disability and people with 
disability affecting the families who have 
children with disability, therefore the family 
attempts to deny, hide their child’s disability- 
this is especially true when children have 
developmental disabilities, such as mental 
retardation, autism, multiple disabilities. 
Therefore, due to the social stigma or taboo 


50                                                                                                                                                                       Global Education Review 3(3) 
associated with disabilities, families might be 
afraid to send their children to the school. 
 
Lack of Awareness.   Knowledge is not 
widespread through society of various types of 
disabilities and the impact on a child’s 
development, nor of the need to have special 
pedagogy to achieve the educational 
qualification. Therefore, parents fail to 
understand the importance of education for such 
children and they do not know in what way they 
can encourage children with disabilities.   
 
Unnoticeable Characteristics of Disabilities in the 
Community.   The civil society may not recognize 
disabilities that cannot be easily identified. 
Lacking understanding of such children’s 
unusual behavior and the challenges faced by 
them in learning, they label them as “stupid, 
useless, and mad”. Some parents may feel 
strongly that their children’s slow progress is 
due to the label. Therefore, they may change 
school often, or they may feel that there is no use 
to providing education to such children as it will 
not benefit them, and there is no point in 
spending money and time on them. Bagga 
(2007) claimed that due to segregation of 
children with disabilities, the general population 
does not get an opportunity to interact with 
them, and therefore may not be sensitized to the 
needs of children with disabilities.   
 
School 
Selection of School.   Once child is diagnosed 
by medical professionals, they generally advise 
the parents to enroll their child in a special 
school. Some medical professionals and other 
professionals in the field of disability in cities 
may advise parents to admit their child in a 
regular school. In this process, I found that 
many parents are not counseled about the 
selection of the school, the advantages, and 
limitations of special schools and regular 
schools, preparation needed for the child before 
admission to a regular school as there are fewer 
facilities for early intervention, especially in 
rural areas. There are special schools for 
children having a visual impairment, hearing 
impairment, intellectual disabilities but they 
tend to be concentrated in the big cities whereas 
there are few schools available for children with 
autism or multiple disabilities or learning 
disabilities or cerebral palsy especially in rural 
areas. As a result, parents’ are limited to regular 
schools where teachers may not know how to 
teach such children. Many special schools   test 
and interview a child with a disability, and 
his/her parents, and admit based on   
performance whereas some special schools 
admit based on vacancy. Most importantly, I 
found that there is no educational counseling 
provided to the parents in many places, i.e., 
explaining the implication of disability, the 
different pedagogy required for a type of 
disability, or the effort and time required for 
educational intervention. Children with 
disabilities who come from upper class and 
educated families are admitted to a regular 
private school and many regular schools are 
open to accommodate such children; those who 
come from lower economic background, may 
join in a regular municipal school if there is no 
availability of special school or far from their 
home. Thus, the parental decision of selecting a 
school is influenced by professional advice, and 
availability of kind of school near their home. 
For students with disabilities who never enrolled 
in school or drop out, there are government 
efforts through SSA teachers to identify such 
children and provide education for them. 
 
The Right to Education Act. The Right to 
Education Act (2009) made it clear that every 
school including private or government or 
municipal schools must admit 25% of the total 
strength of that class for children with 
disadvantaged and weaker section including 
children with disabilities and provide free and 
compulsory education till its completion. Thus, 
schools cannot deny the admission of such 


Accessibility of Education for Children with Disabilities in India                                                                                                                      51 
 
children in their school. Quoting Section 13 of 
the RTE Act 2009, the National Commission for 
Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR) has pointed 
out that while admitting a child to school, the 
Act prohibits schools or persons from collecting 
capitation fees or subjecting the child or the 
parents and guardians to any screening 
procedure. 
(http://vikaspedia.in/education/policies-and-
schemes/right-to-education/right-to-education-
act). If a school violates the rule, they could be 
punished with fines. In spite of this Act, it has 
yet to be implemented effectively which leads 
problems for children to access to school. 
 
School Issue.   Traditionally, the schools for 
children with disabilities are most commonly 
segregated institutions for those with visual, 
hearing, intellectually impairment. The special 
schools are concentrated in larger cities; there 
are hardly such facilities available in rural 
especially remote areas. In many cases, children 
with disabilities in the special schools were less 
proficient in basic literacy and numeracy skills, 
had lower expectations about their own 
capabilities and lacked confidence in social 
settings. As a result, parents were not motivated 
to send children with disabilities in the school as 
they felt that there was no point in sending them 
to the school. 
 
Assistive Device.   Many parents are not 
aware of the importance of assistive devices and 
many special schools are not able to explain the 
importance of aids and appliances and how to 
utilize them for the child’s benefit. In the school 
for the deaf, for example, teachers may not know 
how to help a child with hearing impairment to 
hear with the help of hearing aids. As a result, 
such children and their parents do not show 
much interest in these aids, which affects the 
educational performance of these children. 
There is a debate about using oral and sign 
language for learning as a majority of schools 
and parents prefer oral language. Additionally, 
some parents may find it difficult to obtain such 
aids and appliances, as availability of 
rehabilitative services tends to be concentrated 
in urban areas. Further, some parents were not 
aware of the programs for free aids and 
appliances based on their annual income. Some 
parents also found that the designs did not help 
their child to function effectively. 
 
Negative Attitude Towards Disability and Education 
for Children with Disabilities.  Some nondisabled 
children and teachers show their negative 
attitude towards children with disabilities in 
regular school by discriminating, ignoring, 
bullying, labeling, abusing verbally, and so on. 
There are few regular schools that try to 
understand the specific needs of children with 
disabilities, and to accommodate to them 
according to their needs, which would motivate   
children with disabilities and their parents to 
remain in school.  This results in many parents 
pulling their children out of school. 
 
Teachers 
It is of utmost importance for the education of 
children with disabilities that staff in schools 
receive training and supervision in order to 
provide appropriate instruction to students with 
disabilities. The teacher’s attitude is of utmost 
importance in the education of children with 
disabilities because their judgments can have a 
social, emotional and intellectual influence on 
the well-being of a child. 
 
Lack of Training and Lack of Interest.   The 
special school teachers have the training to teach 
the children with disabilities, but they also need 
to update their knowledge especially, pedagogy 
in this field from time to time. Unfortunately, 
many special school teachers are interested 
securing a good job in government or in a local 
government school. Once they secure such job 
they lose interest in updating their knowledge, 


52                                                                                                                                                                       Global Education Review 3(3) 
developing new approaches, focusing new way to 
help children to improve their performance. 
Further, the teacher’s training course for special 
school teachers fails to train teachers adequately 
to work in an integrated setting (Mondal & Mete, 
N.d., p. 65). Those with temporary jobs in a 
private school for disabled children, are trying to 
apply to other schools, and therefore not paying 
attention to teaching children with disabilities.  
The majority of school personnel in India 
are not trained to design and implement 
educational programmes for students with 
disabilities in regular schools (Mondal & Mete, 
N.d., p. 65). Personnel in many regular schools 
have negative attitudes towards children with 
disabilities and some of them are not 
comfortable teaching such children. Lack of 
sensitivity amongst the teachers itself acts as an 
impediment to the education of children with 
disabilities. One of the important reasons for 
considerably insensitive attitudes of teachers 
towards children with disabilities may be their 
total lack of training or exposure in the field. 
It can be argued that the model being 
adopted by Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) is 
further deskilling mainstream teachers by 
assuming that the educational needs of children 
with disabilities are not the primary concern of 
the general teacher, rather they need to be 
addressed by a resource teacher or indeed 
teachers in special schools. NCERT (2006, p. 23) 
recommended that there is a need to, “gear all 
teacher education programmes (both pre-service 
and in-service) to developing the pedagogical 
skills required in inclusive classrooms”. 
Implementation of an inclusive curriculum 
would require a number of changes in present 
day teaching practices, curriculum content, 
evaluation procedures and available resources at 
the school level. Adapted curricula and learning 
materials, for meeting the learning needs of 
children with disabilities both in content and 
format, are not readily available in most states. 
This applies both to adaptation of regular 
curricula and to differences in curriculum 
between special and regular schools. 
 
Social Access.  Social access to schooling is 
important as physical access. It is important that 
schools recognize the diversity in our situation 
such as language, caste, class. If the language of 
instruction in a school in a tribal area is the State 
language, from class I itself, then the child is 
likely to find the school environment alienating. 
(RTA SSA Final report, N.d., p. 7)   The children 
with disabilities, who come from poor and 
illiterate families, may not have support to do 
homework and therefore they may find difficult 
to take an interest in further studies. The 
teachers’ own patterns of communication with 
children, the seating arrangements in the 
classroom, allocation of work between children, 
can serve to reinforce (or dispel) societal 
perceptions about the ‘proper’ role and place of 
girls and scheduled caste/scheduled tribe 
(SC/ST) and minority community students. 
Thus, ensuring access to schooling is a wider 
challenge and is not confined merely to opening 
schools in or near the habitations where children 
reside (RTA SSA Final Report, N.d., p. 7) 
 
Difficulties Related to School.   Some teachers 
may be aware that   children with disabilities, 
due to the presence of impairment may not be 
able to keep up with the pace of class, but they 
may not pay attention to such children as the 
number of students in the class is large, and 
hence, a child with disability remains neglected. 
This at times also may result in loss of child’s 
interest towards education.  
 
Shortage of Special Teachers.   There are quite 
Many teachers prefer to teach in schools in big 
cities therefore there is a dearth of special school 
teachers in rural and remote areas, despite the 
number of teachers training courses for special 
school teachers run by government and non-
government institutes. Many special schools do 


Accessibility of Education for Children with Disabilities in India                                                                                                                      53 
 
not have adequate funds and find it difficult   to 
provide competitive salaries. They pay less 
salary, which forces   teachers to leave; some 
teachers get temporary jobs in such schools and 
stay for few years.   As a result, there is a 
shortage of teachers and those who are in such 
schools, are forced to teach 2-3 classes at the 
same time, affecting the quality of the education 
provided to children with disabilities.   
 
Poverty 
In India, due to overpopulation, in spite of 
efforts of the Government of India, it is difficult 
to reduce the percentages of families who are 
below poverty line. A large number of children 
with disabilities belong to families that are below 
the poverty line.  Disability may be compounded 
by poverty because it leads to barriers to 
education and skill development. Because of 
economic hardship, families may find difficult to 
provide educational facilities including 
expensive assistive device and it becomes 
challenging for poor families to send   children 
with disabilities to the school. Thus, poverty and 
disability go hand in hand. The combination of 
poverty and disability results in a condition of 
“simultaneous deprivation”. This is a syndrome 
that sets up barriers to the participation of 
persons with disabilities in the normal routines 
and activities of the community, including 
regular schooling (Mondal& Mete, N.d., p. 64). 
 
Accessibility 
Schools are sometimes far from the home and 
there is a lack of transportation and lack of 
accessibility of travelling especially in slum areas 
in big cities, villages and remote areas. There 
should be all options of education, such as, open 
schools, regular schools, special schools, non-
formal and alternative education systems, 
available to all children with disabilities but 
unfortunately appropriate services are rare or 
unavailable. Children with disabilities face 
barriers if the school is not within their easy 
mobility and reach zones.   
Within school premises, children   face 
many difficulties in accessing the washroom, 
libraries, classroom, and playground. Although 
the attitudes toward inclusion of children with 
disabilities are gradually improving, there 
appears to be less movement with respect to 
general community attitudes with regard to 
building “Barrier Free Environments” in which 
people with disabilities can move about safely, 
independently and freely to use the facilities. 
School buildings in India are predominantly not 
accessible to people with disabilities; only 18% of 
SSA schools were “barrier free,” and the 
numbers are even lower in some states, with 2% 
in Jammu and Kashmir, and 6% in Bihar and 
most of the school buildings are already built, 
and building modifications are expensive in a 
country that already has resource-starved 
programs (Kohama, 2012, p. 36). However, all 
schools are not the same in terms of their 
physical infrastructure or in the quality of 
teaching. There are differences between rural 
and urban schools; public and private schools 
and even within public and private schools. 
Clearly, all children do not have the same 
learning opportunities.  
 
Government Policies 
Implementation of policy.   In spite of Central 
government sponsoring funds, many states in 
India show a lack of interest in implementing 
the policy. For example, out of 35 states/Union 
Territories (UTs), 16 states/UTs started 
implementing of Inclusive Education of Disabled 
at Secondary Stages (IEDSS) which replaced the 
earlier plan of Integrated Education for Disabled 
children in 2009-10, 7 states/UTs started it 
2010-11 and 4 states/UTs started it in 2011-12. 
Eight states namely Arunachal Pradesh, 
Chandigarh, Chattisgarh, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, 
Goa, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand and 
Lakshadweep are still not implementing the 


54                                                                                                                                                                       Global Education Review 3(3) 
IEDSS in spite of 100% financial support by the 
Central government. (Jhulka & Bansal, N.d.) 
Funds Issue.   Many states have not yet 
furnished the progress reports of the schemes 
undertaken and they did not submit utilization 
certificates of funds released; that created   
delays in the release of additional funds even 
after the approval by PMEG (Project Monitoring 
and Evaluation Group) to continue further work. 
(Jhulka & Bansal, N.d.) 
 
Lack of Linkages Between Different Departments.   
The government has devolved responsibility for 
education to different ministries and 
departments which created issues of lack of 
coordination, inability to develop a coherent 
strategy and duplication of efforts. For example, 
the education of children with disabilities 
attending special schools is the responsibility of 
the Ministry of Social Justice Empowerment, 
whereas children with disabilities in mainstream 
settings fall under the purview of the Ministry of 
Human Resource Department. While the former 
is financing special schools, the latter is trying to 
evolve an inclusive approach. This fragmented 
approach historically adopted by the 
government in response to the perceived unique 
needs of certain groups of children underscores 
an important dilemma. In addition, there is 
weak coordination of teacher training between 
Rehabilitation Council of India and the general 
teacher training system with respect to special 
needs, lack of coordination in early identification 
of children with special needs, and efforts 
towards convergence between government and 
NGOs/communities. Responsibility for teacher 
training is split between the Rehabilitation 
Council of India, which is responsible for the 
training of special education teachers, and the 
Ministry of Human Resource Development, 
which is responsible for general education 
teacher training.  This split between the types of 
teacher training does not promote inclusion at 
all (Kohama, 2012, p. 34). There is an absence of 
coherent government strategy for promoting 
inclusive education in many states. However, the 
experience of states like Tamilnadu and Gujarat 
offer cause for hope, with directed strategies for 
public/NGO partnerships to improve coverage 
and quality of inclusive education. (World Bank 
Report, 2009).  
 
Severity of disability.    The Legislature has 
failed to distinguish between the needs t of 
children having mild, moderate and severe 
disabilities and therefore, children with 
disabilities who could have been integrated into 
the mainstream schools are denied the 
opportunity. (Bagga, 2007). 
 
Curriculum.   There is a special curriculum 
designed for children with disabilities to 
increase accessibility such as language 
exemption for children with hearing 
impairment, communication for children with 
cerebral palsy. When these children enter 
regular school, they may find difficult to learn 
the general curriculum. The general curriculum 
needs to be adapted to the different formats that 
the special curriculum is available in to make it 
accessible for children with disabilities. 
(Kohama, 2012, P. 36). 
 
Recommendations 
Interventions should be effective for children, 
offer good value for money and be sustainable. 
This section highlights a range of approaches 
that can be undertaken to improve accessibility 
of education for children with disabilities. 
1. Improving the work on identification of 
children with different disabilities and 
promoting overall access to school for them 
are vital.  
2. Involvement of different stakeholders such as 
school, community leaders, government 
officers, parents having children with 
disabilities, Disabled people organization in 
facilitating education for children with 


Accessibility of Education for Children with Disabilities in India                                                                                                                      55 
 
disabilities by adopting partnership 
approach. 
3. The creation of barrier free environment 
including provision of ramps, transport 
facilities for accessibility to school. 
4. Creating facilities for home based schooling 
or special education for children with 
multiple disabilities, deaf-blind and 
intellectual and severe disabilities who may 
not be able to attend regular school. 
5. Organizing teacher training refresher courses 
for all teachers from private and government 
school on information on disability, 
individual educational plans, teaching- 
learning methods to support the education of 
children with disabilities. 
6. Addressing attitudinal barriers by community 
awareness programme on disability and 
education  
7. Making it mandatory for representation of 
parents of children with disabilities in 
education committee  
8. Conducting parental education programme 
such as workshop, training materials to help 
parents support their child’s learning 
9. Ensuring coordination with various 
ministries and line departments responsible 
for education and spell out each one role for 
effective implementation of educational 
policy for children with disabilities 
 
Conclusion 
Children with disabilities face a number of 
barriers to achieving their full potential. Due to 
various hurdles, particularly for those who are 
poor and who suffer other forms of humiliations, 
the families of these children frequently 
experience high levels of stress.  Lack of, or 
inadequate vocational training creates immense 
obstacles for children with disabilities to get out 
of their whirlpool of deprivations. They are more 
likely to live in poverty and face increased risk of 
social exclusion. Trends in Provision of services 
in India reflect   the leading policy 
predisposition before the 1970s   of segregation. 
However,   changing approaches to disability, 
from the charity model to the human rights 
model, have resulted in diversity of policy and 
practice. Despite the efforts of governmental and 
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), there is 
still a significant need to facilitate access to 
children with disabilities to educational 
institutions and to education in general. 
 
References: 
Alur, M. (2002). “Special Needs Policy in India”, in S. 
Hegarty & M. Alue (eds), Education and Children 
with Special Needs: From Segregation to Inclusion. 
New Delhi: Sage. 
Bagga, K. S. (2007) Ensuring disabled people their right to 
education, India Law Journal, 1, 4, Retrieved on 
13th March, 2016 from 
http://indialawjournal.com/volume1/issue_4/article
_by_bagga.html 
Baquer, A. & Sharma, A. (2006) Disability: Challenges vs 
Responses, New Delhi: Concerned Action Now and 
Global College Press, Arizona. 
Byrd, E.S., (2010), India, Families and a Special School, 
TEACHING Exceptional Children Plus, 6 (3) Article 
6. Retrieved on 17th March 2016, from   
http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ879598.pdf  
Julka, A. & Bansal,I..(N.d.) , Evaluation of the 
Implementation of the Schemes IEDSS in India, New 
Delhi: Department of Education of Groups with 
Special Needs (DEGSN), NCERT, Retrieved on  10th 
July 2015 from 
http://www.ncert.nic.in/departments/nie/degsn/pdf
_files/fp3.pdf   
Kohama, Angela (2012). Inclusive Education in India: A 
Country in Transition, Retrieved on 18th March 
2016 from  http://intldept.uoregon.edu/wp-
content/uploads/2012/12/INTL-UG-Thesis-
Kohama.pdf 
Lal, Rubina (2005) Effect of Inclusive Education on 
Language and Social Development of Children with 
Autism, Asia Pacific Disability Rehabilitation 
Journal,  16,  1 2005, pp 78-84. Retrieved on 18th 
March 2016 from 
http://english.aifo.it/disability/apdrj/apdrj105/inclu
ed.pdf 
Ministry of Human Resource Development. (1986). Ministry 
of Human Resource Development: National Policy 
of Education 1986. New Delhi: Government of India. 
Retrieved on 17th July 2015,   from 
http://mhrd.gov.in/sites/upload_files/mhrd/files/d
ocument-reports/NPE86-mod92.pdf 


56                                                                                                                                                                       Global Education Review 3(3) 
Ministry of Human Resource Development (2004). 
Education for all: India marches ahead. New Delhi: 
Government of India. Retrieved on 17th July 2015, 
from 
http://mhrd.gov.in/sites/upload_files/mhrd/files/u
pload_document/EFA-Review-Report-final.pdf  
Ministry of Law and Justice. (1996). The Persons with 
Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of 
Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995. New Delhi: 
Government of India.    Retrieved on 17th July 2015, 
from 
http://www.disabilityaffairs.gov.in/upload/uploadfil
es/files/PWD_Act.pdf 
Mondal, A. & Mete, J. ( N.d.) Education of Children with 
Disabilities in India: Concern and Policy Perspective 
Accessed on 18th July 2015  from 
http://www.caluniv.ac.in/academic/education_jour
nal/7%20Education%20of%20Children%20with%20
Disabilities%20in%20India%20Concern%20and%20
Policy%20Perpective.pdf 
National Council of Educational Research and Training 
(2005). The National focus group on education of 
children with special needs. Position paper. 
Accessed on 18th July 2015   from 
http://www.ncert.nic.in/sites/publication/schoolcur
riculum/Position_Papers/Special%20Needs%20Edu
cation%20Final%20.pdf  
National Council of Educational Research and Training (Feb 
2006) Position paper, National Focus Group on 
Education with Children with Special Needs, 
NCERT, New Delhi, Accessed on 18th July 2015  from 
http://epathshala.nic.in/wp-
content/doc/NCF/Pdf/special_ed_final1.pdf 
National Sample Survey 58th round (July to December 2002 
(2003). National Sample Survey Organisation, 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation, Government of India. Accessed on 
16th July, 2015, from  
http://mospi.nic.in/rept%20_%20pubn/485_final.p
df 
Registrar General of India (2011). Census of India. 2011. 
Retrieved on 1st July 2015 from: 
http://www.censusindia.net. 
RTA SSA Final Report (N.d.) Retrieved on 10th March 2016 
from http://ssa.nic.in/quality-
docs/RTE%20SSA%20Final%20Report.pdf 
Target Study, (2013), Education of Disabled Children in 
India, retrieved on 17th July 2015, 
https://targetstudy.com/articles/education-of-
disabled-children-in-india.html 
World Bank (July 2009) People with Disabilities in India: 
from commitments to Outcomes, New Delhi: Human 
Development Unit, South Asia Region. Retrieved on 
10th July 2015  from http://www-
wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentSe
rver/WDSP/IB/2009/09/02/000334955_2009090
2041543/Rendered/PDF/502090WP0Peopl1Box034
2042B01PUBLIC1.pdf 
Zachariah, Job (December, 3, 2000). Education of Disabled: 
Open the Door. Retrieved on 18th March 2016 from 
http://pib.nic.in/feature/feyr2000/fdec2000/f01122
0001.html 
 
Website sources 
Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 
2009 (Right to Education Act) Retrieved on 16th July, 
2015 from http://vikaspedia.in/education/policies-
and-schemes/right-to-education/right-to-education-
act  
 
About the Author 
Sandhya Limaye, PhD, is Associate Professor, Center for 
Disability Studies and Action, School of Social work, Tata 
Institute of Social Sciences.  She is a former Rockefeller, 
Fulbright, and Erasmus Mundus Fellow, and has worked 
with the disabled population in India for the last 32 years. 
 She runs a field action project iCBR (Inclusive Community 
Based Rehabilitation), for overall rehabilitation for the 
people with disabilities from rural and slum areas of 
Mumbai.   She has done collaborative research with the 
University of Minnesota on Disability and Identity. She has 
published multiple articles based on her research on various 
issues related to disability.