SSDI Approval Rates by Age (2025 Update)
Your age is one of the most important factors affecting the approval or denial of your Social Security Disability Insurance claim. Evaluators consider age, along with your education, work history, and physical ability, to assess claims. Your age may also be a factor in the appeals process.
Disability Advice can explain how your age affects the chance of approval and help you pursue a successful SSDI claim. Our team has helped thousands of disabled Americans navigate the process to get the benefits they need. Let us show you how to use age to your advantage in an SSDI claim.
Why Age Matters in SSDI Claims
SSDI eligibility only requires you to have a medical condition that prevents you from working and a history of recent payments to Social Security. However, age can be a determining factor in SSDI claims.
Older workers, especially those with a long history at a particular job, may find it harder to retrain and secure work they are physically capable of doing. The SSA’s guidelines reflect this.
Since your SSDI payment amount is based on your lifetime earnings, workers with a longer work history will typically get greater benefits.
SSA’s Medical-Vocational Guidelines
When evaluating SSDI claims, the SSA uses a chart called the Medical-Vocational Grid, which weighs the applicant’s age, education, and previous work experience to determine if a condition is disabling. Under the SSA’s guidelines, older applicants are more likely to get approval because they generally have greater difficulty finding suitable employment. The guidelines recognize that older individuals are less able to obtain the skills they may need to transfer into a different line of work, especially if they lack higher education.
Age-Related Factors Influencing Approval Chances
Age is not a function of determining your residual functional capacity, but it may be a factor in your doctor’s medical assessment. Age is a more important consideration in the vocational guidelines since the SSA expressly considers older workers to have a harder time adjusting to a new profession.
That doesn’t mean younger applicants can’t be approved, though. Regardless of your age, a qualified disability attorney can give your claim the best chance for success.
Breakdown of SSDI Recipients by Age Group – 2025 Data
While the SSA does not release direct data on the SSDI approval rate by age, it does release the age breakdown of program recipients.
Younger Claimants (18-29) and Trends
Adults under 30 make up the smallest percentage of the SSDI recipient pool. In the most recent year available, 2023, 6.3% of male and 5.9% of female SSDI applicants under age 30 received approval. Those are roughly the same numbers as 2022, when 5.6% of male and 5.3% of female applicants under 30 were approved.
Younger people have never made up more than 10% of SSDI applicants receiving approval since the program was extended to include all age brackets, reflecting a lower acceptance rate for younger people in general. For those under 45, the SSA doesn’t consider that their age will prevent them from adjusting to a different line of work.
Middle-Aged Claimants (30-44 and 45-54) and Trends
In 2023, 12.8% of male SSDI recipients were between 30 and 44 when they received their first benefits, and 22.4% were between 45 and 54. The numbers for female recipients were 15.5% and 26.2%, respectively. These numbers are in line with recent years.
The group of recipients aged 50 to 54 is especially well represented. In 2023, 17.9% of female and 15.6% of male recipients were in this age group when they first received benefits. SSDI rules after age 50 are slightly different—the SSA defines the 50-54 age bracket as “closely approaching advanced age,” when age may substantially interfere with an individual’s ability to switch to a different type of work.
Older Claimants (55-64 and 65+) and Trends
Older claimants have always made up the largest group of SSDI recipients. In 2023, 51.2% of female and 56.6% of male claimants were between 55 and 64 when their claim was approved.
However, only 1.3% of female and 1.9% of male claimants were 65 or older. This likely reflects that adults over 65 are generally entitled to retirement benefits and may not apply for SSDI.
Applicants over 55 are considered to be of advanced age. The SSA assumes this group will have a much more difficult time adjusting to new work, so the guidelines make it easier to find that an older applicant is disabled.
How Age Influences the SSDI Appeals Process
Many SSDI recipients are initially rejected and receive approval through appeals. This process has four ascending levels: reconsideration, a hearing with a judge, an Appeals Council review, and a federal district court action.
Age doesn’t directly matter in the SSDI appeals process. However, it could make a difference in how a disability lawyer pursues your appeal. If you are younger, your lawyer may focus on additional medical evidence showing how your disability prevents you from working. If you are older, your attorney might try to show how changing your line of work isn’t possible.
Appeal Success Rates by Age
The SSA releases limited statistical information on the appeals process. However, the data shows most applicants are initially denied, many for technical reasons such as application errors. We also know that the SSA uses the medical-vocational grid to asses initial applications and appeals.
If your SSDI claim has been denied, an experienced Social Security advocate can identify why your claim was denied and determine your best strategy for appeal.
Frequently Asked Questions About SSDI Approval Rates and Age
If you have a question about what SSDI is or SSDI approval by age that has not been answered here, contact us today.
					
 Does Age Alone Determine SSDI Eligibility? 
							
			
			
		
						
				
No, age alone doesn’t determine SSDI eligibility. However, age is considered, and older applicants generally find it easier to win approval.
					
 Are Older Applicants More Likely To Get Approved? 
							
			
			
		
						
				
Yes, older SSDI applicants are more likely to be approved. However, each case is different, and your age does not guarantee your claim will succeed.
					
 How Does Age Affect the Duration of the SSDI Claims Process? 
							
			
			
		
						
				
Age does not directly affect the SSDI approval timeline. Your application processing time depends on your regional Social Security office.
					
 Can Younger Applicants Improve Their Chances With Additional Medical Evidence? 
							
			
			
		
						
				
SSDI claims always require medical evidence. It is especially vital for younger applicants. A qualified disability attorney can help you decide what evidence will strengthen your case.
Need Help With Your SSDI Claim?
Age is an important factor in an SSDI claim, but your medical records, job history, and education also play major roles. Applicants of all ages can be successful, especially if they work with an experienced disability attorney.
Disability Advice has helped disabled Americans of all ages get the benefits they need and deserve. Our supportive team can provide guidance that gives your claim the best chance for success. Contact us today for a free, no-obligation claim review.