THE FINANCIAL WELLBEING OF DISABLED PEOPLE IN THE UK
:
AC
C ESS TO ESSENTIAL SERVICESQuick Read
Everyday banking presents a problem for many disabled people: 
Half of disabled people (53%) in our survey reported difficulties getting to 
a bank branch; and four-in-ten (37%) had problems getting to or using a 
cash machine. Remote banking is not a solution for everyone, with four-
in-ten (44%) disabled people finding it difficult or confusing to deal with 
financial services staff on the phone. A quarter (24%) reported similar 
problems with online banking services, rising to 58% among those who 
find using digital devices difficult.  
Disabled people face barriers to accessing other financial services 
as well: Two-in-ten survey respondents (18%) feared switching products 
due to the risk of scams or making a mistake. A similar number (16%) 
worried about disclosing their impairment in case firms withdrew 
insurance cover or charged them more. It was not uncommon for 
disabled people to report being turned down for credit or insurance 
products or to be offered products on terms they felt to be expensive 
and/or unfair. In addition, only three-in-ten respondents (29%) who had 
accessed information or advice on financial matters were satisfied with 
the quality of what was available. 
New regulation brings opportunities but also risks: A new Consumer 
Duty means that financial services firms must “deliver good outcomes for 
retail customers”, including in terms of price and value; consumer 
understanding; and consumer support. But there are concerns that firms 
may simply stop serving some customers altogether rather than risk not 
complying with the regulations. It is crucial therefore that the regulator 
closely monitors what firms do and the outcomes for consumers, 
including disabled consumers and others in vulnerable situations. 


2 
 


3 
 
Introduction
The UK Money and Pensions Service says that "financial wellbeing is 
about feeling secure and in control. It’s about making the most of your 
money from day to day, dealing with the unexpected, and being on 
track for a healthy financial future." Financial wellbeing is essential to 
delivering the United Nation’s vision of “the equal right of all persons 
with disabilities to live in the community, with choices equal to others, 
and […] full inclusion and participation in the community”.  
In September 2023, a research team from the University of Bristol and 
the Research Institute for Disabled Consumers published a report 
looking at the financial wellbeing of disabled people in the UK. The 
report is based on discussions with disabled people in the UK about 
what ‘financial wellbeing’ means to them and the difficulties they face in 
trying to improve their financial wellbeing. We used this information to 
help us measure the financial wellbeing of disabled people in a survey. 
The 815 disabled people who took part in the survey were members of 
a UK-wide research panel of approximately 3,500 people run by the 
Research Institute for Disabled Consumers (RiDC), which is broadly 
representative of the wider disabled population. 
Our research shows that disabled people can face multiple 
disadvantages that impact on their individual resilience and financial 
wellbeing, including accessing work, benefits and essential services, in 
addition to the costs of disability. This can result in a ‘disability trap’ as 
shown in Figure 1, which risks negatively affecting disabled people’s 
health and further disabling them in other areas of their lives.  
 
Figure 1 – The ‘disability trap’  
 


4 
 
We have produced four short briefings on the policy areas 
highlighted in the research. This briefing is on access to essential 
services, with a particular focus on financial services. The others 
look at barriers to employment; the benefits system; and the extra 
costs of disability. You can download the full research report and four 
briefing papers in PDF format from our website.  
 
The Social Model of Disability recognises that people are disabled by 
barriers in society, not by their impairment or difference. Financial 
services are a good example of how people are disabled by barriers 
such as the design of physical and online environments (like bank 
branches and websites) and the ways in which organisations 
communicate with consumers.  
There has been a serious decline in branch
-
based banking facilities and cash machines
The total number of bank and building society branches fell by 40% 
between 2012 and 2022. Some of the remaining branches have 
significantly reduced their opening hours and the services they offer. 
The number of cash machines – which provide access to cash, balance 
and account information and some other functions – also fell by 22% 
between July 2018 and Sept 2022. And there is no guarantee that the 
remaining branches and cash machines are accessible for disabled 
people.  
There are multiple reasons for these changes, but the result is the 
same: individuals and businesses now have far less physical access to 
essential financial services than they did in the past and so less choice 
about how they transact. As Figure 1 shows, half of disabled people 
(53%) in our survey reported difficulties getting to a bank branch; and 
four-in-ten (37%) said they had problems getting to or using a cash 
machine. Difficulty with cash machines was notably high among those 
registered blind (60%) and those with a dexterity-related impairment 
(47%), while 56% of those with a physical mobility impairment reported 
difficulty getting to a bank branch.  
This tallies with research from the Business Disability Forum, which 
found that four in ten (40%) of disabled people said that their choice of 
personal banking or insurance services was limited because of their 
disability or access needs. Similarly, the ONS found evidence of greater 
difficulty accessing banking services among disabled people (25%) than 
non-disabled people (14%). In other research conducted by the 
consumer organisation Which?, disabled respondents reported specific 
issues with wheelchair access (13%), hearing loops (10%) and 


5 
 
accessible debit cards (12%) in the past 12 months. Data collected by 
the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) and Payment Systems Regulator 
(PSR) show that three-in-five (63%) branches run by the largest banks 
and building societies are wheelchair accessible, have step-free access 
and also have a hearing loop available. 
 
Figure 1 – Problems accessing financial services in the last two 
years 
 
Remote banking does not work for significant numbers of disabled people
Branch-based financial services have been replaced by telephone and 
online services but four-in-ten (44%) of our survey respondents said 
they found it difficult or confusing to deal with financial services 
customer service staff on the phone. This rises to 68% among those 
with a behaviour-related impairment, 60% among those with a 
communication-related impairment and 59% with a hearing-related 
impairment. Respondents explained the range of challenges they may 
face: 
“[Call centre staff] do not understand disability and 
how it affects you. Trying to get through to a human is 
becoming more difficult which can make you more 
irate.” 
53%
44%
37%
24%
19%
15%
21%
0%
20%
40%
60%
Difficulty getting to a bank branch
Found dealing with customer services on
the phone confusing and/or difficult
Difficulty accessing or using an ATM / cash
machine
Found using online banking services
confusing and/or difficult
Difficulty understanding letters, emails or
other messages sent to you by a company
Found it difficult to arrange for a trusted
person to deal with finances on your behalf
None of the above


6 
 
“The telephone system is unusable; long waits and 
ridiculously complicated security checks.  The same 
goes for on-line shopping, too many additional 
security checks.  Too many banks I cannot open an 
account with because they require you to have a 
mobile phone, there is no reception where we live.” 
This echoes the finding of research from the Disability Business Forum, 
which found that disabled consumers were not satisfied with the help 
they received from customer service staff. Examples included staff not 
being sufficiently knowledgeable about the accessibility features of their 
own apps or websites, or just repeating the same scripted answer when 
asked to rephrase something. 
A quarter (24%) reported similar problems with online banking services, 
unsurprisingly rising to 58% among those who find using digital devices 
difficult. Other research shows that disabled people make up a large 
proportion of internet non-users and are twice as likely to lack basic 
digital skills. This will severely limit their access to essential financial 
and other services (including government services), which may 
negatively impact their ability to manage their finances and exercise 
control over their financial situation, which are key components of 
financial wellbeing. Given the significant barriers to access evidenced 
by our study and other research, however, it is clear that helping 
disabled people improve their digital skills and confidence could only 
ever be one small part of the much wider effort required. 
The nature of people’s impairments can also affect how they feel about 
talking to essential service providers like banks and insurance 
companies, as one of our participants described:  
“I have mental health conditions, and I feel like the 
anxiety and the way I feel about myself, and towards 
my financial wellbeing, impacts how I’m then able to 
communicate with people, and who I trust.”  
 Disabled people face other issues with financial services
In addition to physical barriers, disabled people reported a range of 
other issues with accessing financial services (Figure 2). Two-in-ten 
survey respondents (18%) feared switching products due to the risk of 
scams or making a mistake, which might leave them stuck with poor 


7 
 
value or inappropriate products. A similar number (16%) worried about 
disclosing their impairment in case financial services firms withdrew 
insurance cover or charged them more. It was also not uncommon for 
disabled people to say they had been turned down for credit or 
insurance products or to be offered products on terms they felt to be 
expensive and/or unfair.    
The experience of one participant highlights the interactions between 
work, income and access to financial services that can negatively 
impact disabled people: having worked all his adult life, he suddenly 
saw his mortgage interest rate skyrocket due to being unable to re-
mortgage since he was no longer able to work.  
 
Figure 2 – Problems dealing with financial services firms in the 
last two years 
 
18%
16%
13%
9%
8%
4%
57%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
Avoided switching to a different financial
product or company in case you made a
mistake or fell victim to a scam
Felt frightened to tell a financial service
provider about your illness or case they
withdraw insurance cover or charge
Offered an insurance product at a price,
or with terms and conditions, you felt to
be unfair or expensive
Turned down for a mortgage or other
form of credit
Turned down for an insurance product
Offered a mortgage or other credit at a
price, or with terms and conditions, you
felt to be unfair or expensive
None of the above


8 
 
Information and advice for disabled people about financial matters is lacking 
Most of our survey respondents said they had accessed some form of 
advice or information on financial matters,1 but only three-in-ten of them 
(29%) were satisfied with the quality of the advice or information that 
was available. Respondents mentioned a wide range of areas where 
information was lacking, such as on guardianship, equity release and 
annuities for less common but life-shortening conditions, financial 
guidance for disabled teenagers, and accessing benefits.  
Other research found that just over 60% of disabled consumers felt that 
the specific information they needed was hard to find, with challenges 
often relating to difficulties: 
• accessing specific product information 
• accessing websites or apps using assistive technology 
• the availability of different communication channels (webchat, 
phone, etc) 
• limited details about alternative formats available 
• information generally being hard to find. 
This means that opportunities are being missed to help disabled people 
with money matters, particularly when a quarter of disabled people 
(23%) don’t feel confident about managing their money. This figure is 
much higher for some types of impairment: for example half (48%) of 
people with a communication-related impairment felt unconfident about 
managing their money, as did a similar number (46%) of people with a 
behaviour-related impairment. 
Participants in the focus groups and discussion forum also commented 
on how impairments could compromise their ability to understand, 
oversee or communicate their finances, including processing financial 
information and making financial decisions. As one participant told us:  
“I think understanding [finances] is a big thing. I have 
ME [chronic fatigue syndrome] as well as fibromyalgia 
and I think constant chronic pain and brain fog can 
mean that, if you’re told new information, it doesn’t 
 
1 The survey question did not ask about specific sources of information or advice on financial 
matters. Sources could include information from financial services firms, independent financial 
advice, or information and advice provided by money guidance services or debt advisers.  


9 
 
always get through to you the first time someone says 
it.” 
A quarter (24%) of survey respondents said they needed help with 
paperwork – a key part of buying financial services but also other areas 
of everyday life such as applying for jobs or benefits. Some groups of 
respondents were much more likely to need this type of help, including 
those with communication-related (46%) and behaviour-related (51%) 
impairments and people with learning difficulties (59%).  
What needs to happen to improve disabled people’s access to financial services?
Like employers, financial services have a legal obligation to make 
reasonable adjustments to ensure that disabled people receive the 
same service as non-disabled people, as far as possible.  
In addition, from July 2023 financial services firms that are regulated by 
the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) must comply with a new 
Consumer Duty to “deliver good outcomes for retail customers”. These 
outcomes relate to the governance of products and services; price and 
value; consumer understanding; and consumer support – all things that 
disabled people in our study had experienced problems with. This is in 
addition to the regulator’s expectations that firms consider the needs of 
customers in vulnerable situations (including those with impairments) 
“when developing products and services, and across the entire 
customer journey.” 
These new duties and expectations are meant to ensure that financial 
services firms treat all customers fairly, for example by using inclusive 
design in product development. But there are concerns that firms may 
simply stop serving some groups of customers altogether rather than 
risk not complying with the regulations. It is crucial therefore that the 
regulator closely monitors what firms do and the outcomes for 
consumers. Tied to this, there have been calls for government to give 
the FCA a new “must have regard to” requirement for considering 
financial inclusion across its work, to try and safeguard people’s access 
to financial services. 
As part of its programme of research on ‘what disabled consumers 
choose to buy and why’, the Business Disability Forum made a series of 
recommendations for banking and insurance providers looking to attract 
or retain disabled consumers. This included the suggestion that firms 
need to go beyond making their digital and physical infrastructure 
accessible to actually communicating this clearly to consumers before 
they sign-up for the service. Firms also need to consider how they can 
make all parts of the consumer journey available by different 


10 
 
communication channels, with information provided in a range of 
alternative formats.  
As we are all increasingly expected to use online and digital services, it 
is important that people are equipped to do this safely. A House of 
Lords inquiry into digital exclusion recommended, for example, 
government investment in basic skills and community-based digital 
inclusion hubs. As full digital inclusion is unrealistic, the inquiry 
concluded that “Accessible services and offline alternatives are 
essential to ensuring people are not left behind in an increasingly 
connected world.” 
The inquiry also makes the point that digitally excluded groups, 
including disabled people, are likely to be poorly represented in some 
datasets that inform algorithmic decision-making. As a result, they face 
a growing risk of marginalisation given the increasing use of predictive 
machine learning tools in public services, which this is equally true of 
financial and other services. Wherever they are used, these tools 
should be kept under review.  
Finally, the UK’s Financial Wellbeing Strategy 2020-2030 has a cross-
cutting theme of mental health but no focus on disabled people or other 
impairments. This study shows that, at the very least, MaPS could 
consider changing the cross-cutting theme to ‘mental health and 
disability’.  
 
 What’s already happening: 
Support Hub
Experian (a large credit information firm) has collaborated with 
consumers, firms and charities to develop Support Hub, a free-to-use 
online service that allows consumers to share their support needs 
across multiple organisations in a transparent, standardised and 
consented way. For example, this could include telling organisations 
that you need statements in Braille or that you need more time to 
complete tasks. Consumers are updated as organisations confirm their 
support needs requests have been completed, and consumers can 
update or revoke their support needs via Support Hub information at 
any time. Support Hub is underpinned by an industry-standard 
taxonomy of support needs called Support List that has been designed 
by consumers.  
 
 


11 
 
What’s already happening: Disability and Access 
Ambassadors
The Government’s Disability Unit manages their Disability and Access 
Ambassadors programme, which was expanded in 2021. This includes 
senior business leaders who “encourage improvements in the 
accessibility and quality of services and facilities in their sector for 
disabled people”. The ambassadors cover around 20 different sectors, 
including banking, insurance and energy. Each one aims to champion 
issues related to disability and accessibility in their industry, with the 
banking ambassador, for example, focusing on issues related to access 
to banking for people with cognitive difference. 
 
 What’s already happening: 
financial services 
industry 
reports
on accessibility
In 2023, the Lending Standards Board published a report on access for 
d/Deaf customers in banking and credit. This highlights issues for the 
industry to focus on, such as how to offer tailored support to d/Deaf 
customers and how to approach offering third party support, such as 
BSL interpreters, rather than forcing customers to rely on friends or 
family. 
UK Finance and EY have also been working together in 2023 on a 
programme called ‘The Future of Accessible Banking’.  Through a 
series of forums between the banking industry and charities, they 
identified a series of themes that the industry needs to take into account 
to achieve accessibility, such as ensuring dialogue between product 
designers and those with lived experience and providing ‘customer-
centric’ channels of communication. Further work on this programme 
continues to take place in Autumn 2023.


12 
 
 
About this research
This research was a collaboration between the University of 
Bristol’s Personal Finance Research Centre (PFRC) and the 
Research Institute for Disabled Consumers (RiDC). It was funded 
by abrdn Financial Fairness Trust.  
The authors of the research report are:  
▪ Jamie Evans, Research Fellow, University of Bristol 
▪ Sharon Collard, PFRC Research Director, University of 
Bristol 
▪ Ellen Fruijtier, Associate Director of Research, RiDC 
▪ Hayley Dawson, Senior Researcher, RiDC 
▪ Luis Campos Ferreira, Research Assistant, RiDC 
▪ Eric Harris, Director of Inclusive Research, RiDC. 
 
The research team would like to thank everyone on the Research 
Institute for Disabled Consumer’s research panel, who gave their 
time to take part in this project.  
Thanks also to our Project Advisory Group members: Jeremy 
Balfour, MSP; Mark Dale, Portland College; Fazilet Hadi, 
Disability Rights UK; Viv Jackson, abrdn Financial Fairness Trust; 
Sarah Murphy, Money and Pensions Service; Matt Oakley, WPI 
Economics and Social Market Foundation; Matt Padley, 
Loughborough University Centre for Research in Social Policy; 
Chloe Schendel-Wilson, Disability Policy Centre; Johnny 
Timpson OBE, Financial Services Consumer Panel and Financial 
Inclusion Commission.  
For further information, please contact jamie.evans@bristol.ac.uk 
or sharon.collard@bristol.ac.uk