CHECK YOUR BIAS! 
Mehrdad Mirpourian
Jonathan Fu
Sonja Kelly
A FIELD GUIDE 
FOR LENDERS


Because there’s 
nothing micro about 
a billion women.
 
Mary Ellen Iskenderian
Author, Advocate, President and 
CEO of Women’s World Banking


| 3
04   |
05   |
07   |
12   |
21   |
31   |
32   |
Acknowledgments
Introduction
Part I: Fundamentals of Bias and Fairness in Lending
Part II: How to Audit for Credit Bias 
	

Part III: Bias Detection and Mitigation Examples in India, 
Mexico, and Colombia
Conclusion: Why Bias Detection Matters
References
Contents
09	 |	
Gender Biases in Credit Processes
10	 |	
Assessing and Pursuing Fairness in Credit Processes	
	
	
13	 |	
Auditing for Group-Level Fairness
13	 |	
Auditing for Individual-Level Fairness
17	 |	
Gender Bias Scorecard for Lenders
20	 |	
Additional Diagnostic Assessments
22	 |	
India: Lendingkart
24	 |	
Mexico: Banco Anonimo
28 | 
Colombia: Aflore


| 4
Acknowledgments  |  Introduction  |  Fundamentals of Bias and Fairness   |  How to Audit for Credit Bias  
Bias Detection and Mitigation Examples  |  Conclusions  |  References
This report would not have been possible 
without our encouraging and patient colleagues 
across the industry. In particular, we would like 
to thank Dr. Annette Krauss and Dr. Mrinal 
Mishra at University of Zurich’s Department of 
Finance and Banking for their instrumental role 
in ensuring our work was intelligible to a broad 
audience. Second, we thank Lendingkart 
Technologies in India, Banco Anonimo in 
Mexico, and Aflore in Colombia for partnering 
Acknowledgments
with us in this project and for providing us 
with the insights that drove our inquiries. Our 
colleagues Pallavi Madhok, Gerardo Pedroza, 
and Harsha Rodriguez deftly translated 
data science insights into business realities, 
contributing a great deal to these ideas. Finally, 
we  are  grateful for  support  from  data.org, 
without which we would not have had the 
freedom and opportunity to pursue this topic.


| 5
Introduction
Credit has always been a fundamental part of both formal and informal 
financial services. In the last three decades, however, the exponential 
growth in data and computing power has led to new ways of assessing 
creditworthiness. 
Artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) 
have opened up the possibility of scoring new and 
alternative data sources, either to complement or 
to replace more traditional lending methodologies. 
But how do financial services providers (FSPs) 
ensure these new systems are both efficient and 
fair? Amidst the backdrop of a rapidly changing 
credit landscape, this practical field guide walks 
executives and data scientists alike through 
recommendations for ensuring that revised and 
new credit scoring methods are not unintentionally 
excluding women.1
1	 Throughout the paper, we use “men” and “women” to refer to gender because these are the binary terms that most lenders use. Nevertheless, our findings 
are applicable to all genders, and we recognize that these issues of bias are just as relevant (perhaps even more relevant) for people who identify as non-
binary.
Acknowledgments  |  Introduction  |  Fundamentals of Bias and Fairness   |  How to Audit for Credit Bias  
Bias Detection and Mitigation Examples  |  Conclusions  |  References
Women’s 
World 
Banking, 
in 
partnership with University of 
Zurich and with support from 
data.org, set out in 2021 on a two-
year technical assistance project 
with three financial institutions: 
Lendingkart 
in 
India, 
Banco 
Anonimo in Mexico, and Aflore in 
Colombia. With each institution, 
we conducted a thorough bias 
audit across either their credit 
portfolio or a particular credit 
product line. While our hypothesis 
was that we would find bias of 
some sort in nearly any portfolio, 
we were surprised by our results. 
All three institutions were “mostly 
fair,” and the biases that emerged 
came from side inquiries and 
additional analyses rather than 
from glaring or obvious gender 
differences in the most visible parts 
of the institutions’ portfolios.
Project Background
BOX 1


| 6
This guide combines academic work on bias 
detection with practical experience analyzing 
administrative data from real lenders working to 
increase financial inclusion around the world. The 
diversity of institutions this report references (Box 
1) offered a natural test for generalizability of a core 
set of easy-to-understand bias detection questions. 
Although our focus is on detecting gender biases, 
the same tools and principles can be applied to bias 
detection for any underrepresented group. 
Detecting bias is not a superfluous exercise. For 
financial institutions, knowing where bias exists can 
serve as a way of identifying overlooked markets 
(as is the case with rejected applicants who are 
highly creditworthy); maximizing the value of current 
customers (for example, those who are not receiving 
sufficiently large loans); or proving alignment with 
regulatory or legal compliance (in demonstrating 
the likelihood of a credit offer among men versus 
women, for instance). For customers, an institution 
attuned to bias detection is more likely to provide 
equal opportunities for business growth for men- 
and women-owned businesses. For regulators 
or policymakers, bias detection processes that 
ensure fairness contribute to broader economic 
participation.
This report has three main sections. The first section 
is a primer on the fundamental concepts of bias 
and fairness that anyone working in lending should 
know. In the second section, for the more technical 
readers, we discuss the statistical foundations of
bias audit. The last section offers three examples of 
bias detection from three different institution types, 
as well suggestions on potential bias mitigation 
interventions specific to the institutions’ context. 
This report is relevant for all lenders, even if most 
of our examples are from institutions using more 
automated and digital processes.
Acknowledgments  |  Introduction  |  Fundamentals of Bias and Fairness   |  How to Audit for Credit Bias  
Bias Detection and Mitigation Examples  |  Conclusions  |  References


| 7
This is far more difficult than it sounds. “Is our credit product fair for women-owned businesses?” is a 
great question, but it is one that will prompt either an imprecise or an invalid response if there is no clear 
understanding of fairness and bias.
The credit assessment process is a set of steps within which a lender evaluates the 
creditworthiness of credit applicants and measures the perceived credit risk these 
applicants pose to the institution. Credit risk is the probability of a loss resulting 
from a borrower who fails to meet their contractual credit obligations. We divide 
credit assessment processes into three main categories: non-digital, digital, and hybrid.
(continued on the next page) 
Part 1 : 
Fundamentals of Bias 
and Fairness in Lending
Every member of a product team—from senior strategic decision-makers 
to more junior technical team members—should be able to speak the 
language of fairness and bias.   
Acknowledgments  |  Introduction  |  Fundamentals of Bias and Fairness   |  How to Audit for Credit Bias  
Bias Detection and Mitigation Examples  |  Conclusions  |  References
A Diversity of Credit Processes
BOX 2


| 8
A digital credit process refers to a credit process in which the primary credit 
assessment activities are digitized. A credit applicant fills out an application form 
through a personal technology device (phone, computer, tablet, or another device) 
and submits the application. After submitting the application, the assessment is 
nearly fully automated and an algorithm or set of predefined coded rules make 
the credit decision. This category has the least amount of human intervention in 
credit assessment, and a decision can happen in seconds. 
Hybrid processes are a combination of both non-digital and digital processes. In 
this category, credit officers usually collect credit applicants’ information, and 
an algorithm conducts the credit assessment based on the provided information. 
The credit decision-making might be based on the output of the algorithm, or the 
algorithm output might be given to a credit analyst who then makes the final 
credit decision.
Digital Credit Process
Non-Digital Credit Process
Hybrid Credit Process
Under a non-digital credit process (a.k.a. traditional), the credit assessment is 
highly dependent on human judgment. Relative to other types of credit processes, 
in non-digital processes the credit officers have the maximum level of power 
for interventions in credit decisions. A credit officer in this context is the person 
who assesses creditworthiness, supports credit or risk analysts by providing 
information, makes a credit decision, collects payments on the loan, and/or 
provides product or financial education to borrowers. Given this potential range 
of roles, loan officers play a crucial role in a non-digital credit process model. 
They often have a close connection to their customers and a strong understanding 
of an applicant’s income, businesses, and social status. This credit model and set-
up can be very successful in highly relationship-oriented economies and cultures, 
and under some specific circumstances. For example, this model may be used in 
a market with a poor credit reporting infrastructure. On the other hand, non-
digital models are highly prone to unconscious biases introduced by loan officers.2
2	 Women’s World Banking (2020). Creating a better banking experience for women-led micro, small, and medium enterprises in Kenya. 
Acknowledgments  |  Introduction  |  Fundamentals of Bias and Fairness   |  How to Audit for Credit Bias  
Bias Detection and Mitigation Examples  |  Conclusions  |  References


| 9
Gender Biases in Credit Processes
What is bias, and how is it connected to fairness in a 
credit assessment? This is the fundamental question 
at the core of fair lending. In this report, when we 
talk about bias we are referring to unfair bias or 
discrimination. Under a discriminatory process, 
some prioritized groups receive a systematic 
advantage (being offered credit, for example), 
and other groups are placed at a systematic 
disadvantage (being denied credit, for example). 
Biases can be based on race, color, religion or 
creed, national origin or ancestry, sex (including 
gender, pregnancy, sexual orientation, and gender 
identity), age, physical or mental disability, veteran 
status, genetic information, citizenship, or other 
distinguishing factors. Among all these biases, we 
focus exclusively on gender bias.
Gender-based credit bias happens when a credit 
process creates results that are systemically 
prejudiced against certain people, for reasons 
related to gender. Algorithms created and run by 
machines can be biased, just as humans can be. 
Bias stems from a variety of sources. Loan officers 
can exhibit bias as they assess creditworthiness 
through  interviews  and observation. Algorithmic bias 
sometimes results from conscious or unconscious 
prejudices introduced by the individuals who create 
the algorithms—for example data scientists, coders, 
developers, or others. If they tell an algorithm to pay 
particular attention to a highly biased variable, the 
resulting decision might be biased. Other times, 
data itself can bias the algorithm, such as when a 
data set represents a sample that is 90 percent men 
and 10 percent women, and the unbalanced data 
is used to train the algorithm. There are still other 
instances in which the construction of an algorithm 
might prioritize a set of goals that do not include 
fairness—for example, a highly efficient algorithm 
may systematically discriminate against a particular 
group (women, for example) that, on average, is 
considered less creditworthy than another group.
Examining 
gender 
biases 
in 
credit-scoring 
algorithms is an interdisciplinary topic that falls 
somewhere between data science and finance. 
The data science community has put most of its 
efforts into developing techniques for detecting and 
mitigating bias without emphasizing the impact of 
these techniques on the accuracy of the unbiased 
algorithms or on the potential for financial losses. 
It is the task of financial institutions to determine 
which biases, when scaled, pose systemic and 
unnecessary risks to a large population. If an 
algorithmic approach pushes women deeper into 
poverty by discriminating on gender at a large 
scale, it is a systemic and unnecessary risk to a 
financial system. If a credit process uses income as 
a proxy for repayment in an environment in which 
women earn less than men do, it is a justifiable 
business practice that creates precision in lending 
and decreases the likelihood of default. Determining 
what is discrimination and what is good business is 
an institution-by-institution and market-by-market 
decision (Kelly & Mirpourian, 2021). This report 
assumes that in nearly every institution there are 
avenues for improving fairness that are also good 
for business. We focus our advice and examples on 
these areas for improvement.
Acknowledgments  |  Introduction  |  Fundamentals of Bias and Fairness   |  How to Audit for Credit Bias  
Bias Detection and Mitigation Examples  |  Conclusions  |  References


| 10
Assessing and Pursuing Fairness in Credit Processes
Fairness is an intricate and multidimensional 
concept, and its definition depends on both context 
and culture. It is impossible to give one specific 
definition of fairness that applies to all organizations’ 
use cases. For the sake of considering gender-
based bias in lending, it is most important for a 
financial institution to discuss and adopt a definition 
(or definitions) of fairness and to examine how 
they balance fairness with efficiency in their credit 
operations. 
What do we mean when we state that fairness is 
multi-dimensional? Institutions pursue fairness 
through credit offers (loan approval), credit 
scores, loan terms (loan amount, interest rate, and 
collateral), loan maturity, and reasons for rejection. 
To offer an example of what this might look like 
in practice, we introduce what is referred to as a 
“confusion matrix.” In a credit assessment process, 
if someone is predicted to repay the loan and then 
actually repays it, the result is a “true positive.” If 
that person is predicted to repay the loan but does 
not repay it, the result is a “false positive,” and so 
on. If women are more likely than men to fall into 
a “false negative” (creditworthy but denied a loan) 
than a “true positive” (creditworthy and extended a 
loan), the decision-making process might be unfair.
Of course, there are other ways of defining and 
measuring unfairness. While we don’t go into the 
dozens of definitions of fairness here, they are 
readily available in our recent paper, “Algorithmic 
Bias, Financial Inclusion, and Gender,” in which we 
summarize Verma and Rubin (2018). What is more 
important is that an institution develops a definition 
of fairness that everyone understands. By referring 
to its own definition of fairness, an institution can 
benchmark its progress and assess the relative 
risks of bias.
In looking at a pool of credit applicants, we can 
separate out two groups for which to assess 
fairness—those offered credit and those rejected 
for credit:
	
For Candidates Offered Credit
In Table 1, candidates offered credit would 
be concentrated in the first row. Gender 
fairness might mean that gender does not 
contribute to building a credit score, or 
does not correlate with it. Fairness might 
also mean that men and women receive 
similar loan amounts, and it ensures that 
gender does not predict interest rate or 
collateral requirements. 
For Candidates Rejected for Credit
In Table 1, candidates rejected for credit 
would be in the second row. An institution 
might be very gender balanced within 
the candidate pool that is offered credit, 
but among the rejected candidates there 
could be a high proportion of women 
with high credit scores who are rejected. 
We spend more time on understanding 
this phenomenon in Part II of this paper, 
which is focused on “reject inference” 
techniques.
While we focus our own fairness and bias detection 
models on these two groups, there are other biases 
which institutions can assess and address: for 
instance, bias within the acquisition channel at the 
top of the data funnel, and bias in renewal processes. 
Gender bias within the acquisition channel could 
mean that men have much higher representation 
among loan applicants. If men account for the 
majority of the data, the algorithm may over-weight 
indicators on which men tend to perform strongly 
(access to and use of a smartphone device, for 
example). For renewal applicants, we can apply 
the same bias assessment process used for those 
candidates who are offered credit, in order to 
assess whether renewal processes introduce new 
biases when they prioritize history with the lender.
Acknowledgments  |  Introduction  |  Fundamentals of Bias and Fairness   |  How to Audit for Credit Bias  
Bias Detection and Mitigation Examples  |  Conclusions  |  References
ACTUALLY CREDITWORTHY
ACTUALLY NOT CREDITWORTHY
Predicted to be creditworthy
True Positive (TP)
False Positive (FP)
Predicted to not be creditworthy
False Negative (FN)
True Negative (TN)
Table 1. Confusion Matrix Applied to Credit Scoring


| 11
Assessing Bias in Non-Digital, Digital, and Hybrid Models
What might be the origins of gender 
bias, and how do these biases present 
themselves in different types of 
institutions? Data bias, unconscious 
bias by loan officers or algorithm 
creators, and algorithmic bias might 
interact with one another, making it 
difficult to untangle the web of biases 
and solve bias problems.
When an algorithm is a primary decision-maker in fully digital institutions, the FSP 
can observe whether some form of algorithmic bias exists. Historic data, unbalanced 
data sets, design of the algorithm, incorrect interpretation of the algorithm’s output, or 
programming bugs can lead to biased credit decisions. Luckily, there are a wide range 
of techniques for detecting and mitigating algorithmic biases. 
Bias detection and mitigation in hybrid institutions can be challenging. In hybrid 
models, the algorithm, the credit officers, and the interaction among them all can 
create gender biases. Bias detection and mitigation in hybrid processes requires careful 
and close attention to the inputs and outputs of each step in the credit process. The 
auditor might assess whether the bias appears to be driven more from the credit 
officer interaction channel (taste-based bias) vs. the algorithmic channel (statistical 
discrimination). If such a pattern can be found, then the existence of both channels may 
provide the FSP with realistic opportunities to test whether shifting processes from one 
channel towards the other will result in the reduction of overall bias.
Loan officers are not immune to unconscious bias, and their credit decisions might be 
biased and unfair as a result. This type of bias can appear in both non-digital and 
hybrid credit processes. Given the level of unconscious bias of a loan officer and his/
her input in credit decisions, the amount of gender bias in those decisions may vary 
accordingly. If the model is purely non-digital, we can apply data science to detect 
gender biases, such as the techniques we propose in Part II. There are a range of 
solutions to bias in non-digital institutions. For example, loan officer training on gender 
bias may create a better environment for fairness. Another solution is to limit the 
influence of the subjective assessment of a loan officer vis-a-vis other more objective 
data sources. Transforming a non-digital credit process into a more data-driven or 
hybrid approaches can also mitigate subjective taste-based bias (Vidal & Barbon, 
2019).
Acknowledgments  |  Introduction  |  Fundamentals of Bias and Fairness   |  How to Audit for Credit Bias  
Bias Detection and Mitigation Examples  |  Conclusions  |  References
BOX 3


| 12
The first steps in the mainstream approach to 
mitigation efforts for bias are to: 1) select a normative 
measure (or measures) for testing for fairness, 2) 
estimate whether a lack of fairness exists between 
cohorts of interest based on those measure(s), 
and then 3) determine whether the economic 
magnitude of the difference is sizeable enough to 
warrant mitigation efforts. This typically takes into 
consideration any protected status classes that an 
organization or user wants to check for any signs of 
inequity, bias, or discrimination — in our case, we 
focus on gender.
Part II: 
How to Audit for Credit Bias
This section offers two broad approaches lenders can use to 
audit for credit bias. We assume that prior to assessing bias, an 
institution has initiated conversations about which dimensions of 
fairness it considers important, and has established an internal 
team responsible for bias mitigation. 
Acknowledgments  |  Introduction  |  Fundamentals of Bias and Fairness   |  How to Audit for Credit Bias  
Bias Detection and Mitigation Examples  |  Conclusions  |  References
Broadly 
speaking, 
approaches 
to 
“fairness” 
measurement can be separated into those that 
promote  a) group-level fairness and  those that 
move towards b) individual-level fairness. In 
this section, we briefly describe these high-level 
approaches and then provide concrete examples 
of different analyses lenders can use to test for 
whether group or individual fairness is being met 
across a variety of outcomes of interest, e.g., 
approval rates, loan terms, true and false negative 
rates, and so forth.


| 13
Group-based fairness measurements rest on the 
logic of treating different groups equally. They 
essentially aggregate the measurement values for 
each pair of groups and compare the unconditional 
outcomes of the classification algorithm for those 
groups. The group that an individual belongs to 
is indicated by its sensitive attribute—e.g., in our 
case, the sample split and comparison is between 
women vs. men applicants. Over time, many 
different approaches have been suggested, most of 
which use metrics based on the binary classification 
confusion matrix to define fairness.
In our case, we provide a concrete example of 
how this can be applied in the case of assessing 
credit underwriting processes for bias through the 
application of positive and negative balance tests.
Auditing for Gender Bias 
Using Two-Sample T-Test
Positive and negative balance tests are among the 
most fundamental bias audit tests, and are used to 
estimate the significance of the difference between 
two numbers. A positive (or negative) balance test 
on credit scores, for example, aims to test whether 
the approved (or rejected) male and female credit 
applicants exhibit statistically significant differences 
in their scores. A positive balance test would 
apply to the applicants who are approved, while a 
negative balance test would apply to the applicants 
who are rejected. To run a positive balance test, 
the auditor compares the average model score of 
approved men vs. approved women using a two-
sample t-test. The negative balance test uses the 
same construct among rejected applicants.
This method can be applied to most of the variables 
we discuss in this section.
Individual-based fairness measurements rest on 
the intuition that similar individuals should be 
treated as similarly as possible. The analyses falling 
under the individual-based approach move towards 
trying to demonstrate fairness (or the lack thereof) 
by identifying as similar observations between 
Auditing for
Group-Level Fairness
Auditing for 
Individual-Level Fairness
comparisons group as possible and demonstrating 
that they are receiving different treatment despite 
this. In practice, this is commonly done through 
highly conditional analyses, including those that 
use quasi-experimental (or even experimental) 
approaches.
In our case, we provide several concrete examples 
of how this can be applied in the case of assessing 
credit underwriting processes for bias through 
the application of linear regression, regression 
discontinuity, and matching methods.
Auditing for Gender Bias 
Using Linear Regression
Linear regression techniques are an approach for 
modelling the relationship between a dependent 
variable and one or more explanatory variables. 
They allow for setting up conditional analyses that 
take into account other relevant characteristics of 
the applicants (e.g., demographics, risk factors, 
requested loan characteristics, etc.), apart from 
gender, that may explain differential outcomes. For 
purposes of bias auditing, they thus move closer 
towards measuring whether a lender is achieving 
“individual-level fairness”, which is grounded on an 
underlying intuition that similar individuals should 
be treated as similarly as possible, if one were to 
not consider protected status class.
One type of regression is called least squares. 
For example, to understand if there is a strong 
relationship between the “female” variable and 
credit scores, relative to male applicants, an auditor 
can use least squares regression and regress credit 
score on gender. As mentioned previously, to make 
this more precise, data scientists can add in a range 
of relevant control variables to test for whether the 
relationship between gender and outcome variables 
of interest hold after other relevant risk factors are 
accounted for. The assessment is unconditional 
if it does not account for control variables, and 
conditional if it accounts for control variables. A 
least squares regression shows the magnitude and 
statistical significance of each variable.
There are other types of regression in which the 
dependent variables are not all linear (such as 
whether an applicant was approved for credit, or 
whether a loan is non-performing). Some of these 
include logistic regression or probit regression. 
Again, regression techniques are valid for many of 
the variables we discuss here. 
Acknowledgments  |  Introduction  |  Fundamentals of Bias and Fairness   |  How to Audit for Credit Bias  
Bias Detection and Mitigation Examples  |  Conclusions  |  References


| 14
Auditing for Gender Bias 
Using Regression Discontinuity
Regression discontinuity design (RDD) is a quasi-
experimental design that is typically used to 
determine the causal effects of interventions. The 
approach compares outcomes for observations 
where there are (arbitrary) cutoffs or thresholds 
above or below which an intervention is assigned. 
The intuition is that observations lying closely on 
either side of the thresholds are likely to have much 
more similar characteristics, which increases the 
validity of the comparison. In our case, we co-opt 
the method for purposes of bias assessment by 
testing whether women and men applicants appear 
to show different discontinuities (e.g., in terms of 
approval rates or loan terms) around key credit 
score or risk thresholds of the lender. Many lenders 
use some form of credit score—whether external or 
in-house—to segment borrowers into different risk 
categories, which have bearing on loan approval 
and/or loan terms to be provided. For some lenders, 
we find that these can often be “fuzzy” thresholds 
(e.g., they provide minimum requirements but do 
not always equate to automated loan approval) 
and/or that approval or provided loan terms take 
into consideration additional human decisions (e.g., 
in the case of hybrid approaches). In such cases, 
RDD can provide an intuitive method for assessing 
bias across a range of outcomes.
Broadly speaking, the approach can be separated 
into two steps. First, the auditor should identify 
any cutoff or risk thresholds that are used by the 
lender for decisions on approval or loan terms. For 
example, credit scores may be categorized into 
high, medium, or low risk. This categorization is a 
subjective exercise that is dependent on the actual 
process of a given lender. The second step is to 
audit for gender bias in each category. The bias 
audit can leverage a range of statistical methods, 
but the one we suggest here is least squares 
regression, using an interaction between gender 
and the cutoff threshold. The goal is to assess 
whether men and women applicants who are close 
to the cutoff points—and who would be assumed 
to be fairly similar to one another—have a different 
likelihood of approval or other loan terms, such as 
loan amount, interest rate, or loan tenure.
Table 2 provides a sample template for how an 
auditor could use RDD to assess the presence 
of bias by comparing approval rates for men 
and women who are right above and below a 
hypothetical minimum approval threshold. In the 
example, the RDD model is re-run using varying 
windows around the minimum approval threshold 
(e.g., +/- 15, 30, 45, and 60 points) to test for 
robustness of the results. The RDD can also be run 
conditionally, through the addition of other relevant 
controls.
Based on the model output reflected in Table 2, 
the auditor can compare general differences in 
outcomes between women and men and any further 
discontinuities for women around the lender’s 
cutoff thresholds. They can also test how sensitive 
or robust the results are to the choice of windows 
for selecting the sample and to the presence or 
absence of control variables.
Auditing for Gender Bias 
Using Simple Augmentation
Simple augmentation is one of many reject inference 
techniques. Reject inference models are a group of 
statistical techniques that aim to impute relevant 
labels (e.g., default risk) for the observations lacking 
counterfactual outcomes, such as individuals 
who were rejected for credit. There are two 
broad approaches in conducting reject inference: 
statistics-based reject inference   models   and 
machine-learning-based reject inference models.3 
The most common statistics  models  are  based  on 
extrapolation and augmentation. On the other hand, 
machine-learning models may be based on neural 
networks, genetic algorithms, and semi-supervised 
learning. The reject inference techniques we have 
explored for assessing bias and its magnitude are 
two statistics-based methods: simple augmentation 
and coarsened exact matching (which we describe 
in the next section). We use data on approved 
applicants to impute predicted values on individuals 
who were denied credit. This technique allows us to 
explore likely differences in risk across gender for 
the rejected applicants, along with their respective 
rates of true and false negatives. The outcome of 
a reject inference model may suggest that women 
could have had higher approval rates, if their rates 
of false negatives are significantly larger than for 
otherwise similar men.
3	 This is a new area of research. For more information, see Li et al. (2017); Anderson (2019); Banasik & Crook (2005); Bücker, van Kampen, & Krämer (2013).
Acknowledgments  |  Introduction  |  Fundamentals of Bias and Fairness   |  How to Audit for Credit Bias  
Bias Detection and Mitigation Examples  |  Conclusions  |  References


| 15
To use simple augmentation for auditing selection 
bias, we first run a logistic regression restricted to 
approved applicants, where the response variable is 
the predicted probability of whether the applicant’s 
loan was non-performing, and the independent 
variables include relevant applicant and requested 
loan characteristics. After running the logistic 
regression model on the approved applicants, 
we store the model coefficients and use them to 
predict the probability of non-performing loans for 
rejected applicants with the same characteristics, 
had they been granted a loan. Our suggested 
approach is based on using simple augmentation 
or a hard-cutoff technique, a method which assigns 
rejected applicants with scores below and above 
a probability  threshold  to  the  “bad”  or  “good”
class, respectively. For example, the credit rating 
industry often assumes that rejects have a “bad 
rate” of 75%. This is a subjective evaluation that 
can be adjusted based on the needs and risk 
tolerance of the lender. In practice, we adopted 
a very low risk tolerance and set the cutoff value 
for the “bad rate” at 0.1. That is, if the predicted 
probability of a non-performing loan is below 10% 
for a given rejected individual, then we consider it 
a good class and a false negative. Conversely, if 
the predicted probability of Non-performing loan is 
above 10% for a given rejected individual, then we 
consider it a bad class and a true negative. We then 
DV: Dependent variable; b: Regression beta coefficients
+/- 60 WINDOW
+/- 45 WINDOW
+/- 30 WINDOW
+/- 15 WINDOW
DV = 1 if Applicant received loan offer
b
p value
b
p value
b
p value
b
p value
Above minimum approval threshold = 1
Female = 1
Above minimum approval threshold = 1 X Female = 1
Control variables
Observations
Table 2. Auditing for Bias Using RDD
combine the accepted and rejected applicants into 
a single data set and do basic descriptive statistics 
on them.
Tables 3 and 4 show the outputs of this approach. 
To provide an example of this approach, we filled 
out these two tables with dummy numbers. In 
Table 3, we can observe that among approved 
applicants, the actual non-performing loan rates 
for the total sample compared with men and with 
women are 16%, 19%, and 15%, respectively. 
The predicted non-performing loan rates for the 
rejected applicants in the total sample compared 
with the men and women applicants are estimated 
at 88%, 93%, and 83%, respectively. That is, these 
are the imputed non-performing loan rates for these 
cohorts based on the reject inference model, in a 
hypothetical scenario in which those applicants 
had been provided loans. On the one hand, as 
can be expected, the rejected cohorts are indeed 
predicted to be much riskier. On the other hand, the 
reject inference models also suggest that a sizeable 
share of the rejected applicants were likely to have 
been creditworthy (i.e., they are “false negatives” 
based on the original model). Moreover, this is 
particularly the case for women rejected applicants, 
who are nearly 10 percentage points more likely to 
be predicted as a “false negative”. These latter two 
points are more explicitly shown in Table 4.
Acknowledgments  |  Introduction  |  Fundamentals of Bias and Fairness   |  How to Audit for Credit Bias  
Bias Detection and Mitigation Examples  |  Conclusions  |  References


| 16
REJECT INFERENCE - NON 
PERFORMANCE ISSUES
ALL
MALE
FEMALE
MALE - FEMALE
mean
sd
mean
sd
mean
sd
b
p_val
Non-performing loan = 1 (Actual 
outcomes for approved)
0.16
0.40
0.19
0.40
0.15
0.50
0.04***
0.00
Non-performing loan = 1 (Imputed 
for rejected applicants)
0.88
0.40
0.93
0.30
0.83
0.40
0.10***
0.00
Non-performing loan = 1 
(Combined for actual outcomes 
for approved + imputed rejected 
applicants)
0.62
0.49
0.69
0.46
0.54
0.50
0.14***
0.00
REJECT INFERENCE - TRUE 
NEGATIVES VS. FALSE 
NEGATIVES
ALL
MALE
FEMALE
MALE - FEMALE
mean
sd
mean
sd
mean
sd
b
p_val
True Negative rate
0.86
0.31
0.91
0.20
0.81
0.40
0.10 ***
0.00
False Negative rate
0.11
0.33
0.08
0.26
0.17
0.38
-0.10 ***
0.00
Table 4. Reject Inference on True Negatives and False Negatives
Table 3. Reject Inference on Non-Performing Loans
Auditing for Gender Bias Using
Coarsened Exact Matching
Matching methods are a non-parametric approach 
that involve taking observational data, and 
matching people who have similar characteristics 
but different treatments, as a way of conducting 
causal 
inference 
or 
other 
estimations. 
The 
intuitiveness of the approach, in additional to a few 
other advantageous statistical properties, make it a 
useful method for reject inference as well.
There are many potential matching strategies to 
choose from, and each has its relative merits.4 
For our purposes, we apply a recently developed 
method called coarsened exact matching.5 In our 
application of this technique, we start by identifying 
the approved and rejected applicants in the sample 
(i.e. we tag these as separate cohorts, but keep the 
sample intact). We then apply the coarsened exact 
matching algorithm, which divides the full sample 
into meaningful strata based on relevant variables 
of interest. The user must select these variables, 
taking into consideration the ones that are likely to 
be strong predictors of loan performance issues 
and also have data that is generally available (i.e., 
tends to be complete for all applicants). In practice, 
any categorical variables are subjected to exact 
matching and any continuous variables are split 
into bins.6 For each stratum, the coarsened exact 
matching process then identifies any matches 
between the approved and rejected cohorts.
For our purposes, we use only strata that have 
matched approved and rejected applications. All 
non-matched observations/strata are ignored. For 
each stratum, where matches are found, we use 
the observed loan performance of the matched 
4	 Giving an extensive review of matching strategies is beyond the scope of this guide. However, Stuart (2010) provides a useful reference and synthesis of 
the related literature.
5	 For further details, see: https://gking.harvard.edu/cem.
6	 The user can either denote specific binning rules for each variable or can automate this based on commonly applied decision rules for binning, e.g., 
Sturge’s rule, Scott’s rule, Freedman-Diaconis’s rule, etc.
Acknowledgments  |  Introduction  |  Fundamentals of Bias and Fairness   |  How to Audit for Credit Bias  
Bias Detection and Mitigation Examples  |  Conclusions  |  References


| 17
approved applications in a given stratum to impute 
predicted loan performance among the matched 
rejected applications. For example, we construct 
a variable, which we call “any NPL imputed” and 
set it to 1 for a given matched rejected application 
if the matched approved application in their strata 
had an NPL and set it to 0 if they did not. In the 
simplest scenario, if there is only one matched 
approved/disbursed application in the stratum, 
then its loan performance is used to impute the 
matched rejected applications’ performance. In the 
more common scenario where there are multiple 
approved/disbursed loans in the stratum, we use 
the mean loan performance. We set a loosely risk- 
averse threshold: If the actual probability of having 
an NPL is greater than or equal to 50% among 
the approved applications in the stratum, then we 
set “any NPL imputed” equal to 1 for the matched 
rejected applications and 0 otherwise. (Note that 
the threshold can be adjusted based on the risk 
tolerance of the lender.) Under this setup, we define:
a.	 “False negatives” – rejected applicants 
where “any NPL imputed” = 0
b.	 “True negatives” – rejected applicants where 
“any NPL imputed” = 1
We  then  combine  the  accepted  and rejected 
applications into a single data set and do basic 
descriptive statistics on them. The outputs of this 
model would be similar to what we showed in Table 
3 and Table 4.
Women’s World Banking 
Gender Bias Scorecard for Lenders
There are many ways to measure and track fairness in lending. This scorecard offers some of 
the more common fairness indicators used by Women’s World Banking in its diagnostic process 
with lenders. Paying attention to these indicators, particularly over time, will offer institutions an 
evidence base so they can identify areas in which they excel and areas for improvement. Since 
not all credit processes are the same, the list of fairness-related questions that an institution will 
ask might vary, and we hope institutions will interpret and adapt these questions to their needs. 
The six dimensions of fairness in Women’s World Banking’s Gender Bias Scorecard are: 1) credit 
score, 2) approval rate, 3) loan amount, 4) interest rate, 5) collateral size, and 6) characteristics 
of rejected candidates. The complete descriptions of these dimensions and how to measure 
them are reflected below. To use this scorecard you will need individual-level data on past loan 
applicants including credit score, decision, loan terms, and any relevant control variables.
Acknowledgments  |  Introduction  |  Fundamentals of Bias and Fairness   |  How to Audit for Credit Bias  
Bias Detection and Mitigation Examples  |  Conclusions  |  References


| 18
| 18
1
2
4
3
For 
example, 
women 
applicants 
have 
an 
equal 
probability 
relative 
to 
men 
applicants 
with 
similar 
risk 
characteristics 
of 
being 
approved 
for 
credit, 
being 
rejected 
for 
credit, 
and 
receiving 
the 
same 
credit 
terms.
ESTABLISH A CLEAR DEFINITION OF FAIRNESS
ESTABLISH RELEVANT CONTROL VARIABLES
ASSESS THE MAGNITUDE OF BIAS
EVALUATE FOR BIAS
Using a list of the most influential variables in your approval process, choose 3-4 
variables which should be indicative of creditworthiness regardless of gender. 
The right mix of control variables will vary by institution and business model.
Starting with the questions outlined here, make an assessment of the magnitude—and 
resulting financial and consumer impacts—of each bias dimension on your portfolio. 
How much does this bias cost your company? How many people does this bias exclude 
or disadvantage unnecessarily? 
a. For example, income may be a 
strategically relevant variable that, 
regardless of gender of the applicant, 
maintains high explanatory power in 
creditworthiness. This is a valid control 
variable.
b. 	 GPS location or number of Facebook 
friends may be low priority variables 
that are highly subject to gender bias 
but with low strategic importance to 
the approval process. These are invalid 
control variables.
Using gender-disaggregated data, answer the questions on the next page to assess bias. 
The word “average” denotes the arithmetic mean. For more advanced analysis, separate 
applicants into subcategories by risk quantile, or apply the scorecard to separate steps 
in the lending process, for example, automated systems compared against loan officer 
assessments. 
Acknowledgments  |  Introduction  |  Fundamentals of Bias and Fairness   |  How to Audit for Credit Bias  
Bias Detection and Mitigation Examples  |  Conclusions  |  References
HOW TO CHECK YOUR CREDIT PROCESS BIAS


Acknowledgments  |  Introduction  |  Fundamentals of Bias and Fairness   |  How to Audit for Credit Bias  
Bias Detection and Mitigation Examples  |  Conclusions  |  References
Women’s World Banking Gender Bias Scorecard for Lenders
QUESTION
ANSWER
EXAMPLE
Do men and women borrowers have the same average credit score to 
indicate creditworthiness while controlling for relevant variables? Yes/no? 
Do men and women applicants have the same likelihood of receiving a 
credit offer, controlling for relevant variables? Yes/no? 
Do men and women who are extended credit offers receive the same 
average loan amount while controlling for relevant variables? Yes/No 
Do men and women who are extended credit offers receive the same 
average interest rate while controlling for relevant variables? Yes/No 
Do men and women who are extended credit offers have the same 
average collateral requirement while controlling for relevant variables? 
Yes/No  
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
n/a
Men
Men
Men
n/a - we use a fixed 
interest rate. 
Men
n/a
Men’s average is $3500 and 
women’s average is $2900. 
Men are 65% likely,
women are 55% likely. 
n/a 
Rejected women received a 350 on 
average, rejected men receive 300.
If not, which gender has a higher credit score? 
If not, which gender on average has a higher loan amount? 
If not, which gender has a lower collateral requirement?  
What is the magnitude of this gap?
What is the magnitude of this gap?
1
2
3
4
5
Your institution’s
responses go here!
Sample responses from 
the United Bank of Banking
Men’s collateral requirement is 
$400 or equivalent, women’s is 
$500 or equivalent.  
Do men and women rejected applicants have the same average
credit score while controlling for relevant variables? Yes/No   
If not, which gender has a lower credit score? 
What is the magnitude of this gap?
6
If not, which gender has a higher likelihood of receiving a credit offer? 
What is the magnitude of this gap? 
What is the magnitude of this gap? 
What is the magnitude of this gap? 
If not, which gender has a lower interest rate? 
WHAT YOUR SCORE MEANS
Count the number of “yes” answers to the headline 
questions above and list this answer here. 
SAMPLE SCORE
1-2	
Highly biased on multiple dimensions 
3-4	
Moderately biased on multiple dimensions 
5-6	
Little to no bias on multiple dimensions 
Check your bias!
RESULTING SCORE
2/6
HOW TO SCORE


| 20
To  supplement  the  previously  described  analyses  and  scorecard,  institutions  can also  employ  a 
wide  range  of  additional  diagnostic  assessments,  as  described below.  These  can  give  them  a 
more  comprehensive  view  of  potential (gender)  bias  across  their  full  operations.  For  example:
APPLICATION CHANNEL
How do the above dimensions of 
fairness differ depending on the 
application channel?
Taking all of the above steps would help an auditor to acquire useful information on credit biases in 
a portfolio.
Acknowledgments  |  Introduction  |  Fundamentals of Bias and Fairness   |  How to Audit for Credit Bias  
Bias Detection and Mitigation Examples  |  Conclusions  |  References
CREDIT APPROVAL RATE 
OVER TIME
How has the approval rate of men 
and women applicants changed over 
time compared with the balance of 
men and women applicants? Is the 
portfolio trending towards fairness? 
REJECTION REASONS
Do reasons for rejection differ
by gender?
SEGMENTATION ANALYSIS
If 
there 
are 
highly 
sensitive 
intersectionalities with gender, how 
do the above dimensions of fairness 
vary between men and women? E.g., 
Socio-economic strata, formal or 
informal employment, etc.
FIRST-TIME VERSUS 
REPEAT APPLICANTS
How do the above dimensions of 
fairness differ for first-time compared 
with repeat applicants? 
PORTFOLIO GENDER BALANCE
What percentage of approved loans 
belongs to men and what percentage 
belongs 
to 
women 
applicants? 
How is the gender balance in the 
portfolio being used to predict the 
creditworthiness of future applicants?
GAP BETWEEN REQUESTED
AND EXTENDED CREDIT
What is the difference between the 
approved credit line and requested 
credit amount for each gender? 
Do these differ?
EX-POST CREDIT PERFORMANCE
How does credit performance differ 
by gender, and what does this 
indicate about the accuracy of the 
model for men and for women?
GENDER BALANCE AT LEAD 
ACQUISITION STAGE
Are there any lead sources for which 
significant gender imbalances exist, 
and what is the magnitude of this 
difference?
CREDIT DENIAL RATE 
OVER TIME
How has the denial rate of men and 
women applicants changed over 
time compared with the balance of 
men and women applicants? Is the 
portfolio trending towards fairness?
Additional  Diagnostic  Assessments


| 21
Important to the understanding of bias is a 
calculation of the risk it poses to the institution. 
Risks to reputation—along with regulatory, ethical, 
and missed market opportunity risks—are all 
Part III: 
Bias Detection and Mitigation 
Examples in India, Mexico, and 
Colombia
Having compiled this range of tools and methods for bias 
detection, Women’s World Banking and its partner University of 
Zurich collaborated with three institutions that represent diverse 
approaches in their use of digitized or hybrid processes.  
Lendingkart is primarily digital, Banco Anonimo 
employs a hybrid approach, and Aflore also uses 
a hybrid process that leverages more person-to-
person engagement relative to the others.7
With each institution, our process was 
straightforward:
1
2
3
4
5
Understand the steps, both human 
and data-driven, in the lending 
process.
Conduct a bias assessment.
Estimate the magnitude of identified 
bias(es), from a statistical, ethical, 
and financial perspective.
Recommend 
bias 
mitigation 
strategies.
Work 
with 
the 
institution 
to 
implement 
these 
mitigation 
strategies where possible.
factors that contribute to a financial institution’s 
decision-making process in considering whether to 
invest in bias mitigation. While we do not go into 
the risk calculation and decision-making process 
each institution undertook, we note this as a valid 
step any financial services provider must take. Not 
all biases pose a high risk to a financial institution.
Similarly, bias mitigation is a highly contextualized 
and specific process. For some institutions, 
mitigating bias may mean balancing data. For others, 
bias mitigation may involve algorithmic revisions. 
For still others, mitigating bias could mean training 
staff or loan officers on gender sensitivity in data 
collection. Rather than offer a set of standard bias 
mitigation techniques, we offer real-life examples 
based on our own recommendations.
Acknowledgments  |  Introduction  |  Fundamentals of Bias and Fairness   |  How to Audit for Credit Bias  
Bias Detection and Mitigation Examples  |  Conclusions  |  References
7	 “Banco Anonimo” is a pseudonym for a large bank in Mexico we partnered with on this project. The institution prefers to remain anonymous.


| 22
Lendingkart’s credit process is fully automated, with 
nearly no human engagement. An evaluation found 
the company’s credit process to meet traditional 
definitions of fairness on nearly all metrics (Table 
5). An unconditional investigation of the credit 
portfolio detected a statistically significant—but not 
substantively large—approval bias against women.7 
This bias was entirely due to policy parameters 
and disappeared when conditioned on policy. For 
example, Lendingkart calls its applicants to verify 
business ownership claims. A larger proportion 
of women compared to men show false claims of 
business ownership, such as a woman applying on 
behalf of a male relative or household member who 
may have already accessed credit. Beyond bias in 
the approval rate, we could not detect any gender 
bias in other areas of Lendingkart’s portfolio.   
Lendingkart Technologies Private Limited is a 
fintech startup providing working capital to SMEs 
in India. The company has developed credit 
assessment tools that leverage big and alternative 
data analysis. Legally, Lendingkart is a non-deposit-
taking non-bank financial company (NBFC). The 
company is transforming small-business lending by 
making credit access for SMEs easier. Unlike banks 
and other NBFCs, Lendingkart does not focus on 
applicants’ past financial statements or income tax 
returns to evaluate their creditworthiness. Instead, 
its algorithm relies on thousands of data points 
ranging from cash flows to business growth.
Lendingkart’s credit assessment process is nearly 
all digital (Figure 1). The company has developed its 
own credit assessment procedure using a machine 
learning algorithm. The majority of Lendingkart’s 
applicants are men, largely because of the gendered 
nature of the SME landscape in India. Lendingkart 
has intentionally sought to increase the share of 
women in its lending process, in part through the 
partnership with Women’s World Banking.  
Acknowledgments  |  Introduction  |  Fundamentals of Bias and Fairness   |  How to Audit for Credit Bias  
Bias Detection and Mitigation Examples  |  Conclusions  |  References
India: Lendingkart
Submitting 
the credit 
application through 
digital channels
Algorithmic 
credit 
assessment
Submit
the credit 
application 
through digital 
channels
Algorithmic 
credit 
assessment
Approve 
the credit 
request
Reject 
the credit 
request 
Figure 1. Lendingkart’s Credit Assessment Process


| 23
8	 Statistically significant with 99% confidence.
NO
QUESTION
ANSWER
1.
Do men and women applicants have the same average credit score to indicate 
creditworthiness, while controlling for relevant variables? Yes/No?
Yes
1.1
If not, which gender has a higher credit score?
n/a
1.2
What is the magnitude of this gap?
n/a
2
Do men and women applicants have the same likelihood of receiving a credit 
offer, while controlling for relevant variables? Yes/No?
Yes 
2.1
If not, which gender has a higher likelihood of receiving a credit offer?
n/a
2.2
What is the magnitude of this gap?
n/a
3
Do men and women who are extended credit offers receive the same average 
loan amount, while controlling for relevant variables? Yes/No
Yes
3.1
If not, which gender on average has a higher loan amount?
n/a
3.2
What is the magnitude of this gap?
n/a
4
Do men and women who are extended credit offers receive the same average 
interest rate, while controlling for relevant variables? Yes/No
Yes
4.1
If not, which gender has a lower interest rate?
n/a
4.2
How much is the magnitude of this gap in percentages?
n/a
5
Do men and women who are extended credit offers have the same average 
collateral requirement, while controlling for relevant variables? Yes/No
Yes
5.1
If not, which gender has a lower collateral requirement?
n/a
5.2
How much is the magnitude of this gap in percentages?
n/a
6
Do men and women rejected applicants have the same average credit score, 
while controlling for relevant variables? Yes/No
Yes
6.1
If not, which gender has a lower credit score?
n/a
6.2
What is the magnitude of this gap?
n/a
Acknowledgments  |  Introduction  |  Fundamentals of Bias and Fairness   |  How to Audit for Credit Bias  
Bias Detection and Mitigation Examples  |  Conclusions  |  References
Table 5: Lendingkart’s Scorecard Results


| 24
After a thorough review of Lendingkart’s overall 
credit assessment process, a comprehensive data 
audit, and an estimation of the relative risk of the 
identified bias, our joint conclusion was that the 
company’s greatest concern was not approval of 
women applicants but rather gender imbalance 
in its clientele. This gender imbalance stems from 
issues with lead acquisition at the top of the data 
funnel. Having significantly more men than women 
applying creates the risk that “representation 
bias” —  a well-documented concern in machine 
learning —  could creep into Lendingkart’s models 
over time. The team, composed of a range of 
departments and employees with varying levels 
of seniority, developed a broad array of strategies 
aimed at increasing acquisition and retention of 
women applicants across the lender’s operations, 
and decreasing the considerable gender imbalance 
in the company’s clientele. As part of this effort, 
together we developed and launched a pilot that 
employs a gender-differentiated product and 
marketing strategy to target and increase take-up 
among women leads.
9	 There was an initial gap between men’s and women’s likelihood of receiving a credit offer. We investigated the rejection reason codes that explain this 
differential. We found that, after removing those applications where rejection is based on non-negotiable and legitimate policy rules, this gap no longer 
remained.
Acknowledgments  |  Introduction  |  Fundamentals of Bias and Fairness   |  How to Audit for Credit Bias  
Bias Detection and Mitigation Examples  |  Conclusions  |  References
Mexico: Banco Anonimo 
Banco Anonimo is a large bank operating in 
Mexico with a physical branch infrastructure and 
online presence. The company’s products include 
consumer credit for goods, personal loans, small 
business loans, credit cards, mortgages, and payroll 
systems. In Mexico, Banco Anonimo has thousands 
of bank branches and has millions of outstanding 
loans. We partnered primarily with Banco Anonimo’s 
small-business loan team focused on the Mexican 
market.
Banco Anonimo’s credit assessment process 
is a hybrid model. The company accepts credit 
applications through both digital and non-digital 
(i.e. physical branches) channels. Regardless of 
the application channel, applications go through a 
similar assessment process. Banco Anonimo uses 
an algorithm for categorizing its customers into one 
of the three risk buckets:  low risk, medium risk, and 
high risk. Applicants categorized as low risk usually 
receive credit approval without the necessity of 
going through any further investigation. Medium-risk 
applicants often receive home visits or video calls 
to add information on their sources of income and 
upcoming expenses. With the risk categorization 
and these additional pieces of information, a loan 
officer makes the final credit decision. Applicants 
with high credit risk are likely to be rejected, with a 
portion being offered the opportunity to go through 
an interview process, after which they sometimes 
receive a loan. These high-risk applicants often 
need a guarantor or collateral, provided they get 
loan disbursement approval.


| 25
A gender bias audit found some statistically 
significant differences between men and women 
on a few metrics. These statistically significant 
differences, while indicating some unfairness in 
the process, did not have a high economic impact 
and were also not always biased against women. 
For example, rates of loan approvals proved to be 
higher for women than for men with otherwise similar 
characteristics. Moreover, loan amounts for women 
were significantly larger than for men in statistical 
terms, albeit the economic magnitude was not large 
— around 120 pesos or about US $6. Looking at 
rejected applicants, however, revealed statistically 
significant and substantively important gender bias 
against rejected women applicants. This bias was 
more profound among women applicants who had 
received home visits and had gone through extra 
credit assessment verifications, indicating some 
additional unconscious bias. See Table 6 for details. 
Algorithmic 
credit risk 
categorization
Medium-risk 
applicants
Low-risk 
applicants
High-risk 
applicants
Officer likely 
to approve 
the request 
Officer likely 
to reject the 
request 
Slim chance 
of home visit
Slim chance 
of home visit
Home 
visit
Approval
Approval
Approval
Rejection
Rejection
Rejection
Submit 
the credit 
application 
through 
digital 
channels
Submit  
the credit 
application 
through 
non-digital 
channels
Acknowledgments  |  Introduction  |  Fundamentals of Bias and Fairness   |  How to Audit for Credit Bias  
Bias Detection and Mitigation Examples  |  Conclusions  |  References
Figure 2. Banco Anonimo’s Credit Assessment Process


| 26
NO
QUESTION
ANSWER
1
Do men and women applicants have the same average 
credit score to indicate creditworthiness, while controlling 
for relevant variables? Yes/No?
No
1.1
If not, which gender has a higher credit score?
Women
1.2
What is the magnitude of this gap?
7.2*** (Approved women have a 561; 
Approved men have a 554. The score 
ranges from 468 to 665, with a standard 
deviation of ~25).
2
Do men and women applicants have the same likelihood 
of receiving a credit offer, while controlling for relevant 
variables? Yes/No?
No
2.1
If not, which gender has a higher likelihood of receiving a 
credit offer?
Women
2.2
What is the magnitude of this gap?
~1.5 percentage points***
3
Do men and women who are extended credit offers receive 
the same average loan amount, while controlling for relevant 
variables? Yes/No
No
3.1
If not, which gender on average has a higher loan amount?
Women
3.2
What is the magnitude of this gap?
~120 Mexican pesos ($6 USD)** 
Statistically significant at the 5% level, 
but not economically significant.
4
Do men and women who are extended credit offers receive 
the same average interest rate, while controlling for relevant 
variables? Yes/No
Yes
4.1
If not, which gender has a lower interest rate?
n/a
4.2
How much is the magnitude of this gap in percentages?
n/a
5
Do men and women who are extended credit offers have 
the same average collateral requirement, while controlling 
for relevant variables? Yes/No
Yes
5.1
If not, which gender has a lower collateral requirement?
n/a
5.2
How much is the magnitude of this gap in percentages?
n/a
6
Do men and women rejected applicants have the same 
average credit score, while controlling for relevant 
variables? Yes/No
No
6.1
If not, which gender has a lower credit score?
Men
6.2
What is the magnitude of this gap?
6.5*** (Rejected women have a 545.35; 
Rejected men have a 538.87. The score 
ranges from 468 to 665, with a standard 
deviation of ~25).
Acknowledgments  |  Introduction  |  Fundamentals of Bias and Fairness   |  How to Audit for Credit Bias  
Bias Detection and Mitigation Examples  |  Conclusions  |  References
Note: As in many presentations of inferential statistics, asterisks denote the level of confidence in the statistical significance of the finding. For example, 
*** means p<0.001 or 99.9% confident, ** means p<0.01 or 99% confident, * means p<0.05 or 95% confident.
Table 6: Banco Anonimo’s Scorecard Results


| 27
In other words, our audit (particularly the reject 
inference analysis) revealed that women applicants 
have a significantly higher likelihood of being “false 
negatives,” i.e., a disproportionate share are being 
rejected despite having a higher propensity to 
repay than comparable male applicants. Moreover, 
we observed that the partner’s credit assessment 
process exhibits some signs of subjective biases at 
stages where credit officers are heavily engaged in 
decision-making. 
As such, we recommended two different pilots 
aimed at mitigating both problems, and we engaged 
in discussions with the partner to integrate them 
into their processes. The first was an experiment to 
reduce the disproportionately high “false negative” 
rate for women applicants and extend more loan 
access to such borrowers. Specifically, we would 
utilize “reject inference” techniques to identify 
applicants who were marginally rejected, but likely 
to have had no repayment issues if they had been 
granted a loan. A subset of such marginally rejected 
applicants would be randomly selected to either 
be approved (overturning the original decision) or 
to remain rejected. We would use the experiment 
to gauge how accurately the methods work in 
selecting safe marginally rejected applicants, and 
then we would consider a broader roll-out of the 
process. 
The second recommendation was an experiment 
to test whether greater provision of hard-coded 
information could mitigate the high potential for 
subjective “taste-based” discrimination in the 
partner’s credit assessment process, which is 
currently reliant on credit officers to make the final 
decision for riskier borrowers. The partner’s status 
quo operations use credit scoring models to sort 
applicants into different assessment channels, but 
they do not currently provide the actual scores 
to credit officers when making assessments. As 
such, we planned an intervention in which some 
credit officers would be (randomly selected to 
be) “primed” with the model scores instead of 
continuing with the original process. While both of 
these recommendations were superseded by other 
organizational priorities, they may be relevant to 
other institutions with similar biases.
Acknowledgments  |  Introduction  |  Fundamentals of Bias and Fairness   |  How to Audit for Credit Bias  
Bias Detection and Mitigation Examples  |  Conclusions  |  References


| 28
Aflore is a fintech company based in Colombia, 
serving 
low-income 
customers 
who 
operate 
primarily in the informal sector. Aflore provides its 
customers with loans and insurance products, and 
maintains a tech-enabled direct sales channel to 
bring simple financial products into the household 
via people the community trusts. Building on social 
networks, Aflore has more than 14,000 informal 
advisors engaging directly with its customers. 
Aflore uses a hybrid credit model and is heavily 
dependent on its network of informal advisors. 
These informal advisors are not employed by 
Aflore; however, they advocate for Aflore in their 
communities and bring new credit applicants to 
the top of the application channel. The informal 
advisors receive a commission for recommending 
new applicants, and they consider the opportunity 
to serve the community as an important motivation, 
aside from the financial gains. The advisors enjoy 
seeing their community thrive and helping people 
get out of the informal credit markets. Aflore has 
a digital credit application process through which 
informal advisors help prospective borrowers apply. 
Before the Covid-19 outbreak, Aflore had been 
using its own credit-scoring algorithm. However, 
during the pandemic, Aflore found that the accuracy 
of its model had deteriorated. Therefore, Aflore 
decided to retire this model and instead started 
to rely on credit scores from formal credit-rating 
agencies. Only two thirds of applicants who apply 
for credit at Aflore have a credit history with credit 
bureau agencies. Aflore passes these applicants 
through a set of screening checks. If the applicants 
pass the initial screening, a loan officer will look 
at the credit score, income, estimated expenses, 
and other financial and socioeconomic indicators 
before making a decision. However, assessing 
the creditworthiness of the remaining one third of 
applicants who have no credit history (also known 
as thin-file applicants) can be more challenging. 
This involves a more subjective assessment by loan 
officers, who  conduct interviews with applicants 
and often require a physical or virtual visit at the 
applicant’s home or business.
Looking into Aflore’s credit portfolio from January 
2016 - June 2022, we did not detect much 
substantive gender bias against approved women 
applicants. However, we learned that there is a 
significant bias against rejected women applicants 
(Table 7). 
Acknowledgments  |  Introduction  |  Fundamentals of Bias and Fairness   |  How to Audit for Credit Bias  
Bias Detection and Mitigation Examples  |  Conclusions  |  References
Colombia: Aflore
Initial credit 
screening 
checks
Submit 
the credit 
application 
with the help 
of an informal 
advisor
Initial credit 
screening 
checks
Applicant 
has credit 
history
Loan officer 
conducts
a more
rule-based 
credit 
assessment 
Applicant 
has no credit 
history
Loan officer 
conducts 
a more 
subjective 
credit 
assessment 
Approval
Approval
Rejection
Rejection
Figure 3. Aflore’s Credit Assessment Process


| 29
NO
QUESTION
ANSWER
1
Do men and women applicants have the same average credit score to 
indicate creditworthiness, while controlling for relevant variables? Yes/
No?
n/a±
1.1
If not, which gender has a higher credit score?
n/a
1.2
What is the magnitude of this gap?
n/a
2
Do men and women applicants have the same likelihood of receiving a 
credit offer, while controlling for relevant variables? Yes/No?
No
2.1
If not, which gender has a higher likelihood of receiving a credit offer?
Women
2.2
What is the magnitude of this gap?
0.3-0.8 percentage 
points
3
Do men and women who are extended credit offers receive the same 
average loan amount, while controlling for relevant variables? Yes/No
Yes
3.1
If not, which gender on average has a higher loan amount?
n/a
3.2
What is the magnitude of this gap?
n/a
4
Do men and women who are extended credit offers receive the same 
average interest rate, while controlling for relevant variables? Yes/No
Yes
4.1
If not, which gender has a lower interest rate?
n/a
4.2
How much is the magnitude of this gap in percentages?
n/a
5
Do men and women who are extended credit offers have the same 
average collateral requirement, while controlling for relevant variables? 
Yes/No
Yes
5.1
If not, which gender has a lower collateral requirement?
n/a
5.2
How much is the magnitude of this gap in percentages?
n/a
6
Do men and women rejected applicants have the same average credit 
score, while controlling for relevant variables? Yes/No
n/a±
6.1
If not, which gender has a lower credit score?
n/a
6.2
What is the magnitude of this gap?
n/a
Note: As in many presentations of inferential statistics, asterisks denote the level of confidence in the statistical significance of the finding. For example, 
*** means p<0.001 or 99.9% confident, ** means p<0.01 or 99% confident, * means p<0.05 or 95% confident.
± Aflore does not currently use an in-house credit score for its credit assessment, and only collects a 3rd-party credit score for a subset of its applicants. 
The reject inference model we used to impute the share of rejected applicants expected to have an non-performing loan is based on other factors. 
Consequently, this metric is less applicable in their case. 
Acknowledgments  |  Introduction  |  Fundamentals of Bias and Fairness   |  How to Audit for Credit Bias  
Bias Detection and Mitigation Examples  |  Conclusions  |  References
Table 7: Aflore’s Scorecard Results


| 30
For Aflore, our audit similarly revealed that their 
women applicants have a significantly higher 
likelihood of being “false negatives,” i.e. a 
disproportionate share are being rejected despite 
having a higher propensity to repay than comparable 
male applicants. Our main bias mitigation strategy 
also revolves around using reject inference 
methods to complement their regular process. We 
would apply reject inference techniques to identify 
“marginal” applicants rejected by their status 
quo process but predicted by the reject inference 
models to be creditworthy. We would experimentally 
offer loans to a subset of these marginal applicants 
to test if the approach was accurately identifying 
“false negatives,” before a potential large-scale roll-
out. The team developed the algorithm to identify 
these false negative applicants and is working to 
make it open-source for any institution to use.
Acknowledgments  |  Introduction  |  Fundamentals of Bias and Fairness   |  How to Audit for Credit Bias  
Bias Detection and Mitigation Examples  |  Conclusions  |  References


| 31
| 31
We offered a menu of bias detection tools, both 
basic and advanced, that financial services 
providers can use in their journeys towards fairness. 
We ended with three case examples of financial 
services providers that care about measuring 
potential biases in their portfolio and understanding 
the relative impact of these biases. 
Bias in lending—whether algorithmic or human—
matters, but not always for the reasons we assume 
it does. Perhaps most relevant to financial services 
providers is the business case. If gender biases 
in a credit assessment process are a result of 
inefficiencies, they cost a financial institution money. 
In the portfolio of every institution with which we 
partnered, a proportion of rejected applicants would 
have been likely to have paid their loans if they had 
been extended credit. Financial services providers 
can decrease their non-performing loans by paying 
attention to bias in their portfolios.
A second reason to care about bias is the perception 
in the market. Highly biased institutions may be seen 
to be unfair at best, and discriminatory at worst. 
Perception is important to institutions because it 
affects the loyalty of their existing customers, their 
ability to acquire new customers, and their access 
to investment capital.
Further, as we see in many markets across the 
world, there is likely to be increased regulation of 
innovation in lending. Europe’s new regulation of 
algorithms and related data-protection measures, 
alongside the U.S. government’s request for 
information about machine-learning-based models, 
indicate that regulations surrounding fairness are 
Conclusion : 
Why Bias Detection Matters
In this paper, we started by emphasizing that fairness is a complex goal, 
one that cannot be achieved through any singular pathway. Nevertheless, 
there are some clear first steps that institutions can take to understand 
where their biases exist and the extent to which these biases get in the 
way of their goals.    
imminent for the financial sector. The most forward-
thinking institutions will take the opportunity to 
“future-proof” their processes to ensure they can 
assess and improve their ability to be fair.
Finally, bias detection and mitigation matters for 
financial inclusion. New data and new technology 
combined create the conditions for faster, more 
efficient financial services. It is the responsibility 
of all of us to ensure that these services, rather 
than creating new lines of exclusion, will present 
new opportunities to increase women’s financial 
inclusion.
Acknowledgments  |  Introduction  |  Fundamentals of Bias and Fairness   |  How to Audit for Credit Bias  
Bias Detection and Mitigation Examples  |  Conclusions  |  References


| 32
References
Anderson, B. (2019). Using Bayesian networks 
to perform reject inference. Expert Systems with 
Applications, 137. Retrieved from https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.eswa.2019.07.011
Banasik, J., & Crook, J. (2005). Credit scoring, 
augmentation and lean models. Journal of the 
Operational Research Society, 56(9), 1072-1081. 
Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1057/palgrave.
jors.2602017
Bücker, M., Van Kampen, M., & Krämer, W. 
(2013). Reject inference in consumer credit 
scoring with nonignorable missing data. Journal 
of Banking and Finance, 37(3), 1040-1045. 
Retrieved 
from 
https://EconPapers.repec.org/
RePEc:eee:jbfina:v:37:y:2013:i:3:p:1040-1045  
Kelly, S., & Mirpourian, M. (2021). Algorithmic bias, 
financial inclusion, and gender: A primer on opening 
up new credit to women in emerging economies. 
Women’s World Banking. Retrieved from  https://
www.womensworldbanking.org/wp-content/
uploads/2021/02/2021_Algorithmic_Bias_Report.
pdf
Li, Z., Tian, Y., Li, K., Zhou, F., & Yang, W. (2017). Reject 
inference in credit scoring using semi-supervised 
support vector machines. Expert Systems with 
Applications, 75(15), 105-114. Retrieved from 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2017.01.011
Mehrabi, N., Morstatter, F., Saxena, N., Lerman, K., 
& Galstyan, A. (2021). A survey on bias and fairness 
in machine learning. ACM Computing Surveys 
(CSUR), 54(6), 1-35.
Shen, F., Zhao, X., & Kou, G. (2020). Three-stage 
reject inference learning framework for credit scoring 
using unsupervised transfer learning and three-way 
decision theory. Decision Support Systems, 137. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2020.113366
Stuart, E. A. (2010). Matching methods for causal 
inference: A review and a look forward. Statistical 
Science: A Review Journal of the Institute of 
Mathematical Statistics, 25(1), 1.
Tian, Y., Yong, Z., & Luo, J. (2018). A new approach 
for reject inference in credit scoring using kernel-free 
fuzzy quadratic surface support vector machines. 
Applied Soft Computing Journal, 73, 96–105.
Verma, S., & Rubin, J. (2018, May 29). Fairness 
definitions explained [Paper presentation, pp. 1-7]. 
IEEE/ACM International Workshop on Software 
Fairness (Fairware), Gothenburg, Sweden. https://
fairware.cs.umass.edu/
Vidal, M. F., & Barbon, F. (2019). Credit scoring in 
financial inclusion. Retrieved from https://www.
cgap.org/research 
publication/credit-scoring-
financial-inclusion 
Women’s World Banking. (2020). Creating a better 
banking experience for women-led micro, small, 
and medium enterprises in Kenya. Retrieved 
from 
https://www.womensworldbanking.org/wp-
content/uploads/2020/11/MSME_Report_2020.pdf
Acknowledgments  |  Introduction  |  Fundamentals of Bias and Fairness   |  How to Audit for Credit Bias  
Bias Detection and Mitigation Examples  |  Conclusions  |  References




| 34
     @womensworldsbnkg
www.womensworldbanking.org