May 2019 
1 
 
The Importance of Housing Affordability 
and Stability for Preventing and Ending 
Homelessness 
 
Introduction 
Home, Together: The Federal Strategic Plan to Prevent and 
End Homelessness, which was adopted by the Council in 
2018, includes an emphasis on improving housing 
affordability1 and opportunities for households at risk of or 
exiting homelessness. This focus is informed by: the 
powerful connection between homelessness and access to 
housing people can afford; an increased awareness of 
housing as a core social determinant of personal health 
and well-being; and substantial evidence that housing 
stability is essential for people to address their challenges 
and pursue their goals. For example, a body of evidence 
indicates that when people—both adults and children alike—experience housing instability or homelessness, their 
prospects for future educational attainment, employment growth, health stability, and family preservation are 
significantly reduced. 
When housing costs are more affordable and housing opportunities are more readily available, there is a lower 
likelihood of households becoming homeless, and households who do become homeless can exit homelessness 
more quickly and with greater likelihood of sustaining that housing long-term. To reduce the negative impacts of 
housing instability, and to end homelessness as quickly and efficiently as possible, communities are increasingly 
focused on expanding the supply of housing that is affordable to renter households at lower income levels, as well 
as ensuring that people experiencing and exiting homelessness have access to such housing.  
The Benefits of Housing Affordability and Stability 
Living in a stable, adequate home that is affordable to the household yields a multitude of opportunities and 
stronger outcomes for children, youth, and adults.2 A stable home provides a platform for improved outcomes 
around employment, health, and education. For instance, the impact of stable housing on children and youth is 
                                                          
1 Generally, housing is “affordable” if it costs less than 30% of the resident household’s income; for example, for a household 
with $2,000 of monthly income, a unit is affordable if the cost is $600 or less. Housing may be affordable to people exiting 
homelessness through a variety of mechanisms: (1) it may be available in the private market without any subsidy needed, 
sometimes referred to as “naturally affordable” units; (2) people may be provided tenant-based rental assistance (e.g., HUD-
PIH voucher, HUD HOME TBRA) to rent a unit in the private market; or (3) below-market rate rent levels may be secured 
through public and private financing into the development itself (e.g., HUD-assisted multi-family housing, project-based 
rental subsidies, Low Income Housing Tax Credit). 
2 See, e.g., USICH’s The Evidence Behind Approaches that Drive an End to Homelessness.  
 


 
  
     May 2019 
 
United States Interagency Council on Homelessness  
 
 
2 
well documented, including that, without stable housing, young people are more vulnerable to mental health 
problems, developmental delays, and poor cognitive outcomes.3 Further, there is a correlation between housing 
instability and trauma, which can negatively impact future success. Educational outcomes for children are also 
improved with housing stability; young people in stable housing are less likely to repeat a grade and less likely to 
drop out of school. Ultimately, the lack of stable housing has long-lasting effects that can impact health, 
education, and employment throughout people’s lives and in future generations.  
In another example, HUD’s large-scale Family Options Study demonstrated that access to housing that is 
affordable leads to substantial benefits in reducing food insecurity and school mobility; it also improves well-being 
among adults as well as children. In addition, the study offers evidence that providing access to housing that is 
affordable strengthens family well-being and dramatically reduces child separations, domestic violence, and 
psychological distress. 
Further, many studies have also demonstrated that supportive housing, which combines housing with more 
intensive supportive services, has been shown to help people with disabilities exit homelessness, improve their 
health, and, by reducing their use of crisis services, lower public costs. In fact, numerous studies have shown that 
providing opportunities for supportive housing is less costly than the public costs related to chronic 
homelessness.4,5,6 
Recent Reports Regarding Housing Affordability Challenges 
In many parts of the country, housing costs are rising more quickly than incomes, housing markets have not 
responded with adequate supplies of housing, and renter households at the lowest income levels face the 
greatest challenges with housing costs. Several recent reports on research and data analyses regarding housing 
affordability challenges are driving local conversations within many communities and are therefore important 
for broad federal awareness, including: 
• 
HUD’s Worst Case Housing Needs 2017 Report to Congress7 reported that more than 8 million households 
with very low incomes pay more than 50% of their household income for housing costs, leaving them with 
challenges paying for transportation, child care, food, medical expenses, and other necessities. This report 
further documents that for every 100 extremely low income households – who make less than 30% of the 
median income in their area – there are only 33 units that are affordable and available (i.e., either occupied 
by a renter at or below that income level or vacant). This situation leaves households at risk of 
homelessness if they have unexpected expenses, such as a car breaks down, work hours are cut, or a family 
                                                          
3 See, e.g., the studies referenced in USICH’s Ending Family Homelessness, Improving Outcomes for Children.  
4 Sadowski, L., et al. 2009. “Effect of a Housing and Case Management Program on Emergency Department Visits and 
Hospitalizations Among Chronically Homeless Adults.” JAMA 301 (17), 1771-1778; Basu A., et al. 2012. “Comparative Cost 
Analysis of Housing and Case Management Program for Chronically Ill Homeless Adults Compared to Usual Care.” Journal of 
Health Services Research. DOI: 10.1111/j.1475-6773.2011.01350. 
5 Hall, Gerod, et al. 2014. Public Service Use and Costs Associated with NY/NY III’s Supportive Housing for Active Substance 
Users. Columbia University, The National Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse. 
6 http://www.csh.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/01/FUSE-Eval-Report-Final_Linked.pdf 
7 This report provides an estimate of the number and percentage of renters who are experiencing “worst case” housing 
needs, meaning they: (1) have very low incomes (below 50% of the median income in their area); (2) do not receive 
government housing assistance; and (3) either have severe rent burdens (paying more than 50% of their income in rents), or 
live in severely inadequate or substandard housing, or experience both problems. 


 
  
     May 2019 
 
United States Interagency Council on Homelessness  
 
 
3 
member is hospitalized. The National Low Income Housing Coalition’s 2019 Gap Report estimates that there 
is a shortage of 7 million rental homes for households whose incomes are less than 30% of the median 
income in their communities.   
• 
The 2018 Out of Reach Report, also published by the National Low Income Housing Coalition, reports that a 
full-time worker in America must earn on average at least $22.10 an hour to afford a modest two-bedroom 
apartment without paying more than 30% of their income for housing. This rate varies across communities, of 
course; for instance, to rent a reasonable two-bedroom unit in Washington, DC, a worker must earn $34.48 an 
hour, while in Oklahoma that wage is $15.41. 
• 
There is a particularly severe problem with availability of housing that is affordable to those with extremely 
low incomes, including the more than 4.8 million adults with disabilities living only on Supplemental Security 
Income (SSI) in America. Priced Out: The Housing Crisis for People with Disabilities, prepared by Technical 
Assistance Collaborative and the Consortium for Citizens with Disabilities Housing Task Force, documents that 
a person who has SSI as their sole source of income cannot afford a safe, decent rental unit anywhere in the 
United States. The report also documents that the SSI income amount of $763 in 2016 was less than that 
year’s average national monthly rent of $861 for a modest one-bedroom apartment. In the absence of rental 
assistance, therefore, people living with disabilities frequently experience severe rent burdens and are at 
greater risk for institutionalization or homelessness.  
• Recent research sponsored by Zillow analyzes connections between rent levels and rates of homelessness in 
communities, and provides convincing evidence that rising rental housing costs are a significant predictor of 
homelessness. The study concludes that communities where median rent levels exceed 32% of median 
household incomes can expect more rapid increases in homelessness. The study also documents that areas 
with the most severe housing affordability issues along with rapidly rising rents are home to only 15% of the 
country’s total population but account for 47% of all people experiencing homelessness in the United States.   
Taken together, these analyses help support the assessment that severe housing affordability challenges, limited 
supply, increasingly high rents and rent burdens on households, and low vacancy rates with tighter competition 
for units in many communities are helping to drive the increases in unsheltered homelessness reflected in the 
Point-in-Time count data in 2017 and 2018.  
It is also important to note that a disproportionate number of households of color face significant housing needs 
and homelessness. While non-Hispanic Black persons represent 13% of the total population, they are 21.7% of the 
renters experiencing the worst case housing needs defined in HUD’s report. Similarly, Hispanic persons are 16% of 
the population but represent 25.3% of renters with worst case housing needs. This data is consistent with data 
regarding racial disparities in experiences of homelessness; for example, 40% of people counted as experiencing 
homelessness in the January 2018 Point-in-Time count were African American. 
Achieving an Increased Focus on Housing Affordability and Stability 
Housing affordability and stability challenges in communities will not be solved overnight, but local leaders can 
take action now to both improve current conditions and generate the information and support that will be 
needed to achieve the longer-term and larger-scale solutions needed, including:  
 
 


 
  
     May 2019 
 
United States Interagency Council on Homelessness  
 
 
4 
• 
Elevating awareness and attentiveness to the impact of housing stability on a broad range of outcomes, 
including education, health, and employment. As described above, there is a wealth of evidence to support 
the link between housing stability and outcomes related to health, education, safety, employment, and 
others. Despite this evidence, many programs do not consistently collect and assess participant information 
regarding housing status and its impact on program outcomes. To address this gap, local partners can work to 
capture information on housing status and stability at entry into, during participation in, and at exit from 
programs, and assess how increasing a focus on housing stability can improve program outcomes, such as 
keeping families together, reducing absenteeism and drop-out rates for children and youth in public schools, 
ensuring stable employment and earned income, and improving physical and behavioral health of everyone in 
the household, among others. This data and information can help make the case regarding the importance of 
housing stability and will help recruit a broader array of stakeholders and local leaders to recognize roles they 
need to play in addressing housing affordability and stability.  
• 
Strengthening partnerships to improve program participants’ housing stability. Many programs provide 
services with a broad range of activities for a diverse set of subpopulations, including but not limited to those 
at-risk of and experiencing homelessness, often referred to as “mainstream programs.” Strengthening 
partnerships with these programs can both support their capacity to better prevent homelessness and can 
help ensure successful exits from homelessness by focusing on: improving housing stability among 
mainstream program participants; prioritizing households experiencing homelessness or at risk of 
homelessness for the services and opportunities that mainstream programs provide; and targeting 
mainstream services to people who have exited homelessness to help ensure their stability and success. 
Through such partnerships, communities can better support households to maintain housing stability in the 
long-term, providing a platform from which households can address their challenges, stabilize their families, 
pursue economic mobility, and achieve their goals.  
• 
Identifying and removing barriers to housing assistance and/or prioritizing households experiencing or most 
at risk of homelessness. While some barriers to housing assistance are created through federal statutes or 
regulations, many programs offer a great deal of discretion to local communities in the implementation of 
such programs. Agencies that provide housing assistance can undertake analyses of potential changes to local 
policies and practices that would improve access to assistance for households experiencing homelessness or 
those assessed as most at risk of homelessness. In addition, agencies with housing programs can implement 
policies that prioritize people experiencing homelessness for available and appropriate housing options. For 
example, Public Housing Agencies and HUD-assisted multifamily housing developments can, within the federal 
requirements, establish preferences for households exiting homelessness or moving on from permanent 
supportive housing. 
• Aligning all housing affordability and homelessness efforts. USICH’s recent publication Aligning Affordable 
Housing Efforts with Actions to End Homelessness supports communities to implement strategies that will 
better align efforts to address housing affordability more broadly with efforts to prevent and end 
homelessness, focusing on actions to: Align Efforts; Set Goals; Message Effectively; Encourage Development; 
Engage Federal Programs; Target and Scale State and Local Funding; Align Funding; Link Health and Housing, 
and Ensure Access. 
 
 


 
  
     May 2019 
 
United States Interagency Council on Homelessness  
 
 
5 
Home, Together Strategies Related to Housing Affordability 
In addition to such actions, Home, Together also identifies federal strategies that USICH and our partners are 
acting upon and which communities can adapt within their efforts. The Plan’s most relevant strategies include: 
Strategies to Ensure that Homelessness is Prevented Whenever Possible 
• 
Promote development of an expanded supply of safe and affordable rental homes through federal, state, 
and local efforts and investments. This includes assisting communities that are working to adopt policies to 
expand overall housing supply and to project the scale of affordable housing units—including units that are 
affordable to people exiting homelessness and units that are accessible to persons with disabilities—needed 
to meet local demand on an ongoing basis. (Strategy 1.2.a) 
• 
Improve access to federally funded housing assistance by eliminating administrative barriers and 
encouraging targeting and prioritization of affordable housing to people experiencing homelessness in a 
community and/or to populations that are especially vulnerable to homelessness. (Strategy 1.2.b) 
• 
Encourage programs that are not specifically dedicated to ending homelessness to fund interventions that 
promote and support housing stability or to prioritize or serve individuals and families experiencing 
homelessness. Federal partners will further encourage partnerships with sources of public resources that can 
fund housing and related interventions, or that can prioritize or serve those experiencing homelessness, such 
as public housing, Temporary Assistance for Needy Families and child welfare agencies, Head Start programs, 
and Child Care and Development Fund providers, to strengthen the communitywide approach that ensures 
that homelessness is a brief experience in any community. (Strategy 1.2.i) 
Strategies to Ensure that Homelessness is a Brief Experience 
• 
Support communities to expand the supply and increase access to rental housing subsidies and other 
affordable housing options for individuals and families experiencing or most at risk of homelessness. These 
efforts will include: (1) Encouraging collaboration between public housing agencies, multi-family housing 
owners, and homelessness services systems, and promoting guidance on how public housing agencies and 
multi-family housing owners can adopt admissions preferences and successfully house people exiting 
homelessness; and (2) Supporting states and communities to better target and align rental assistance and 
capital financing sources to support new construction and rehabilitation of affordable housing units that can 
be effectively accessed by people exiting homelessness. (Strategy 2.4.a) 
• 
Support communities to implement expanded “move-on” strategies to assist people who have achieved 
stability in permanent supportive housing—and who no longer need and desire to live there—to move into 
other housing options they can afford and create access to those permanent supportive housing units for 
other prioritized households currently experiencing homelessness. (Strategy 2.4.f) 
• 
Improve access to federally funded housing assistance by eliminating administrative barriers and 
encouraging prioritization of people experiencing or most at risk of homelessness, including implementing 
the housing anti-discrimination and eviction protection provisions covered in the Violence Against Women 
Act. Federal partners will review federal program policies, procedures, and regulations to identify 
administrative or regulatory mechanisms that could be used to remove barriers and improve access to stable 
health care, housing, and housing supports. (Strategy 2.4.i)