Education
What Can Help Teachers Intervene in Anti-LGBTQ Harassment?
Survey of teachers show the importance of school culture in LGBTQ bullying.
Posted February 24, 2025 Reviewed by Lybi Ma
Key points
- Teachers' backgrounds have the strongest influence on confidence to intervene in anti-LGBTQ harassment.
- School culture is the second most important influence on preventing anti-LGBTQ harassment.
- School policies are important but must be paired with staff training and school culture changes.
How do we keep students safe at school? One important area I have focused on is understanding how, when, and why teachers do or don’t intervene in bullying and harassment. The journal Teaching Education recently published our study showing how important school culture is in whether or not teachers decide to intervene in anti-LGBTQ harassment. Our goal in this project was to identify areas where school leaders can focus efforts to support teachers’ interventions to reduce the harm students experience related to harassment in general and anti-LGBTQ harassment in particular.
We surveyed teachers and asked them questions to help us learn if school structures (formal policies and procedures), school culture (informal values and interactions), or individual experiences (teachers’ own identities and values) were more important in shaping teachers’ confidence to intervene in various forms of anti-LGBTQ harassment. Of these three elements, we learned that all had some impact, but formal school structures were the least influential, and individual experiences were the most influential.
For example, in terms of formal school structures, we learned that the items that most affected teachers’ confidence to intervene included the: presence of LGBTQ educators’ networks; LGBTQ library holdings; policies in place to address bullying based on gender expression; and LGBTQ web resources. However, the most influential factors were internal influences or based on the teachers’ identities and experiences. This included: the ability to redirect disruptive students, the personal importance of addressing LGBTQ issues or those related to gender expression, and views that all staff is responsible for student safety. Although the teacher-self (internal) factors were most influential, they are much harder to change as they emerge over an individual's lifetime. It is important for schools interested in actionable changes to focus on the external variables that have the most impact on teachers’ actions, we identified this as school culture.
Importance of school culture
The most influential school culture factors included teachers feeling unprepared due to a lack of training and resources on LGBTQ issues, the extent to which colleagues and administrators intervened in homophobic harassment, and teachers' concerns about facing student harassment for addressing LGBTQ topics in class.
Our study indicates that school leaders should focus efforts on improving school culture. School leaders can cultivate a climate where all staff and teachers are expected to address harassment. Teachers’ perception of how their colleagues and administrators at their schools addressed homophobic and transphobic harassment was important.
These factors make interventions more visible to others and demonstrate that addressing harassment is a clear priority in that school community. It also minimizes risks to individual educators who, without this culture of support, may be perceived as working in isolation to address transphobia and homophobia and could then be targets for parental backlash or isolation from colleagues. The access to training and resources also has significant relationships with educators’ reported confidence and intervention. Schools should prioritize providing professional learning opportunities on gender and sexual diversity in schools with a particular focus on how to intervene when anti-LGBTQ behaviors are observed.
This study answers several key questions: 
(1) whether updating school bullying and harassment policies to explicitly protect students from harassment based on sexual orientation, gender identity, and expression is sufficient to motivate teachers to intervene
(2) what factors are most related to teacher confidence and reported interventions
(3) which elements of school culture and teachers’ professional learning must be addressed if schools want their staff to intervene consistently in gendered harassment
School districts must also address related cultural factors such as access to LGBTQ-inclusive resources and professional development, actions of school leaders, and the willingness of other school personnel to intervene in incidents of gendered harassment visibly and consistently if policies are to have any meaningful effect on reducing this form of violence in schools. Safety at school is not a political issue: all students have the right to access an education free from violence and discrimination. We hope this study helps more schools move in that direction.
References
Meyer, E. J., Zabala-Eisshofer, C., & Atteberry, A. (2025). Educators’ interventions in gendered harassment: the importance of school culture. Teaching Education, 1-24.