Disability justice is 
economic justice, and 
economic justice must 
consider how intersecting 
identities of race, ethnicity 
and gender affect the so­
cio-economic mobility of 
individuals living with disabilities. While many institutions 
are actively seeking to amplify the voices of historically 
marginalized groups, including Black, Indigenous and oth­
er people of color (BIPOC), these efforts continue to prove 
inadequate in understanding and deliberately addressing 
the discrimination faced by the more than 41 million Amer­
icans living with disabilities. Economic equity as a point 
of discussion seldom addresses the barriers to inclusion 
and financial independence that many individuals with 
disabilities face. By extension, programs are not tailored to 
meet the needs of BIPOC individuals with disabilities, and 
financial well-being data often do not ask or document 
whether participants have a disability.
Using data from the 2021 FDIC Survey of Household Use of 
Banking and Financial Services, this factsheet illustrates 
the inequities in bank account ownership experienced by 
persons with disabilities. Recognizing the impact of inter­
sectionality, the findings highlight the disproportionate 
financial barriers faced by BIPOC persons with disabilities. 
The data were collected in June 2021 and are useful for de­
scribing post-COVID-19 conditions as households readjust 
to a changed world. The analysis of these data can: (1) help 
characterize the financial positioning of households with 
a disability post-pandemic, and (2) provide a comparative 
benchmark for the upcoming 2023 survey.
Unbanked households use nonbank credit for various reasons 
including bank location, lack of trust in financial institutions, 
and challenges with accessing mainstream credit and main­
taining positive credit history. A household that uses nonbank 
credit products uses products and services such as the fol­
lowing: payday loans, pawn shop loans, rent-to-own services, 
refund anticipation loans, and auto title loans.
Highlights from the 2021 FDIC Survey of Household Use of Banking and Financial Services


DISABILITY, RACE AND ETHNICITY
Inequality in Access to Bank Credit
The percentage of households that are unbanked due 
to problems with past banking or credit history is 1.4 
times greater than in households with disabilities than 
in households without disability.
n	 Households with disability 7.1%; Households without 
disability 5.2%
The percentage of households that use nonbank credit 
is almost 1.7 times greater in households with a disabil­
ity than those without a disability.
n	 Households with disability 7.9%; Households without 
disability 4.8%


In households with a disability, a marginally higher 
percentage of Black households with a disability use 
nonbank credit services compared to White1 house­
holds with a disability.
n	 Black 10.8%; White 7.6%; Latinx 5.0%
PERCENTAGE OF HOUSEHOLDS 
THAT USE NONBANK CREDIT
HOUSEHOLDS WITH DISABILITY  
HOUSEHOLDS WITHOUT DISABILITY
1 	 The difference in the percentage of households that use nonbank 
credit was statistically significant at 0.05 and 0.1 alpha levels.


Higher percentages of households with a disability use 
nonbank credit services in Black and White households: 
n	 Black with a disability: 10.8%; Black without a disabili­
ty: 8.3% 
n	 White with a disability: 7.6%; White without a disability: 
3.5%
In households with a disability, the use of nonbank credit 
services among Black households is marginally higher. 
National Disability Institute (NDI) thanks the FDIC for their continued commitment to gather data on disability status and to 
advance the financial inclusion of persons with disabilities and other economically vulnerable populations. It is our hope that 
other economic surveys will begin to collect disability data (e.g., Annual Business Survey, Consumer Expenditure Survey, Feder­
al Reserve Board Survey of Household Economics and Decision-making Survey).
This research was made possible through the generous support of JPMorgan Chase & Co.
A higher percentage of Black households with a disability use 
nonbank credit services compared to White households.2
n	 Black households with a disability: 10.8%; White house­
holds with a disability: 7.6% 
In tandem, there are higher percentages of households with­
out a disability that use nonbank credit services in Black 
and Latinx households compared to White households.
n	 Black households without a disability: 8.3%; Latinx 
households without a disability: 7.0%; White house­
holds without a disability: 3.5%
n	 It is likely that Native Hawaiian/ Pacific Islander and 
American Indian/Alaskan Native households with a 
disability face inequalities in access to bank credit 
at rates similar to the ones found in Black and Latinx 
households with a disability. For instance, in house­
holds without a disability, the races/ethnicity with the 
highest percentage use of non-bank credit are Amer­
ican Indian/Alaska Native (10.9%), followed by Black 
(8.3%) and Latinx (7.0%). Data also show that the 
percentage of households that use non-bank credit 
was even higher in Black households with a disability. 
Therefore, it is likely that the percentage of American 
Indian/ Alaska Native households with a disability is 
similar to the percentages found in Black and Latinx 
households with a disability.






2 	 The difference in the percentage of households that use non-bank 
credit was statistically significant at 0.05 and 0.1 alpha levels.
METHODOLOGY
The race/ethnicity of the householder was used to classify the household. For example, “Black household with a disability,” 
refers to a household for which the householder identifies as Black alone and not Latinx. The associations between income 
bracket and group membership based on disability status and race/ethnicity described in this document are significant at 
the .05 alpha level.
Disability, Race and Ethnicity
Inequality in Access to Bank Credit
PERCENTAGE OF HOUSEHOLDS 
THAT USE NONBANK CREDIT
HOUSEHOLD 
WITH DISABILITY
HOUSEHOLD 
WITHOUT DISABILITY
n BLACK          n LATINX          n WHITE