An Empirical Analysis of Racial Diﬀerences in Police Use of Force∗
Roland G. Fryer, Jr.†
Draft: July 2016
Abstract
This paper explores racial diﬀerences in police use of force. On non-lethal uses of force,
blacks and Hispanics are more than ﬁfty percent more likely to experience some form of force
in interactions with police. Adding controls that account for important context and civilian
behavior reduces, but cannot fully explain, these disparities. On the most extreme use of force –
oﬃcer-involved shootings – we ﬁnd no racial diﬀerences in either the raw data or when contextual
factors are taken into account. We argue that the patterns in the data are consistent with a
model in which police oﬃcers are utility maximizers, a fraction of which have a preference for
discrimination, who incur relatively high expected costs of oﬃcer-involved shootings.
Keywords: discrimination, decision making, bias, police use of force
∗This work has beneﬁtted greatly from discussions and debate with Chief William Evans, Chief Charles McClelland,
Chief Martha Montalvo, Sergeant Stephen Morrison, Jon Murad, Lynn Overmann, Chief Bud Riley, and Chief
Scott Thomson. I am grateful to David Card, Kerwin Charles, Christian Dustmann, Michael Greenstone, James
Heckman, Richard Holden, Lawrence Katz, Steven Levitt, Jens Ludwig, Glenn Loury, Kevin Murphy, Derek Neal,
John Overdeck, Jesse Shapiro, Andrei Shleifer, Jorg Spenkuch, Max Stone, John Van Reenan, Christopher Winship,
and seminar participants at Brown University, University of Chicago, London School of Economics, University College
London, and the NBER Summer Institute for helpful comments and suggestions. Brad Allan, Elijah De La Campa,
Tanaya Devi, and William Murdock III provided truly phenomenal project management and research assistance.
Lukas Althoﬀ, Dhruva Bhat, Samarth Gupta, Julia Lu, Mehak Malik, Beatrice Masters, Ezinne Nwankwo, Charles
Adam Pfander, Sofya Shchukina and Eric Yang provided excellent research assistance. Financial support from EdLabs
Advisory Group and an anonymous donor is gratefully acknowledged. Correspondence can be addressed to the author
by email at rolandfryer@edlabs.harvard.edu. The usual caveat applies.
†Department of Economics, Harvard University, and the NBER, (rfryer@fas.harvard.edu);


“We can never be satisﬁed as long as the Negro is the victim of the unspeakable horrors
of police brutality.” Martin Luther King, Jr., August 28, 1963.
I. Introduction
From “Bloody Sunday” on the Edmund Pettus Bridge to the public beatings of Rodney King,
Bryant Allen, and Freddie Helms, the relationship between African-Americans and police has an
unlovely history. The images of law enforcement clad in Ku Klux Klan regalia or those peaceful
protesters being attacked by canines, high pressure water hoses, and tear gas are an indelible part
of American history. For much of the 20th century, law enforcement chose to brazenly enforce the
status quo of overt discrimination, rather than protect and serve all citizens.
The raw memories of these injustices have been resurrected by several high proﬁle incidents of
questionable uses of force. Michael Brown, unarmed, was shot twelve times by a police oﬃcer in
Ferguson, Missouri, after Brown ﬁt the description of a robbery suspect of a nearby store. Eric
Garner, unarmed, was approached because oﬃcers believed he was selling single cigarettes from
packs without tax stamps and in the process of arresting him an oﬃcer choked him and he died.
Walter Scott, unarmed, was stopped because of a non-functioning third brake light and was shot
eight times in the back while attempting to ﬂee. Samuel Du Bose, unarmed, was stopped for failure
to display a front license plate and while trying to drive away was fatally shot once in the head.
Rekia Boyd, unarmed, was killed by a Chicago police oﬃcer who ﬁred into a group of people ﬁve
times from inside his police car. Zachary Hammond, unarmed, was driving away from a drug deal
sting operation when he was shot to death by a Seneca, South Carolina, police oﬃcer. He was
white. And so are 44% of police shooting subjects.1
These incidents, some captured on video and viewed widely, have generated protests in Ferguson,
New York City, Washington, Chicago, Oakland, and several other cities and a national movement
(Black Lives Matter) and a much needed national discourse about race, law enforcement, and
policy. Police precincts from Houston, TX, to Camden, NJ, to Tacoma, WA, are beginning to issue
body worn cameras, engaging in community policing, and enrolling oﬃcers in training in an eﬀort
to purge racial bias from their instinctual decision making. However, for all the eerie similarities
1Author’s calculations based on ProPublica research that analyzes FBI data between 1980 and 2012.
1


between the current spate of police interactions with African Americans and the historical injustices
which remain unhealed, the current debate is virtually data free. Understanding the extent to which
there are racial diﬀerences in police use of force and (if any) whether those diﬀerences might be due
to discrimination by police or explained by other factors at the time of the incident is a question
of tremendous social importance, and the subject of this paper.
A primary obstacle to the study of police use of force has been the lack of readily available data.
Data on lower level uses of force, which happen more frequently than oﬃcer-involved shootings, are
virtually non-existent. This is due, in part, to the fact that most police precincts don’t explicitly
collect data on use of force, and in part, to the fact that even when the data is hidden in plain
view within police narrative accounts of interactions with civilians, it is exceedingly diﬃcult to
extract. Moreover, the task of compiling rich data on oﬃcer-involved shootings is burdensome. Until
recently, data on oﬃcer-involved shootings were extremely rare and contained little information on
the details surrounding an incident. A simple count of the number of police shootings that occur
does little to explore whether racial diﬀerences in the frequency of oﬃcer-involved shootings are
due to police malfeasance or diﬀerences in suspect behavior.2
In this paper, we estimate the extent of racial diﬀerences in police use of force using four
separate datasets – two constructed for the purposes of this study.3 The ﬁrst comes from NYC’s
Stop, Question, and Frisk program (hereafter Stop and Frisk). Stop and Frisk is a practice of the
New York City police department in which police stop and question a pedestrian, then can frisk
them for weapons or contraband. The dataset contains roughly ﬁve million observations. And,
important for the purposes of this paper, has detailed information on a wide range of uses of force
– from putting hands on civilians to striking them with a baton. The second dataset is the Police-
Public Contact Survey, a triennial survey of a nationally representative sample of civilians, which
contains – from the civilian point of view – a description of interactions with police, which includes
uses of force. Both these datasets are public-use and readily available.4
2Newspapers such as the Washington Post estimate that there were 965 oﬃcer-involved shootings in 2015. Web-
sites such as fatal encounters estimate that the number of annual shootings is approximately 704 between 2000 and
2015.
3Throughout the text, I depart from custom by using the terms “we,” “our,” and so on. Although this is sole-
authored work, it took a large team of talented individuals to collect the data necessary for this project. Using “I”
seems disingenuous.
4The NYC Stop and Frisk data has been used in Gelman et al. (2012) and Coviello and Persico (2015) to un-
derstand whether there is evidence of racial discrimination in proactive policing and Ridgeway (2009) to develop a
statistical method to identify problem oﬃcers. The Police-Public Contact Survey has been used, mainly in criminol-
2


The other two datasets were assembled for the purposes of this research. We use event sum-
maries from all incidents in which an oﬃcer discharges his weapon at civilians – including both hits
and misses – from three large cities in Texas (Austin, Dallas, Houston), six large Florida counties,
and Los Angeles County, to construct a dataset in which one can investigate racial diﬀerences in
oﬃcer-involved shootings.
Because all individuals in these data have been involved in a police
shooting, analysis of these data alone can only estimate racial diﬀerences on the intensive margin
(e.g., did the oﬃcer discharge their weapon before or after the suspect attacked).
To supplement, our fourth dataset contains a random sample of police-civilian interactions from
the Houston police department from arrests codes in which lethal force is more likely to be justiﬁed:
attempted capital murder of a public safety oﬃcer, aggravated assault on a public safety oﬃcer,
resisting arrest, evading arrest, and interfering in arrest. Similar to the event studies above, these
data come from arrests narratives that range in length from two to one hundred pages. A team of
researchers was responsible for reading arrest reports and collecting almost 300 variables on each
incident. Combining this with the oﬃcer-involved shooting data from Houston allows us to estimate
both the extensive (e.g., whether or not a police oﬃcer decides to shoot) and intensive margins.
Further, the Houston arrests data contain almost 3,500 observations in which oﬃcers discharged
charged electronic devices (e.g., tasers). This is the second most extreme use of force, and in some
cases, is a substitute for lethal use of force.
The results obtained using these data are informative and, in some cases, startling.
Using
data on NYC’s Stop and Frisk program, we demonstrate that on non-lethal uses of force – putting
hands on civilians (which includes slapping or grabbing) or pushing individuals into a wall or onto
the ground, there are large racial diﬀerences.
In the raw data, blacks and Hispanics are more
than ﬁfty percent more likely to have an interaction with police which involves any use of force.
Accounting for baseline demographics such as age and gender, encounter characteristics such as
whether individuals supplied identiﬁcation or whether the interaction occurred in a high- or low-
crime area, or civilian behaviors does little to alter the race coeﬃcient. Adding precinct and year
ﬁxed eﬀects, which estimates racial diﬀerences in police use of force by restricting to variation
within a given police precinct in a given year reduces the black coeﬃcient by 19.4 percent and the
ogy, to study questions such as whether police treatment of citizens impacts the broader public opinion of the police
(Miller et al., 2004).
3


Hispanic coeﬃcient by 26 percent, though both are still statistically larger than zero. Including
more than 125 controls available in the data, the odds-ratio on black (resp. Hispanic) is 1.173 (resp.
1.120).
Interestingly, as the intensity of force increases (e.g. handcuﬃng civilians without arrest, draw-
ing or pointing a weapon, or using pepper spray or a baton), the probability that any civilian
is subjected to such treatment is small, but the racial diﬀerence remains surprisingly constant.
For instance, 0.26 percent of interactions between police and civilians involve an oﬃcer drawing a
weapon; 0.02 percent involve using a baton. These are rare events. Yet, the results indicate that
they are signiﬁcantly more rare for whites than blacks. In the raw data, blacks are 21.3 percent
more likely to be involved in an interaction with police in which at least a weapon is drawn than
whites and the diﬀerence is statistically signiﬁcant. Adding our full set of controls reduces the
racial diﬀerence to 19.4 percent. Across all non-lethal uses of force, the odds-ratio of the black
coeﬃcient ranges from 1.163 (0.036) to 1.249 (0.129).
Data from the Police-Public Contact Survey are qualitatively similar to the results from Stop
and Frisk data, both in terms of whether or not any force is used and the intensity of force, though
the estimated racial diﬀerences is larger. In the raw data, blacks and Hispanics are approximately
two percentage points more likely than whites to report any use of force in a police interaction.
The white mean is 0.8 percent. Thus, the odds ratio is 3.335 for blacks and 2.584 for Hispanics.
As the use of force increases, the racial diﬀerence remains roughly constant. Adding controls for
civilian demographics, civilian behavior, contact and oﬃcer characteristics, or year does little to
alter the results. The coeﬃcients are virtually unchanged and are all highly signiﬁcant with the
exception of the highest uses of force for which data is sparse.
There are several potential explanations for the quantitative diﬀerences between our estimates
using Stop and Frisk data and those using PPCS data. First, we estimate odds-ratios and the
baseline probability of force in each of the datasets is substantially diﬀerent. Second, the PPCS is a
nationally representative sample of a broad set of police-civilian interactions. Stop and Frisk data
is from a particularly aggressive form of policing in a dense urban area. Third, the PPCS is gleaned
from the civilian perspective. Finally, granular controls for location are particularly important in
the Stop and Frisk data and unavailable in PPCS. In the end, the “Truth” is likely somewhere in
the middle and, importantly, both bounds are statistically and economically important.
4


In stark contrast to non-lethal uses of force, we ﬁnd no racial diﬀerences in oﬃcer-involved
shootings on either the extensive or intensive margins. Using data from Houston, Texas – where
we have both oﬃcer-involved shootings and a randomly chosen set of potential interactions with
police where lethal force may have been justiﬁed – we ﬁnd, in the raw data, that blacks are 23.8
percent less likely to be shot at by police relative to whites. Hispanics are 8.5 percent less likely.
Both coeﬃcients are statistically insigniﬁcant. Adding controls for civilian demographics, oﬃcer
demographics, encounter characteristics, type of weapon civilian was carrying, and year ﬁxed eﬀects,
the black (resp. Hispanic) coeﬃcient is 0.924 (0.417) (resp. 1.256 (0.595)). These coeﬃcients are
remarkably robust across alternative empirical speciﬁcations and subsets of the data. Partitioning
the data in myriad ways, we ﬁnd no evidence of racial discrimination in oﬃcer-involved shootings.
Investigating the intensive margin – the timing of shootings or how many bullets were discharged
in the endeavor – there are no detectable racial diﬀerences.5
Our results have several important caveats. First, all but one dataset was provided by a select
group of police departments. It is possible that these departments only supplied the data because
they are either enlightened or were not concerned about what the analysis would reveal. In essence,
this is equivalent to analyzing labor market discrimination on a set of ﬁrms willing to supply a
researcher with their Human Resources data! There may be important selection in who was willing
to share their data. The Police-Public contact survey partially sidesteps this issue by including
a nationally representative sample of civilians, but it does not contain data on oﬃcer-involved
shootings.
Relatedly, even police departments willing to supply data may contain police oﬃcers who present
contextual factors at that time of an incident in a biased manner – making it diﬃcult to interpret
regression coeﬃcients in the standard way.6 It is exceedingly diﬃcult to know how prevalent this
type of misreporting bias is (Schneider 1977). Accounting for contextual variables recorded by
police oﬃcers who may have an incentive to distort the truth is problematic. Yet, whether or not
we include controls does not alter the basic qualitative conclusions. And, to the extent that there
5It is important to recognize that there may be racial bias in the likelihood of appearing in the Houston Arrest
Data.
6In the Samuel DuBose case at the University of Cincinnati, the oﬃcer reported “Mr. DuBose pulled away and
his arm was caught in the car and he got dragged” yet body camera footage showed no such series of events. In
the Laquan McDonald case in Chicago, the police reported that McDonald lunged at the oﬃcer with a knife while
dash-cam footage showed the teenager walking away from the police with a small knife when he was fatally shot 16
times by the oﬃcer.
5


are racial diﬀerences in underreporting of non-lethal use of force (and police are more likely to not
report force used on blacks), our estimates may be a lower bound. Not reporting oﬃcer-involved
shootings seems unlikely.
Third, given the inability to randomly assign race, one can never be conﬁdent in the direct
regression approach when interpreting racial disparities. We partially address this in two ways.
First, we build a model of police-civilian interactions that allows for both statistical and taste-
based discrimination and use the predictions of the model to help interpret the data. For instance,
if police oﬃcers are pure statistical discriminators then as a civilian’s signal to police regarding
their likelihood of compliance becomes increasingly deterministic, racial diﬀerences will disappear.
To test this, we investigate racial diﬀerences in use of force on a set of police-civilian interactions
in which the police report the civilian was compliant on every measured dimension, was not ar-
rested, and neither weapons nor contraband was found. In contrast to the model’s predictions,
racial diﬀerences on this set of interactions is large and statistically signiﬁcant. Additionally, we
demonstrate that the marginal returns to compliant behavior are the same for blacks and whites,
but the average return to compliance is lower for blacks – suggestive of a taste-based, rather than
statistical, discrimination.
For oﬃcer-involved shootings, we employ a simple test for discrimination inspired by Knowles,
Persico, and Todd (2001) and Anwar and Fang (2006). We investigate the fraction of white and
black suspects, separately, who are armed conditional upon being involved in an oﬃcer-involved
shooting. If the ordinal threshold of shooting at a black suspect versus a white suspect is diﬀerent
across oﬃcer races, then one could reject the null hypothesis of no discrimination. Our results,
if anything, are the opposite. We cannot reject the null of no discrimination in oﬃcer-involved
shootings.
Taken together, we argue that the results are most consistent with, but in no way proof of, taste-
based discrimination among police oﬃcers who face convex costs of excessive use of force. Yet, the
data does more to provide a more compelling case that there is no discrimination in oﬃcer-involved
shootings than it does to illuminate the reasons behind racial diﬀerences in non-lethal uses of force.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section describes and summarizes the
four data sets uses in the analysis. Section 3 presents estimates of racial diﬀerences on non-lethal
uses of force. Section 4 describes a similar analysis for the use of lethal force. Section 5 attempts
6


to reconcile the new facts with a simple model of police-civilian interaction that incorporates both
statistical and taste-based channels of discrimination. The ﬁnal section concludes. There are 3
online appendices. Appendix A describes the data used in our analysis and how we coded variables.
Appendix B describes the process of creating datasets from event summaries. Appendix C provides
additional theoretical results.
II. The Data
We use four sources of data – none ideal – which together paint an empirical portrait of racial
diﬀerences in police use of force. The ﬁrst two data sources – NYC’s Stop and Frisk program and
the Police-Public Contact Survey (PPCS) – provide information on non-lethal force from both the
police and civilian perspectives, respectively. The other two datasets – event summaries of oﬃcer-
involved shootings in ten locations across the US, and data on interactions between civilians and
police in Houston, Texas, in which the use of lethal of force may have been justiﬁed by law – allow
us to investigate racial diﬀerences in oﬃcer-involved shootings on both the extensive and intensive
margins.
Below, I brieﬂy discuss each dataset in turn. Appendix A provides further detail.
A. New York City’s Stop-Question-and-Frisk Program
NYC’s Stop-Question-and-Frisk data consists of ﬁve million individual police stops in New York
City between 2003 and 2013. The database contains detailed information on the characteristics
of each stop (precinct, cross streets, time of day, inside/outside, high/low crime area), civilian
demographics (race, age, gender, height, weight, build, type of identiﬁcation provided), whether
or not the oﬃcers were in uniform, encounter characteristics (reason for stop, reason for frisk (if
any), reason for search (if any), suspected crime(s)), and post-encounter characteristics (whether
or not a weapon was eventually found or whether an individual was summonsed, arrested, or a
crime committed).
Perhaps the most novel component of the data is that oﬃcers are required to document which
one of the following seven uses of force was used, if any: (1) hands, (2) force to a wall, (3) handcuﬀs,
(4) draw weapon, (5) push to the ground, (6) point a weapon, (7) pepper spray or (8) strike with
7


a baton.7 Oﬃcers are instructed to include as many uses of force as apply. For instance, if a stop
results in an oﬃcer putting his hands on a civilian and, later within the same interaction, pointing
his weapon, that observation would have both “hands” and “point a weapon” as uses of force.
Unfortunately, oﬃcers are not required to document the sequence in which they used force.
These data have important advantages.
First, the Stop and Frisk program encompasses a
diverse sample of police-civilian interactions.8 Between the years 2003 and 2013, the same period
as the Stop and Frisk data, there were approximately 3,457,161 arrests in NYC – 26.3% fewer
observations than Stop and Frisk excluding stops that resulted in arrests.9 Unfortunately, even
this robust dataset is incomplete – nowhere is the universe of all police interactions with civilians
– or even all police stops – recorded.
Second, lower level uses of force – such as the use of hands – are both recorded in these data
and more frequently used by law enforcement than more intense uses of force. For instance, if
one were to use arrest data to glean use of force, many lower level uses of force would simply be
considered standard operating procedure. Putting hands on a suspect, pushing them up against a
wall, and putting handcuﬀs on them are so un-noteworthy in the larger context of an arrest that
they are not recorded in typical arrest descriptions. Yet, because proactive policing is a larger and
less confrontational portion of police work, these actions warrant data entry.
The key limitation of the data is they only capture the police side of the story. There have
been several high-proﬁle cases of police storytelling that is not congruent with video evidence of the
interaction. Another important limitation for inference is that the data do not provide a way to
identify oﬃcers or individuals. Ideally, one would simply cluster standard errors at the oﬃcer level
to account for the fact that many data points – if driven by a few aggressive oﬃcers – are correlated
and classic inference treats them as independent. Our typical regressions cluster standard errors at
the precinct level. Appendix table 9 explores the robustness of our results for more disaggregated
clusters – precinct x time of day, block-level, and even block x time of day. Our conclusions are
7Police oﬃcers can also include “other” force as a type of force used against civilians. We exclude “other” forces
from our analysis. Appendix Table 3 calculates racial diﬀerences in the use of “other” force and shows that including
these forces does not alter our results.
8Technically, NYC police are only required to record a stop if some force was used, a civilian was frisked or
searched, was arrested, or refused to provide identiﬁcation.
Nonetheless, roughly 41 percent of all stops in the
database appear to be reported despite not resulting in any of the outcomes that legally trigger the requirement to
record the stop.
9This number was calculated from the Division of Criminal Justice Services’ record of adult arrests by counties
in New York City between 2003 and 2013.
8


unaﬀected by any of these alternative ways to cluster standard errors.
Summary statistics for the Stop and Frisk data are displayed in table 1A. There are six panels.
Panel A contains baseline characteristics. Fifty eight percent of all stops recorded were of black
civilians. If police were stopping individuals at random, this number would be closer to 25.5 percent
(the fraction of black civilians in New York City according to US Census 2010 records). Hispanics
make up twenty-ﬁve percent of the stops. The data are comprised predominantly of young males;
the median age is 24 years old. The median age in NYC is roughly 11 years older.
Panel B describes encounter characteristics for the full sample and then separately by race.
Most stops occur outside after the sun has set in high-crime areas. A surprisingly small number of
stops – about three percent – the police report ﬁnding any weapon or contraband. Panel C displays
variables that describe civilian behavior. Approximately 50 percent of stops were initiated because
a civilian ﬁt the relevant description of a person of interest, were assumed to be a lookout for a
crime, or the oﬃcers were casing a victim or location.
Panel D contains a series of alternative outcomes such as whether a civilian was frisked, sum-
monsed, or arrested. Panel E provides descriptive statistics for the seven forms of force available
in the data. Panel F provides the frequency of missing variables.
B. The Police-Public Contact Survey
The Police-Public Contact Survey (PPCS) – a nationally representative sample – has been collected
by the Bureau of Justice Statistics every three years since 1996. The most recent wave publicly
available is 2011. Across all years, there are approximately 500,000 observations.
The main advantage of the PPCS data is that, unlike any of our other datasets, it provides the
civilian’s interpretation of interactions with police. The distinction between PPCS data and almost
any other data collected by the police is similar to the well-known diﬀerences between certain data
in the Uniform Crime Reports (UCR) and the National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS).10
One explanation for these diﬀerences given in the literature is that individuals are embarrassed or
10According to the US Department of Justice, UCR and NCVS measure an overlapping but nonidentical set of
crimes. The UCR Program’s primary objective is to provide a reliable set of criminal justice statistics by compiling
data from monthly law enforcement reports or individual crime incident reports transmitted directly to FBI or to
centralized state agencies that then report to FBI. The BJS, on the other hand, established the NCVS to provide
previously unavailable information about crime (including crime not reported to police), victims and oﬀenders.
Therefore, there are discrepancies in victimization rates from the two reports like the UCR which reports 89,000
forcible rapes in 2010 while the NCVS reports 203,830 rapes and sexual assaults in 2010.
9


afraid to report certain crimes to police or believe that reporting such crimes have unclear beneﬁts
and potential costs. Police use of force – in particular for young minority males – may be similar.
Another key advantage is that it approximates the universe of potential interactions with police
– rather than limited to arrests or police stops.11 If a police oﬃcer is investigating a crime in a
neighborhood and they discuss it with a civilian – this type of interaction would be recorded in the
PPCS. Or, if a police oﬃcer used force on a civilian and did not report the interaction – this would
not be recorded in police data but would be included in the PPCS.
The PPCS also has important limitations. First, data on individual’s locations is not available
to researchers. Second, the data on contextual factors surrounding the interaction with police or
the oﬃcer’s characteristics are limited. Third, the survey omits individuals who are currently in
jail. Fourth, the PPCS only includes the civilian account of the interaction which could be biased
in its own way. In this vein, according to individuals in the PPCS data, only 4.18% of them have
resisted arrests and only 11% of civilians argued when they were searched despite not being guilty
of carrying alcohol, drugs or weapons.
Table 1B presents summary statistics for PPCS data. There are six panels. Panel A contains
civilian demographics. Blacks comprise roughly eleven percent of the sample, women are 53 percent.
The average age is approximately 17 years older than the Stop and Frisk data. Over 60 percent of
the sample reports being employed in the previous week – average income category in the sample
is 1.95. Income is recorded as a categorical variable that is 1 for income levels below $20,000, 2 for
income levels between 20, 000 and 49, 999, and 3 for income levels greater than $50,000.
Panel B describes self-reported civilian behavior. According to the all PPCS survey respondents,
almost no civilians disobey police orders, try to get away, resist, argue or threaten oﬃcers. However,
since these questions were asked in response to why force was used against respondents, if we restrict
the data to civilians who report non-missing use of force from police oﬃcers, this percentage rises
to 15.3 percent.
Panel C of table 1B includes summary data on the types of contact and oﬃcer characteristics.
Almost half of the interactions between the public and police are traﬃc stops, eighteen percent
are from street interactions – including the types of street interaction that may not appear in our
11Contacts exclude encounters with private security guards, police oﬃcers seen on a social basis, police oﬃcers
related to the survey respondents, or any contacts that occurred outside the United States.
10


Stop and Frisk data – and thirty percent are “other” which include being involved in a traﬃc
accident, reporting a crime, being provided a service by the police, participating in block watch or
other anti-crime programs, or being suspected by the police of something or as a part of a police
investigation. Panel D contains alternative outcomes and Panel E describes the ﬁve uses of force
available in the data. Panel F provides the frequency of missing variables.
C. Oﬃcer-Involved Shootings
There are no systematic datasets which include oﬃcer-involved shootings (OIS) along with demo-
graphics, encounter characteristics, and suspect and police behavior.12 For the purposes of this
project, we compile a dataset on oﬃcer-involved shootings from ten locations across America.
To begin, ﬁfteen police departments across the country were contacted by the author: Boston,
Camden, NYC, Philadelphia, Austin, Dallas, Houston, Los Angeles, six Florida counties, and
Tacoma, Washington.13 Importantly for thinking about the representativeness of the data – many
of these cities were a part of the Obama Administration’s Police Data Initiative.14 We received
data from all but three of these police departments – NYC, Philadelphia, and Tacoma, Washington
– all of which have indicated a willingness to participate in our data collection eﬀorts but have not
yet provided data.15 This is likely not a representative set of cities. Appendix Table 14 investigates
diﬀerences between the cities that provided us data and other Metropolitan Statistical Areas on a
variety of dimensions such as population demographics and crime rates.
In most cases, OIS data begins as event summaries from all incidents in which a police oﬃcer
discharged their ﬁrearm at civilians (including both hits and misses). These summaries, in many
cases, are more than ﬁfty page descriptions of the factors surrounding an oﬃcer-involved shooting.
Below is an extract from a “typical” summary:
12Data constructed by the Washington Post has civilian demographic identiﬁers, weapons carried by civilian, signs
of mental illness and an indicator for threat level but no other contextual information.
13Another approach is to request the data from every police department vis-a-vis a freedom of information request.
We attempted this method, but police departments are not obliged to include detailed event summaries. In our
experience, the only way to obtain detailed data is to have contacts within the police department.
14The White House launched the Police Data Initiative as a response to the recommendations made by the Task
Force on 21st Century Policing. The Initiative was created to work with police departments to leverage data on
police-citizen interactions (e.g., oﬃcer-involved shootings, use of force, body camera videos and police stops) to
increase transparency and accountability.
15Camden and Boston each had one OIS during the relevant time frame, so we did not use their data for this
analysis. Camden provided remarkable data on police-civilian interactions which will be used in future work.
11


“As I pointed my riﬂe at the vehicle my primary focus was on the male passenger
based on the information provided by the dispatcher as the person who had been armed
inside the store. As the vehicle was driving past me I observed the male passenger in
the truck turn around in the seat, and begin pointing a handgun at me through an
open rear sliding glass window. When I observed this I was still yelling at the female
to stop the truck! The male suspect appeared to be yelling at me, but I could not
hear him. At that point the truck was traveling southbound toward the traﬃc light
on Atlantic Boulevard, and was approximately 30-40 feet away from me. The car had
already passed me so the driver was no longer in my line of ﬁre. I could also see my back
drop consisted of a wooded area of tall pine trees. It appeared to me at that time that
his handgun was moving in a similar fashion of being ﬁred and going through a recoil
process, but I could not hear gunshots. Fearing for my life, the lives of the citizens in
the area and my fellow oﬃcers I began to ﬁre my riﬂe at the suspect.”
To create a dataset out of these narratives, a team research assistants read each summary
and extracted data on 65 pre-determined variables in six categories: (A) suspect characteristics,
(B) suspect weapon(s), (C) oﬃcer characteristics, (D) oﬃcer response reason, (E) other encounter
characteristics, and (F) location characteristics.16 Suspect characteristics include data on suspect
race, age and gender. Suspect weapon variables consist of dummy variables for whether the suspect
used a ﬁrearm, sharp object, vehicle, or other objects as a weapon or did not have a weapon at
all. Oﬃcer characteristics include variables that determine the majority race of the oﬃcer unit,
whether there were any female oﬃcers in the unit, average tenure of the shooting oﬃcer and dummy
variables for whether the oﬃcer was on duty and was accompanied by two or more oﬃcers on the
scene. Oﬃcer response reason variables determine the reason behind the oﬃcer being present at
the scene. They include dummy variables on whether the oﬃcer was present as a response to a
robbery, a violent disturbance, traﬃc related stop, or was responding to a warrant, any suspicious
activity, a narcotics transaction, a suicide, responding because he was personally attacked or other
reasons. Other encounter characteristics gather information on whether the shooting happened
during the day or night and a variable that is coded 1 if the suspect attacked the oﬃcer or drew
16Appendix B provides a detailed, step-by-step, account of how the OIS dataset was created and was explicitly
designed to allow researchers to replicate our analysis from the original source materials.
12


a weapon or attempted to draw a weapon on the oﬃcer. The variable is coded 0 if the suspect
only appeared to have a weapon or did not attack the oﬃcer at all. Finally, location characteristics
include dummies to represent the jurisdiction that we collected data from. Appendix B contains
more details of how the variables were coded.
As a crucial check on data quality, once we coded all OIS data from the event summaries, we
wrote Appendix B. We then hired eight new research assistants who did not have any involvement
in creating the ﬁrst dataset. We provided them the event summaries, Appendix B, and extremely
minimal instructions – the type of simple clariﬁcation that would be provided to colleagues at-
tempting to replicate our work from the source material – and they created a second, independent,
dataset. All results remain qualitatively unchanged with the alternatively coded dataset.17
The most obvious advantage of the OIS data is the breadth and speciﬁcity of information
contained in the event summaries. Descriptions of OIS are typically long and quite detailed relative
to other police data.
A second advantage is that oﬃcer-involved shootings are non-subjective.
Unlike lower level uses of force, whether or not an oﬃcers discharges a weapon is not open to
interpretation. Oﬃcers are also required to document anytime they discharge their weapon. Finally,
OIS are subject to internal and often times external review.
The OIS data have several notable limitations. Taken alone, oﬃcer-involved shootings are the
most extreme and least used form of police force and thus, in isolation, may be misleading. Second,
the penalties for wrongfully discharging a lethal weapon in any given situation can be life altering,
thus, the incentive to misrepresent contextual factors on police reports may be large.18 Third, we
don’t typically have the suspect’s side of the story and often there are no witnesses. Fourth, it is
impossible to capture all variables of importance at the time of a shooting. Thus, what appears to
be discrimination to some may look like mis-measured contextual factors to others.
A ﬁnal disadvantage, potentially most important for inference, is that all observations in the
OIS data are shootings. In statistical parlance, they don’t contain the “zeros” (e.g., set of police
interactions in which lethal force was justiﬁed but not used). To the extent that racial bias is
prevalent on the extensive margin – whether or not someone is ever in an oﬃcer-involved shooting
– these data would not capture it.
17Thanks to Derek Neal for suggesting this exercise.
18From interviews with dozens of current police oﬃcers, we gleaned that in most all police shootings – even when
fully justiﬁed and observed by many – the oﬃcer is taken oﬀactive-duty, pending an investigation.
13


We address this concern both directly and indirectly in two ways. First, given the data we
have, we investigate the intensive margin by deﬁning our outcome variable as whether or not the
oﬃcer shoots the suspect before being attacked. Second, we collected unprecedented data from the
Houston Police Department on all arrest categories in which oﬃcers may have used justiﬁable force
as a way to obtain the “zeros.” These data are described in the next subsection.
Table 1C displays summary statistics for OIS data, divided into four locations and six categories
of data. Column (1) contains observations from the full sample – 1,332 shootings between 2000
and 2015. Forty-six percent of oﬃcer-involved shootings in our data are blacks, thirty percent are
Hispanic, and twenty-four percent are other with the majority in that category being whites. Given
the spate of video evidence on police shootings – all of which are of blacks – it is a bit surprising
that they are less than half of the observations in the data.
Columns (2) and (3) displays data from 507 oﬃcer-involved shootings with ﬁrearms and over
4,000 instances of an oﬃcer-involved shooting with a taser, in Houston, Texas. Most police oﬃcers
in the Houston Police Department carry Glock 22, Glock 23 or the Smith & Wesson M&P40 .40
(S&W) caliber semi-automatic handguns on their dominant side, but many carry an X26 taser
on their non-dominant side. We exploit this choice problem to understand how real-time police
decisions may be correlated with suspect race.
Columns (4) through (6) contain OIS data from Austin and Dallas, Texas, six Florida counties
(Brevard, Jacksonville, Lee, Orange, Palm Beach and Pinellas), and Los Angeles County. Panel F
demonstrates that Houston accounts for 38% of all oﬃcer-involved shootings. Austin and Dallas,
combined, provide 20% of the data while Florida provides 27% of the data. Panel G provides the
frequency of missing variables.
D. Houston Police Department Arrests Data
The most comprehensive set of OIS data is from the Houston Police Department (HPD). For this
reason, we contacted HPD to help construct a set of police-civilian interactions in which lethal
force may have been justiﬁed. According to Chapter 9 of the Texas Penal Code, police oﬃcers’
use of deadly force is justiﬁed “when and to the degree the actor reasonably believes the force is
immediately necessary.” Below, we describe the task of implementing this obtuse deﬁnition in data
in an eﬀort to develop a set of police-civilian interactions in which the use of lethal force may have
14


been justiﬁed by law.
There are approximately 100,000 arrests per year in Houston; 1.6 million total over the years
we have OIS data. If the data were more systematically collected, the tasks of creating potential
risk sets would be straightforward. Data in HPD is the opposite – most of it is narrative reports
in the form of unstructured blocks of text that one can link to alternative HPD data with unique
case IDs.19
We sample case IDs from ﬁve arrest categories which are more likely to contain incidence in
which lethal force was justiﬁed: attempted capital murder of a public safety oﬃcer, aggravated
assault on a public safety oﬃcer, resisting arrest, evading arrest, and interfering in arrest.20 This
process narrowed the set of relevant arrests to 16,000 total, between 2000 and 2015. We randomly
sampled ﬁve percent of these arrest records and manually coded 290 variables per arrest record. This
process took between 30 and 45 minutes per record to manually keypunch and includes variables
related to speciﬁc locations for calls, incidents, and arrests, suspect behavior, suspect mental health,
suspect injuries, oﬃcer use of force, and oﬃcer injuries resulting from the encounter.
These data are merged with data on oﬃcer demographics and suspect’s previous arrest history
to produce a comprehensive incident-level dataset on interactions between police and civilians in
which lethal force may have been justiﬁed.
We also collected 4,250 incident reports for all cases in which an oﬃcer discharged their taser.
These data form another potential risk set. It it important to note: technology allows for HPD to
centrally monitor the frequency and location of taser discharges.
Table 1D provides descriptive statistics for the Houston Arrest Data. Compared to the oﬃcer-
involved shootings dataset, civilians sampled in the arrest dataset carry far fewer weapons – 95%
do not carry weapons compared to 21% in the OIS dataset. The other variable that is signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent between the two datasets is the fraction of suspects who attacked or drew weapon – 56%
in the HPD arrest dataset compared to 80% in the OIS dataset.
19In conversations with engineers and data scientists at Google, Microsoft Research, and several others in Artiﬁcial
Intelligence and Machine Learning, we were instructed that current natural language processing algorithms are not
developed for the level of complexity in our police data. Moreover, one would need a “test sample” (manually coded
data to assess the algorithm’s performance) of several hundred thousand to design an algorithm. This is outside the
scope of the current project.
20Our original request to HPD was for a dataset similar to OIS for all arrests between 2000 and 2015. The response:
“we estimate that it will take 375 years to fulﬁll that request.”
15


III. Estimating Racial Diﬀerences in Non-Lethal Use of Force
NYC’s Stop, Question, and Frisk Data
Table 2A presents a series of estimates of racial diﬀerences in police use of force using the Stop
and Frisk data. We estimate logistic regressions of the following form:
Forcei,p,t “ Race1
iα ` X1
i,tβ ` Z1
p,tµ ` νt ` ψp ` ϵi,p,t
(1)
where Forcei,p,t is a measure of police use of force on individual i, in precinct p, at time t. A
full set of race dummies for civilians are included in the regressions, with white as the omitted
category. Consequently, the coeﬃcients on race capture the gap between the named racial category
and whites – which is reported as an Odds Ratio.21
The vectors of covariates included in the
speciﬁcation, denoted X1
i,t and Zp,t, vary between rows in table 2A. As one moves down the table,
the set of coeﬃcients steadily grows. We caution against a causal interpretation of the coeﬃcients
on the covariates, which are better viewed as proxies for a broad set of environmental and behavioral
factors at the time of an incident. Standard errors, which appear below each estimate, are clustered
at the precinct level unless otherwise speciﬁed.
The ﬁrst row in table 2A presents the diﬀerences in means for any use of force. These results
reﬂect the raw gaps in whether or not a police stop results in any use of force, by race. Blacks are
53% more likely to experience any use of force relative to a white mean of 15.3 percent. The raw
gap for Hispanics is almost identical. Asians are no more likely than whites to experience use of
force. Other race – which includes American Indians, Alaskan natives or other races besides white,
black, Hispanic and Asian – is smaller but still considerable.
The raw diﬀerence between races is large – perhaps too large – and it seems clear that one needs
to account for at least some contextual factors at the time of a stop in order to better understand,
for example, whether racial diﬀerences are driven by police response to a given civilian’s behavior
or racial diﬀerences in civilian behavior. Yet, it is unclear how to account for context that might
predict how much force is used by police and not include variables which themselves might be
21Appendix Tables 2A through 2G runs similar speciﬁcation using ordinary least squares and obtains similar
results. Estimating Probit models provides almost identical results.
16


inﬂuenced by biased police.22
Row (2) adds baseline civilian characteristics – such as age and gender – all of which are
exogenously determined and not strategically chosen as a function of the police interaction. Adding
these variables does almost nothing to alter the odds ratios. Encounter characteristics – whether
the interaction happened inside, the time of day, whether it occurred in a high or low crime area,
and whether the civilian provided identiﬁcation – are added as controls in row 3. If anything, adding
these variables increase the odds ratios on each race, relative to whites. Surprisingly, accounting
for civilian behavior – row 4 in the table – does little to alter the results.
The ﬁnal row in table 2A includes both precinct and year ﬁxed eﬀects. This signiﬁcantly changes
the magnitude of the coeﬃcients. Blacks are seventeen percent more likely to incur any use of force,
accounting for all variables we can in the data. Hispanics are roughly twelve percent more likely.23
Both are statistically signiﬁcant. Asians are slightly less likely, though not distinguishable from
whites.
These results have two potential takeaways: precincts matter and, accounting for a large and
diverse set of control variables, black civilians are still more likely to experience police use of force.
Of the 112 variables available in the data, there is no linear combination that fully explains the
race coeﬃcients.24 From this point forward, we consider the ﬁnal speciﬁcation, including precinct
and year ﬁxed eﬀects as our main speciﬁcation.
Inferring racial diﬀerences in the types of force used in a given interaction is a bit more nuanced.
Police report that in twenty percent of all stops, some use of force is deployed. Oﬃcers routinely
record more than one use of force. For instance, a stop might result in an oﬃcer putting their
hands on a civilian, who then pushes the oﬃcer and the oﬃcer responds by pushing him to the
ground. This would be recorded as “hands” and “force to ground”. In 85.1% of cases, exactly one
use of force is recorded. Two use of force categories were used in 12.6% of cases, 1.8% report three
22The traditional literature in labor economics – beginning with Mincer (1958) – dealt with similar issues. O’Neill
(1990) and Neal and Johnson (1996) sidestep this by demonstrating that much of the racial wage gap can be accounted
for by including only pre-market factors such as test scores.
23Even accounting for eventual outcomes of each stop – which include being let go, being frisked, being searched,
being arrested, being summonsed, and whether or not a weapon or some form of contraband was found – blacks are
twenty-two percent more likely to experience force and Hispanics are twenty-seven percent more likely. We did not
include these control variables in our main speciﬁcation due to the fear of over-controlling if there is discrimination
in the probability of arrests, conditional on behavior.
24Using data on geo-spatial coordinates, we also included block-level ﬁxed eﬀects and the results were qualitatively
unchanged.
17


use of force categories, and 0.6% of all stop and frisk incidents in which force is used record more
than three uses of force.
There are several ways to handle this. The simplest is to code the max force used as “1” and
all the lower level uses of force in that interaction as “0”. In the example above in which an oﬃcer
recorded both “hands” and “forced to the ground” as uses of force, one would ignore the use of
hands and code forced to the ground as “1.” The limitation of this approach is that it discards
potentially valuable information on lower level uses of force. When analyzing racial diﬀerences in
the use of hands by police, one would miss this observation. A similar issue arises if one uses the
parallel “min.”25
Perhaps a more intuitive way to code the data is to treat each use of force as “at least as much”.
In the example above, both hands and forced to the ground would be coded as “1” in the raw data.
When analyzing racial diﬀerences in the use of hands by police, this observation would be included.
The interpretation would not be racial diﬀerences in the use of hands, per se, but racial diﬀerences
in the use of “at least” hands. To be clear, an observation that records only hands would be in
the hands regression but not the regression which restricts the sample to observations in which
individuals were at least forced to the ground. This is the method we use throughout.
Results using this method to describe racial diﬀerences for each use of force are displayed in
Figure 1. The x-axis contains use of force variables that range from at least hands to at least the
use of pepper spray or baton. The y-axis measures the odds ratio for blacks (panel A) or Hispanics
(panel B). The solid line is gleaned from regressions with no controls, and the dashed line adds
precinct and year ﬁxed eﬀects (equivalent to row 5 in table 2A).
For blacks, the consistency of the odds ratios are striking. As the use of force increases, the
frequency with which that level of force is used decreases substantially. There are approximately
ﬁve million observations in the data – 19 percent of them involve the use of hands while 0.04 percent
involve using pepper spray or a baton. The use of high levels of force in these data are rare. Yet,
it is consistently rarer for whites relative to blacks. The range in the odds ratios across all levels
of force is between 1.163 (0.036) and 1.236 (0.058).
Interestingly, for Hispanics, once we account for our set of controls, there are small diﬀerences
25Appendix table 8 demonstrates that altering the deﬁnition to be “at most” or using the max/min force used in
any given police interaction does not alter the results.
18


in use of force for the lower level uses of non-lethal force, but the diﬀerences converge toward whites
as the use of force increases both in the raw data and with the inclusion of controls.
One may be concerned that restricting all the coeﬃcient estimates to be identical across the
entire sample may yield misleading results. Regressions on a common support (for example, only
on males or only on police stops during the day) provide one means of addressing this concern.
Table 3 explores the sensitivity of the estimated racial gaps in police use of force across a variety
of subsamples of the data. I report only the odds-ratios on black and Hispanic and associated
standard errors. The top row of the table presents baseline results using the full (any force) sample
and our parsimonious set of controls (corresponding to row 5 in table 2a). The subsequent rows
investigate racial diﬀerences in use of force for high/low crime areas, time of day, whether or not
the oﬃcer was in uniform, indoors/outdoors, gender of civilian, and eventual outcomes.
Most of the coeﬃcients on race do not diﬀer signiﬁcantly across these various subsamples with
the exception of time of day and eventual outcomes. Black civilians are 7 percent more likely to
have any force used against them conditional on being arrested. They are 15 percent more likely
to have any force used against them conditional on being summonsed and 11.1 percent more likely
conditional on having weapons or contraband found on them. Results are similar for Hispanics.
Additionally, for both blacks and Hispanics, racial diﬀerences in use of force are more pronounced
during the day relative to night.
To dig deeper, Panel A in ﬁgure 2 plots the odds ratios of any use of force for black civilians
versus white civilians for every hour of day. Panel B displays the average use of force for black
civilians and white civilians for every hour of day. These ﬁgures show that force against black
civilians follows approximately the same pattern as white civilians, though the diﬀerence between
average force between the two races decreases at night.
Police-Public Contact Survey
One of the key limitations of the Stop and Frisk data is that one only gets the police side of
the story, or more accurately, the police entry of the data. It is plausible that there are large racial
diﬀerences that exist that are masked by police misreporting. The Police-Public Contact Survey is
one way to partially address this weakness.
Table 2B presents a series of estimates of racial diﬀerences in police use of force using the PPCS
19


data. The speciﬁcations estimated are of the form:
Forcei,t “ Race1
iα ` X1
i,tβ ` νt ` ϵi,t,
where Forcei,t is a measure of police use of force reported by individual i in year t. A full set of
race dummies for individuals and oﬃcers are included in the regressions, with white as the omitted
category. The vectors of covariates included in the speciﬁcation vary across rows in table 2B. As
one moves down the table, the set of coeﬃcients steadily grows. Standard errors, which appear
below each estimate, account for heteroskedasticity.
Generally, the data are qualitatively similar to the the results using Stop and Frisk – namely,
despite a large and complex set of controls, blacks and Hispanic are more likely to experience some
use of force from police. A key diﬀerence, however, is that the share of individuals experiencing any
use of force is signiﬁcantly lower. In the Stop and Frisk data, 15.3 percent of whites incur some force
from police. In the PPCS, this number is 1%. There are a variety of potential reasons for these
stark diﬀerences. For instance, the PPCS is a nationally representative sample of interactions with
police from across the U.S., whereas the Stop and Frisk data is gleaned from a rather aggressive
proactive policing strategy in a large urban city. This is important because in what follows we
present odds-ratios. Odds-ratios are informative, but it is important for the reader to know that
the baseline rate of force is substantially smaller in the PPCS.
Blacks are three times more likely to report use of force by police in the raw data. Hispanics
are 2.6 times more likely. Adding controls for demographic and encounter characteristics, civilian
behavior, and year ﬁxed eﬀects reduces the odds-ratio to roughly 2.7 for blacks and 1.7 for Hispanics.
Diﬀerences in quantitative magnitudes aside, the PPCS paints a similar portrait – large racial
diﬀerences in police use of force that cannot be explained using a large and varied set of controls.
One important diﬀerence between the PPCS and the Stop and Frisk data is in regards to racial
diﬀerences on the more extreme uses of non-lethal force: using pepper spray or striking with a
baton. Recall, in the Stop and Frisk data the odds ratios were relatively consistent as the intensity
of force increased. In the PPCS data, if anything, racial diﬀerences on these higher uses of force
disappear. For kicking or using a stun gun or pepper spray, the highest use of force available, the
black coeﬃcient is 1.867 (0.589) and the Hispanic coeﬃcient is 1.228 (0.468), though because of the
20


rarity of these cases the coeﬃcients are barely statistically signiﬁcant at the 5% level.
Table 4 explores the heterogeneity in the data by estimating racial diﬀerences in police use
of force in the PPCS on various subsamples of the data: civilian income, gender, civilian, time of
contact, and oﬃcer race. Civilian income is divided into three categories: less than $20,000, between
$20,000 and $50,000, and above $50,000. Strikingly, both the black and Hispanic coeﬃcients are
statistically similar across these income levels suggesting that higher income minorities do not price
themselves out of police use of force – echoing some of the ideas in Cose (1993). Racial diﬀerences
in police of force does not seem to vary with civilian gender or oﬃcer race. Consistent with the
results in the Stop and Frisk data, the black coeﬃcient is 3.17 (0.85) for interactions that occur
during the day and 1.68 (0.48) for interactions that occur at night. The p-value on the diﬀerence
is marginally signiﬁcant.
Putting the results from the Stop and Frisk and PPCS datasets together, a pattern emerges.
Relative to whites, blacks and Hispanics seem to have very diﬀerent interactions with law en-
forcement – interactions that are consistent with, though deﬁnitely not proof of, some form of
discrimination. Including myriad controls designed to account for civilian demographics, encounter
characteristics, civilian behavior, eventual outcomes of the interaction and year reduces, but cannot
eliminate, racial diﬀerences in non-lethal use of force in either of the datasets analyzed.
IV. Estimating Racial Diﬀerences in Oﬃcer-Involved Shootings
We now focus on racial diﬀerences in oﬃcer-involved shootings. We begin with speciﬁcations most
comparable to those used to estimate racial diﬀerences in non-lethal force, using both data from
oﬃcer-involved shootings in Houston and data we coded from Houston arrest records that contains
interactions with police that might have resulted in the use of lethal force.26
Speciﬁcally, we
estimate the following empirical model:
shootingi,t “ Race1
iα ` X1
i,tβ ` νt ` ϵi,t,
26Because of this select set of “0s” the non-black, non-Hispanic mean, displayed in column 1, is drastically larger
than a representative sample of the population – which would be approximately .0001%. 45.5 percent of whites in
our data were involved in an oﬃcer-involved shooting.
21


where shootingi,t is a dichotomous variable equal to one if a police oﬃcer discharged their weapon
at individual i in year t. There are no accidental discharges in our data and shootings at canines
have been omitted. A full set of race dummies for individuals and oﬃcers are included in the
regressions, with non-black non-Hispanics as the omitted category for individuals. The vectors of
covariates included in the speciﬁcation vary across rows in table 5. As one moves down the table,
the set of coeﬃcients steadily grows. As one moves across the columns of the table, the comparison
risk set changes.27 Presenting the results in this way is meant to underscore the robustness of the
results to the inclusion of richer sets of controls and to alternative interpretations of the risk sets.
Standard errors, which appear below each estimate, account for heteroskedasticity.
Given the stream of video “evidence”, which many take to be indicative of structural racism in
police departments across America, the ensuing and understandable outrage in black communities
across America, and the results from our previous analysis of non-lethal uses of force, the results
displayed in Table 5 are startling.
Blacks are 23.8 percent less likely to be shot by police, relative to whites. Hispanics are 8.5
percent less likely to be shot but the coeﬃcient is statistically insigniﬁcant.
Rows (2) through (6) add various controls, identical to those in table 1D. Accounting for basic
suspect or oﬃcer demographics, does not signiﬁcantly alter the raw racial diﬀerences. Including
encounter characteristics – which one can only accomplish by hand coding the narratives embed-
ded in arrests reports – creates more parity between blacks and non-black non-Hispanic suspects,
rendering the coeﬃcient closer to 1. Finally, when we include whether or not a suspect was found
with a weapon or year ﬁxed eﬀects, the coeﬃcients still suggest that, if anything, oﬃcers are less
likely to shoot black suspects, ceteris paribus, though the racial diﬀerences are not signiﬁcant.
Columns (4) and (5) of table 5 include 4504 incident reports from 2005-2015 for all arrests
during which an oﬃcer reported using his taser as a risk set, in addition to all OIS in Houston from
that time period. The empirical question here is whether or not there are racial diﬀerences in the
split-second decision as to whether to use lethal or non-lethal force through the decision to shoot
a pistol or taser.
Consistent with the previous results, the raw racial diﬀerence in the decision to employ lethal
27Appendix Table 6 investigates the sensitivity of the main results to more alternative compositions of the risk
sets.
22


force using this taser sample is negative and statistically signiﬁcant. Adding suspect and oﬃcer
demographics, encounter characteristics and year controls does little to change the odds ratios for
black versus non-black suspects. Including all controls available from the taser sample, table 5
shows that black civilians are 30.9 percent less likely to be shot with a pistol (rather than a taser)
relative to non-black suspects. Columns (6) and (7) pool the sample from hand coded arrest data
and taser data. Results remain qualitatively the same. Controlling for all characteristics from
incident reports, black suspects are 21.6 percent less likely to be shot than non-black suspects.
To be clear, the empirical thought experiment here is that a police oﬃcer arrives at a scene
and decides whether or not to use lethal force. Our estimates suggest that this decision is not
correlated with the race of the suspect. This does not, however, rule out the possibility that there
are important racial diﬀerences in whether or not thse police-civilian interactions occur at all.
Appendix Table 5 explores the sensitivity of the results for various subsamples of the data:
number of oﬃcers who respond to the scene, whether the suspect attacked an oﬃcer ﬁrst, whether
the oﬃcer was on-duty, whether the unit that responded was majority black or Hispanic or majority
white or Asian, and the type of call the oﬃcer was responding to (a partial test of the selection
issue described above). Equations identical to (3) are estimated, but due to the smaller sample
sizes inherent in splitting the sample, we estimate Ordinary Least Squares regressions.
None of the subsamples explored demonstrate much diﬀerence of note. We ﬁnd no evidence
that racial diﬀerences in the use of lethal force varies in a statistically meaningful way between the
number of oﬃcers at an incident. We ﬁnd no diﬀerences in the use of lethal force across diﬀerent
call slips – the p-value for equality of race coeﬃcient across diﬀerent calls slips is 0.557 for black
suspects – suggesting that oﬃcers seeking confrontation in random street interactions in a way that
causes important selection bias into our sample is not statistically relevant. Subsampling on the
number and racial composition of the oﬃcer unit also shows no evidence of racial diﬀerences.
Another way to investigate the robustness of our coeﬃcients is to analyze the odds ratios across
time. These data are displayed in ﬁgure 4. Racial diﬀerences in OIS between 2000 and 2015 are
remarkably constant. This interval is interesting and potentially informative as it is 9 years after
the public beatings of Rodney King and includes the invention of Facebook, the iPhone, YouTube,
and related technology that allows bystanders to capture police-civilian interactions and make
it publicly available at low costs. Crudely, the period between 2000 and 2005 one might think
23


to be years in which police misconduct could more easily go unnoticed and for which the public
attention was relatively low. Thus, the disincentive to misreport was likely lower. After this period,
misreporting costs likely increased. Yet, as we see from ﬁgure 3, this does not seem to inﬂuence
racial diﬀerences in the use of lethal force.
Are there Racial Diﬀerences in the Timing of Lethal Force?
The above results, along with the results on use of force, are about racial diﬀerences on the
extensive margin: whether or not an oﬃcer uses a particular type of force or decides to use lethal
force on a suspect. Because of the richness of our oﬃcer-involved shooting database, we can also
investigate the intensive margin – whether there are racial diﬀerences in how quickly a police oﬃcer
shoots a suspect. In particular, given the narrative accounts, I create a dichotomous variable that
is equal to one if a police oﬃcer reports that she (he) shoots a suspect before they are attacked and
zero if they report shooting the suspect after being attacked. These data are available for Houston
as well as the other nine locations where we collected OIS data. An important caveat to these data
is that the sequence of events in a police-civilian interaction is subject to misreporting by police.
Thus, the dependent variable is subjective.
Table 6 presents a series of estimates of racial diﬀerences in the timing of police shootings using
the OIS data. The speciﬁcations estimated are of the form:
Shoot Firsti,c,t “ Race1
iα ` X1
i,tβ ` Z1
c,tT ` νt ` ψc ` ϵi,c,t,
where Shoot Firsti,c,t is a measure of whether a police oﬃcer reports shooting individual i, in city c,
in year t, before being attacked. Standard errors, which appear below each estimate, are clustered
at the location level unless otherwise speciﬁed.
The results from these speciﬁcations are consistent with our previous results on the extensive
margin. Row (1) displays the results from the raw data. Blacks are 1.3% less likely to be shot ﬁrst
by police. Hispanics are slightly more likely. Neither coeﬃcient is statistically signiﬁcant. Adding
suspect or oﬃcer demographics does not alter the results.28
Row (4) accounts for important context at the time of the shooting. For instance, whether
28We also estimate the “intensity” of force used in oﬃcer-involved shootings by estimating racial diﬀerences in the
total number of bullets used in a given police shooting. The average number of bullets in oﬃcer-involved shootings
involving blacks is 0.256 (0.508) more relative to shootings that involve whites [not shown in tabular form].
24


the shooting happened during day time or night time and whether the suspect drew weapon or
attacked the oﬃcer. Including these variables decreases the black coeﬃcient to 0.693 (0.096) which
is statistically signiﬁcant. The Hispanic coeﬃcient is similar in size but less precisely estimated.
Adding whether the suspect was eventually found to have a weapon and its type or including
location and year ﬁxed eﬀects only strengthens the results in the unexpected direction. Including
all controls available, oﬃcers report that they are 47.4% less likely to discharge their ﬁrearms
before being attacked if the suspect is black. The Hispanic coeﬃcient is strikingly similar (43.6%
less likely).
Appendix Table 7 explores the heterogeneity in the data across various subsamples: number
of oﬃcers who arrive at a scene, whether or not oﬃcers report that the suspect clearly drew their
weapon or whether they “appeared” to draw their weapon, whether the oﬃcer was on-duty, the
call type, and the racial composition of the responding unit.
The ﬁnal panel provides results
disaggregated by location.
Estimated race coeﬃcients across call types – whether oﬃcers were dispatched because of a
violent crime, robbery, auto crime, or other type of call – are statistically identical. This is partic-
ularly interesting in light of the potential selection into the sample of OIS cases discussed earlier.
Indeed, the majority of police shootings in our data occur during violent crimes or robberies and
there are no racial diﬀerences on these call types.
One of the more interesting subsamples is whether or not a suspect “appeared” to have a weapon
versus an oﬃcer indicating that it was clear he had a weapon. This dovetails with many of the
anecdotal reports of police violence and is thought to be a key margin on which implicit bias, and
the resulting discriminatory treatment, occur. Eberhardt et al. (2004) ﬁnds that police oﬃcers
detect degraded images of crime related objects faster when they are shown black faces ﬁrst.
Yet our data from the ﬁeld seem to reject this lab-based hypothesis, at least as regards oﬃcer-
involved shootings. The coeﬃcient on black for the subsample who police report clearly drew their
weapon ﬁrst is -0.105 (0.020). The same coeﬃcient estimated on the set of interactions were police
assumed an individual had a weapon is -0.038 (0.033). The Hispanic coeﬃcients are nearly identical.
More generally, the coeﬃcients are uncommonly consistent across all subsamples of the data.
Of the 5 tests of equality performed in the table, not one is signiﬁcant. We cannot detect racial
diﬀerences in oﬃcer-involved shootings on any dimension.
25


V. Interpretation
A number of stylized facts emerge from the analysis of the preceding sections. On non-lethal uses
of force, there are racial diﬀerences – sometimes quite large – in police use of force, even after
controlling for a large set of controls designed to account for important contextual and behavioral
factors at the time of the police-civilian interaction. As the intensity of use of force increases from
putting hands on a civilian to striking them with a baton, the overall probability of such an incident
occurring decreases but the racial diﬀerence remains roughly constant. On the most extreme uses
of force, however – oﬃcer-involved shootings with a Taser or lethal weapon – there are no racial
diﬀerences in either the raw data or when accounting for controls.
In this section, we explore the extent to which a model of police-civilian interaction that en-
compasses both information- and taste-based discrimination – can successfully account for this set
of facts. The model is an adaptation of Coate and Loury (1993a, 1993b).
A. A Model of Police-Civilian Interactions
Basic Building Blocks
Imagine a large number of police oﬃcers and a weakly larger population of civilians. Each
police oﬃcer is randomly matched with civilians from this population. Civilians belong to one of
two identiﬁable groups, B or W. Denote by λ the fraction of W’s in the population. Police oﬃcers
are assumed to be one of two types: “biased” or “unbiased.” Let δ P p0, 1q denote the fraction of
biased police oﬃcers.
Nature moves ﬁrst and assigns a cost of compliance to each civilian and a type to each police
oﬃcer. Let c P rc, cs, represent the cost to a civilian of investing in compliance. An alternative way
to think about this assumption is that individuals contain inherent dangerousness and those who
are dangerous have higher costs of compliance.
After observing his cost, the civilian makes a dichotomous compliance decision, choosing to
become either a compliant type or a non-compliant type with no in-between. Then, based on this
decision, nature distributes a signal θ P rθ, θs to police oﬃcers regarding whether or not a civilian
is likely to comply.29 Next, the police oﬃcer observes θ and decides whether or not to use force,
29This model is a simpliﬁed version of a more general model in which individuals invest in a “compliance identity”
26


which we denote h P t0, 1u.30
The distribution of θ depends, in the same way for each race, on whether or not a civilian
has invested in compliance.
This signal is meant to capture the important elements of initial
interactions between police and civilians; clothing, demeanor, attitude, posture, and so on. Let
F1pθq [resp.
F0pθq] be the probability that the signal does not exceed θ, given that a civilian
has invested in compliance (resp. non-compliance) and let f1pθq and f0pθq be the related density
functions. Deﬁne µpθq ” f0pθq
f1pθq to be the likelihood ratio at θ. We assume that µpθq is non-increasing
on r0, 1s, which implies that F1pθq ď F0pθq for all θ. Thus, higher values of observed θ are more
likely if the civilian is compliant, and for a given prior, the posterior likelihood that a civilian will
be compliant is larger if his signal takes a higher value.
Payoffs
For the civilian, payoﬀs depend on whether or not force is used on him and whether he chose
to invest in compliance. Speciﬁcally, if force is used on the civilian, he receives a payoﬀof ´γ ´ c
if he invested in compliance and ´γ if not. If force is not used on the civilian, he receives a payoﬀ
of ´c if he invests and the payoﬀis normalized to zero if he did not invest.
It is assumed that police oﬃcers want to use force on civilians who are non-compliant and prefer
not to use force on those that are compliant. In addition, we allow for “biased” police oﬃcers to
gain utility from using force on Bs.
Thus, for police oﬃcers, payoﬀs depend on their type, whether or not they use force, and
whether or not the civilian is compliant. We begin with unbiased oﬃcers. If force is used, the
oﬃcers payoﬀis ´K ´ φF if the civilian is compliant and χF ´ φF if the civilian is non-compliant.
If no force is used, the oﬃcer receives a payoﬀof 0 if the civilian is compliant and ´χNF if the
civilian is non-compliant. These payoﬀs are identical for biased oﬃcers when they interact with W
civilians.
When biased police oﬃcers interact with B civilians they derive psychic pleasure from using
force, independent of whether they are compliant or not. We represent this by, τ a positive term
ala Akerlof and Kranton (2000) and then, in any given interaction with police, decide whether to comply or escalate.
For those who have a compliance identity, there is an identity costs of escalation. This model is more intuitive, but
delivers the same basic results.
30We model the police oﬃcer’s decision as deciding to use force rather than what type of force to use for two
reasons: analytical convenience and for most of our analysis the dependent variable is whether or not to use force.
Extending our analysis to allow for N potential uses of force does not alter the key predictions of the model.
27


in the biased oﬃcer’s payoﬀwhen he uses force on B civilians. Note: This is similar to the taste
parameter pioneered in Becker (1957).
Strategies
A civilian’s strategy is a mapping I : rc, cs Ñ t0, 1u. Without loss of generality, the civilian’s
strategy can be represented by a cut-oﬀpoint, c˚, such that the civilian will invest in compliance
if and only if their cost is below c˚. A strategy for the police oﬃcer is a decision of whether or not
to use force, conditional upon what he can observe, h : t0, τu ŚrB, Ws Śrθ, θs Ñ t0, 1u.
Expected Payoffs
Let π P r0, 1s denote the oﬃcer’s prior belief that a civilian will be compliant. Expected payoﬀs
for the police oﬃcer are functions of her beliefs, her type, and the signal she receives. Given π and
observed signal θ, she formulates a posterior probability (using Bayes’ rule) that the civilian will
be compliant: Ψpπ, θq ”
πf1pθq
πf1pθq`p1´πqf0pθq.
The expected payoﬀof using force for an unbiased police oﬃcer (and, equivalently, a biased
police oﬃcer when interacting with Ws) is:
Ψpπ, θqp´K ´ φF q ` p1 ´ Ψpπ, θqqpχF ´ φF q.
(2)
The expected payoﬀof using force for an biased oﬃcer interacting with Bs is:
Ψpπ, θqp´K ´ φF q ` p1 ´ Ψpπ, θqqpχF ´ φF q ` τ.
(3)
Relatedly, the expected payoﬀs of not using force, for both types of oﬃcers, can be written as:
´p1 ´ Ψpπ, θqqpχNF q.
(4)
Combining equation (2) and equation (4), and using a bit of algebra, an unbiased oﬃcer uses
force only if
θ ď θ˚
ub ” mintθ|Ψpπ, θqp´K ´ φF q ` p1 ´ Ψpπ, θqqpχF ` χNF ´ φF qu ą 0q
(5)
28


In words, equation (5) provides a threshold, θ˚
ub, such that for any θ below this threshold
unbiased oﬃcers always use force. Similarly, using the corresponding expected payoﬀs for a biased
oﬃcer, one can derive θ˚
b .
Now, consider the civilian’s expected payoﬀ. W civilians receive F1pθ˚ubqp´γq ´ c if they invest
and F0pθ˚
ubqp´γq if they choose not to invest. When optimizing, a civilian will invest in compliance
if and only if the cost of compliance is less than the net beneﬁt of compliance. In symbols, c ď c˚
W ”
tFncpθ˚
ubq ´ Fcpθ˚
ubqu γ. Similarly, Bs invest if c ď c˚
B ” γ tδpFncpθ˚
ubq ´ Fcpθ˚
ubqq ` p1 ´ δqpFncpθ˚
b q ´ Fcpθ˚
b qqu.
Note – given we assume δ ą 0 – it follows that c˚
B ă c˚
W .
Definition 1 An equilibrium consists of a pair pθ˚, π˚q such that each is a best response to the
other.
B. Understanding the Data Through the Lens of the Model
Assuming the distribution of costs (c) and the signal (θ) are independent of race, racial disparities
can be produced in this model in two (non-mutually exclusive) ways: diﬀerent beliefs or diﬀerent
preferences.31 To see this formally, suppose all racial diﬀerences were driven by information-based
discrimination and there was no taste-based component. In this case, equation (3) simpliﬁes to
(2) and both B and W individuals’ net beneﬁt of investment becomes tFncpθ˚
ubq ´ Fcpθ˚
ubqu γ ´ c.
Thus, one needs diﬀerences in π to generate discriminatory equilibrium.
In contrast, one can also derive an equilibrium for cases in which we turn oﬀthe information-
based channel and only allow diﬀerences through preferences. In this case, police oﬃcers observe
investment decisions perfectly. When police oﬃcer bias is suﬃciently large, any equilibrium will
contain discrimination against Bs.
Distinguishing between these two cases, empirically, is diﬃcult with the available data.
In
what follows, we attempt to understand whether the patterns in the data are best explained by an
information-based or taste-based approach to discrimination – recognizing that both channels may
be important.
Statistical Discrimination
31It is also plausible that racial diﬀerences arise due to diﬀerences in costs of compliance (for instance, through
peer eﬀects) or in the signal distributions. Incorporating these assumptions into the model is a trivial extension.
29


To better understand whether statistical discrimination might explain some of the patterns in
the data, we investigate two possibilities.32 First, we explore whether racial diﬀerences in mean
characteristics across police precincts predicts racial diﬀerences in use of force. The key – untestable
– assumption is police oﬃcer beliefs about the compliance of a civilian – π in our model – is partly
driven by local variation in variables such as education or income levels.33
Table 7 explores racial diﬀerences in any use of force – using the Stop and Frisk data – for
various proxies for “dangerousness” including education, income, and unemployment. Education
is represented by the fraction, by race, in each precinct of individuals with a high school diploma.
Income is measured as median income. Unemployment is measured as the fraction of civilians in
the labor force who are unemployed. For each of these variables, we take the diﬀerence between
the white population and black population and rank the precincts by this diﬀerence, individually.
We then divide the data into terciles. The ﬁrst tercile is always the one in which racial diﬀerences
between our proxies are the lowest.
The third tercile represents precincts in which there are
relatively large racial diﬀerences on a given proxy.
Statistically larger racial diﬀerences in use of force for the third tercile (ﬁrst tercile for unem-
ployment), relative to tercile one or two (tercile two or three for unemployment), would be evidence
consistent with statistical discrimination. This would imply that racial diﬀerences in use of force
are correlated with racial diﬀerences in proxies for dangerousness. Table 7 demonstrates no such
pattern. The odds-ratio of having any force used on a black civilian versus a white civilian remains
statistically the same across terciles. 34
A second prediction of the statistical discrimination model that is testable in our data is how
racial diﬀerences in use of force change as signals about civilian compliance become more clear.35
32Appendix C considers the extent to which discrimination based on categories can explain the results (Fryer and
Jackson 2008). We argue categorical discrimination is inconsistent with the fact that black oﬃcers and white oﬃcers
interact similarly with black civilians. See Appendix Table 11.
33Ideally, one might use variables more directly correlated with dangerousness such as racial diﬀerences in crime
rates, by precincts. Despite repeated formal Freedom of Information Law requests, the New York Police Department
refused to supply these data.
34We performed a similar exercise exploiting the variance across space in proxies for dangerousness (see Appendix
Tables 10A-10C for results). We also investigated whether more weight in the bottom quintiles of the distribution of
our proxies predicted police use of force. These empirical exercises were meant as a partial test of Aigner and Cain
(1977). We ﬁnd no evidence of this sort of statistical discrimination on any of the dimensions tested.
35Another potential test of statistical discrimination was pioneered by Altonji and Pierret (2001). They investigate
racial diﬀerences in wage trajectories, conditional upon being hired. To the extent that statistical discrimination drives
wage diﬀerences between racial groups, one would expect the wage trajectory for blacks to be higher than whites
– as employers learn. We performed a similar, though imperfect, test by estimating the probability that a civilian
is arrested, conditional upon force being used. Consistent with a discrimination story, on the lowest level use of
30


If statistical discrimination is the key driver of racial diﬀerences in use of force, the model predicts
that as θ becomes perfectly predictive of compliance behavior, there will be no racial diﬀerences.
We test this using oﬃcer recorded data on the compliance behavior of civilians.
The NYC Stop and Frisk data contains oﬃcer recorded information on the compliance of civil-
ians during a stop. These variables include: whether the civilians refused to comply with oﬃcers’
directions, whether the civilian verbally threatened an oﬃcer, whether they were evasive in their
response to questioning or whether they changed direction at the sight of an oﬃcer. If statistical
discrimination is a key driver of racial diﬀerences, on the set of interactions in which oﬃcers report
perfect compliance (and, to capture potentially important unobservables – the civilian was not
arrested or was not guilty of carrying weapons or contraband) racial diﬀerences should be close
to zero. And, on the set of interactions in which civilians engage in questionable behavior, racial
diﬀerences should be statistically larger.
Figure 5 shows that even when we take perfectly compliant individuals and control for civilian,
oﬃcer, encounter and location variables, black civilians are 21.1 (0.041) percent more likely to
have any force used against them compared to white civilians with the same reported compliance
behavior. As the intensity of force increases, the odds ratio for perfectly compliant individuals
decreases.
Ultimately, it is diﬃcult to know if statistical discrimination is an important component of
racial diﬀerences in use of force. Though our tests have quite limited power, we ﬁnd no evidence
that statistical discrimination plays an important role.
Taste-Based Models of Discrimination
Similar to any large organization, police departments surely have individuals who hold biased
views toward minority citizens and those views may manifest themselves in biased treatment of
individuals based solely on their race. Yet, as Becker (1957) argued, individual discrimination does
not necessarily equate to market (or systemic) discrimination.
Taste-based discrimination is consistent with the data from the direct regression approach on
non-lethal uses of force if, among those who discriminate, the preference for discrimination is
greater than the expected costs of wrongly using force.
In other words, the expected price of
force, blacks and Hispanics are less likely to be arrested conditional upon force being used. As the intensity of force
increases, if anything, minorities are more likely to be arrested conditional upon force being used.
31


discrimination is not large enough – either through low penalties or low probabilities of detection –
to alter behavior of those who have biased preferences. This model is also consistent with the lack
of racial diﬀerences in oﬃcer-involved shooting if there is a discrete increase in the costs of being
deemed a discriminator, relative to the costs incurred with non-lethal uses of force.36
Below, we explore the extent to which two additional implications of the taste-based channel
of our model are borne out in the data. The ﬁrst uses the predictions on average versus marginal
returns of compliant behavior. The second is inspired by the seminal work in Knowles, Persico,
and Todd (2001) and Anwar and Fang (2006).
In any equilibrium model of discrimination, oﬃcer behavior inﬂuences the incentive to invest
in compliance behavior. This is made explicit in equations (6) and (7). Figure 5 provides some
suggestive evidence that the returns to compliance may be diﬀerent across races. We can test this a
bit more directly. One issue in this setting, which does not arise in labor markets, is it’s not obvious
how to aggregate non-compliance into a monotonic index. It may be considered more dangerous
from a police oﬃcer perspective that a civilian shouted verbal threats than refusing to comply with
an oﬃcer’s directions and being evasive regarding questioning. A simple aggregation of the number
of non-compliant activities is likely misleading.
To sidestep this important potential issue of aggregating non-compliance, we create an index
equal to 1 if a civilian changes direction at the sight of an oﬃcer, 2 if a civilian is non-compliant on
any other, but not all dimensions of measured compliance, and 3 if a civilian is non-compliant on all
four dimensions we can measure. The regression estimated, then, is whether or not an oﬃcer uses
any force – accounting for our full set of controls – and including our measure of non-compliance
interacted with race. Racial diﬀerences in the marginal return to non-compliance behavior would
manifest itself in statistically diﬀerent coeﬃcients on the compliance variable. For a given race,
adding both the race coeﬃcient and the interaction term with compliance behavior provides an
estimate of the net beneﬁt of investment (equations (6) and (7)).
The results of this exercise [not shown in tabular form] are consistent with racial diﬀerences
in police use of force being driven by taste-based discrimination. Black civilians have statistically
36While purely anecdotal, in police departments across the country, any oﬃcer-involved shooting – no matter how
“justiﬁed” – results in the temporary conﬁscation of the oﬃcer’s weapon until an investigation of the incident is
complete This is a potentially high cost relative to other non-lethal uses of force. Moreover, in informal interviews
with dozens of police oﬃcers in Boston, Cambridge, Camden, and Houston – almost all police oﬃcers described
pulling the trigger of their weapon as a “life altering event.”
32


similar marginal returns to compliance as white civilians. In other words, the probability of force
being used as θ increases is statistically identical between blacks and whites. Yet, black civilians
always have a higher likelihood of force being used on them compared to white civilians, for all
θ. Further, the net beneﬁt of investment in compliance is lower for blacks relative to whites. This
is precisely what the model predicts if racial animus is an important factor in explaining racial
diﬀerences in use of force.
We conclude our statistical analysis by developing a test for discrimination based on Knowles,
Persico, and Todd (2001) [hereafter KPT] and Anwar and Fang (2006) to complement the direct
regression approach described in the previous sections. KPT tests for racist preferences by looking
at oﬃcers’ success rate of searches across races. Their model assumes that police maximize the
number of successful searches net of the cost of searching motorists. If racial prejudice exists then
the cost of searching drivers will be diﬀerent across races. This, in turn, implies that the rate of
successful searches will be diﬀerent across races.
Anwar and Fang (2001) build upon the theory of KPT; arguing that the KPT results might not
hold if police oﬃcers are non-monolithic in their behavior. They test this by investigating search
rates of civilians of a particular race, across oﬃcer races. Under the null hypothesis that none of
the racial groups of oﬃcers has racial prejudice, it must be true that the ranking of search rates
for white civilians across oﬃcer races is the same as the ranking of search rates for black civilians
across oﬃcer races.
We adopt this approach by investigating whether or not a suspect was eventually found to have
a weapon during the interaction with police. In other words, we calculate the probability, for each
race, that a suspect has a weapon conditional upon being involved in an oﬃcer-involved shooting.
Given the level of detail in our data, one can perform this test for weapons generally – guns, knives
or other cutting objects, or assault weapons – or for guns speciﬁcally, including pistols, riﬂes, or
semi-automatic machine guns, speciﬁcally. Moreover, following the insights in Anwar and Fang
(2006), we disaggregate the data by oﬃcer race.
The null hypothesis is no racial discrimination in oﬃcer-involved shootings. The null could
be rejected in several ways. First, according to KPT, the null could be rejected if the fraction of
suspects carrying weapons or ﬁrearms is diﬀerent across suspect races. Second, according to Anwar
and Fang, the null could be rejected if the ranking of “being armed” rates for black suspects across
33


oﬃcer races is diﬀerent from the ranking of being armed rates for white suspects.
Consistent with our direct regression approach and the ﬁndings in Knowles, Persico, and Todd
(2001), and Anwar and Fang (2006), we fail to reject the null of no discrimination. The data are
displayed in Table 8. For white oﬃcers, the probability that a white suspect who is involved in
oﬃcer-involved shooting has a weapon is 85.1% percent. The equivalent probability for blacks is
81%. A diﬀerence of 4%, which is not statistically signiﬁcant. For black oﬃcers, the probability
that a white suspect who is involved in an oﬃcer-involved shooting has a weapon is surprisingly
lower, 62.5%. The equivalent probability for black suspects is 74%. The only statistically signiﬁcant
diﬀerences by race demonstrate that black oﬃcers are more likely to shoot unarmed whites, relative
to white oﬃcers.
We perform a similar exercise for non-lethal uses of force, recognizing that as the use of force
gets less extreme the application of that force and whether or not a suspect has a weapon is
more tenuous. For instance, investigating racial diﬀerences in whether or not oﬃcers use “hands”
on civilians who are unarmed is not a valid test of discrimination as there are myriad legitimate
reasons for police oﬃcers to place hands on civilians who are unarmed. Yet, racial diﬀerences in
the use of a baton – after accounting for suspect behavior – seem less justiﬁable. Unfortunately,
where to draw the line on the continuum of potential uses of force is ad hoc. Thus, we present our
modiﬁed KPT test for all uses of force while acknowledging that for the low level uses, it does not
seem appropriate.
Table 9 presents these results. Each row is a diﬀerent level of force which begins with “at least
hands” and increases in severity of force until “use of pepper spray or Baton.” Column (1) contains
the white mean. Columns (2) and (3) display the coeﬃcient on black and Hispanic, respectively.
Column (4) displays the number of observations which range from over one million for the use of
hands to 1,745 for the use of pepper spray or baton.
Blacks are 1.3 (0.4) percentage points less likely to have a weapon, conditional upon a police
oﬃcer using any force. Hispanics are 0.8 (0.3) less likely to have a weapon. Both are statistically
signiﬁcant. Interestingly, on all other non-lethal uses of force, the probability that a weapon is
found – conditional upon force being used – is statistically identical across races. Taken at face
value, these data are consistent with discrimination against minorities on the lowest level uses of
non-lethal force.
34


VI. Conclusion
The issue of police violence and its racial incidence has become one of the most divisive topics in
American discourse. Emotions run the gamut from outrage to indiﬀerence. Yet, very little data
exists to understand whether racial disparities in police use of force exist or might be explained
by situational factors inherent in the complexity of police-civilian interactions. Beyond the lack
of data, the analysis of police behavior is fraught with diﬃculty including, but not limited to, the
reliability of the data that does exist and the fact that one cannot randomly assign race.
With these caveats in mind, this paper takes ﬁrst steps into the treacherous terrain of under-
standing the nature and extent of racial diﬀerences in police use of force. On non-lethal uses of
force, there are racial diﬀerences – sometimes quite large – in police use of force, even after ac-
counting for a large set of controls designed to account for important contextual and behavioral
factors at the time of the police-civilian interaction. Interestingly, as use of force increases from
putting hands on a civilian to striking them with a baton, the overall probability of such an incident
occurring decreases dramatically but the racial diﬀerence remains roughly constant. Even when
oﬃcers report civilians have been compliant and no arrest was made, blacks are 21.3 (0.04) percent
more likely to endure some form of force. Yet, on the most extreme use of force – oﬃcer-involved
shootings – we are unable to detect any racial diﬀerences in either the raw data or when accounting
for controls.
We argue that these facts are most consistent with a model of taste-based discrimination in
which police oﬃcers face discretely higher costs for oﬃcer-involved shootings relative to non-lethal
uses of force. This model is consistent with racial diﬀerences in the average returns to compliant
behaviors, the results of our tests of discrimination based on Knowles, Persico, and Todd (2001) and
Anwar and Fang (2006), and the fact that the odds-ratio is large and signiﬁcant across all intensities
of force – even after accounting for a rich set of controls. In the end, however, without randomly
assigning race, we have no deﬁnitive proof of discrimination. Our results are also consistent with
mismeasured contextual factors.
As police departments across America consider models of community policing such as the Boston
Ten Point Coalition, body worn cameras, or training designed to purge oﬃcers of implicit bias, our
results point to another simple policy experiment: increase the expected price of excessive force
35


on lower level uses of force. To date, very few police departments across the country either collect
data on lower level uses of force or explicitly punish oﬃcers for misuse of these tactics.
The appealing feature of this type of policy experiment is that it does not require oﬃcers to
change their behavior in extremely high-stakes environments. Many arguments about police reform
fall victim to the “my life versus theirs, us versus them” mantra. Holding oﬃcers accountable for
the misuse of hands or pushing individuals to the ground is not likely a life or death situation and,
as such, may be more amenable to policy change.
****
The importance of our results for racial inequality in America is unclear. It is plausible that
racial diﬀerences in lower level uses of force are simply a distraction and movements such as Black
Lives Matter should seek solutions within their own communities rather than changing the behaviors
of police and other external forces.
Much more troubling, due to their frequency and potential impact on minority belief formation,
is the possibility that racial diﬀerences in police use of non-lethal force have spillovers on myriad
dimensions of racial inequality. If, for instance, blacks use their lived experience with police as
evidence that the world is discriminatory, then it is easy to understand why black youth invest
less in human capital or black adults are more likely to believe discrimination is an important
determinant of economic outcomes. Black Dignity Matters.
36


References
[1] Allport, G.W. 1954. The Nature of Prejudice. Reading, MA: Addison Wesley
[2] Aigner, D.J. and Cain, G.G., 1977. “Statistical theories of discrimination in labor markets.”
Industrial and Labor relations review, pp.175-187.
[3] Altonji, J.G. and Pierret, C.R., 2001. Employer Commitment and Statistical Discrimination.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116.
[4] Anwar, S. and Fang, H., 2006. ”An Alternative Test of Racial Prejudice in Motor Vehicle
Searches: Theory and Evidence.” American Economic Review, 96(1): 127-151.
[5] Becker Gary, S., 1957. The economics of discrimination.
[6] Coate, S. and Loury, G.C., 1993a. Will aﬃrmative-action policies eliminate negative stereo-
types?. The American Economic Review, pp.1220-1240.
[7] Coate, S. and Loury, G., 1993b. Antidiscrimination enforcement and the problem of patroniza-
tion. The American Economic Review, 83(2), pp.92-98.
[8] Coviello, D. and Persico, N., 2015. An Economic Analysis of Black-White Disparities in NYPDs
Stop and Frisk Program. Journal of Legal Studies, 44(2), pp. 315-360.
[9] Cose, E., 1993. The rage of a privileged class: Why are middle-class Blacks angry? Why should
America care. New York: HarperPerennial.
[10] Eberhardt, J.L., Goﬀ, P.A., Purdie, V.J. and Davies, P.G., 2004. Seeing black: race, crime,
and visual processing. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87(6), p.876.
[11] Fiske, S.T. 1998. “Stereotyping, Prejudice, and Discrimination” in D.T. Gilbert, S.T. Fiske
and G. Lindzey, eds, Handbook of Social Psychology, vol 2. New York: Oxford University Press,
357-414.
[12] Fryer, R. and Jackson, M.O., 2008. “A categorical model of cognition and biased decision
making.” The BE Journal of Theoretical Economics, 8(1).
37


[13] Gelman, A., Fagan, J. and Kiss, A., 2012. “An analysis of the New York City police depart-
ment’s stop-and-frisk policy in the context of claims of racial bias.” Journal of the American
Statistical Association.
[14] Goﬀ, P.A., Jackson, M.C., Di Leone, B.A.L., Culotta, C.M. and DiTomasso, N.A., 2014. “The
essence of innocence: Consequences of dehumanizing Black children.” Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 106(4), p.526.
[15] Knowles, J., Persico, N., and Todd, P., 2001. “Racial Bias in Motor-Vehicle Searches: Theory
and Evidence.” Journal of Political Economy, 109(1), pp. 203-29.
[16] Miller, J., Davis, R.C., Henderson, N.J., Markovic, J. and Ortiz, C.W., 2004. Public opinions
of the police: The inﬂuence of friends, family and news media. New York: Vera Institute of
Justice.
[17] Mincer, J., 1958. “Investment in human capital and personal income distribution.” The Journal
of Political Economy, pp.281-302.
[18] Neal, D. A., and Johnson, W. R. 1996. “The Role of Premarket Factors in Black White Wage
Diﬀerences.” Journal of Political Economy, 104, 869-895.
[19] O’Neill, J. 1990. “The Role of Human Capital in Earnings Diﬀerences Between Black and
White Men.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 4, 25-45.
[20] Ridgeway, G., and MacDonald, J. M. 2009. Doubly robust internal benchmarking and false
discovery rates for detecting racial bias in police stops. Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 104(486), 661-668.
[21] Schneider, A., 1977. Portland (Or) Forward Record Check of Crime-Victims Final Report,
December 1977. Oregon Research Institute and United States of America, 1977.
[22] Sporer, S. 2001. “Recognizing Faces of Other Ethnic Groups: An Integration of Theories,”
Psychology, Public Policy, and Law, 7, 36-97.
38


Table 1A
Summary Statistics for New York City Stop, Question and Frisk, 2003 - 2013
Full Sample
White
Black
Hispanic
p-val
p-val
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(2) = (3)
(2) = (4)
Panel A: Baseline Characteristics
White
0.10
1.00
0.00
0.00
.
.
Black
0.58
0.00
1.00
0.00
.
.
Hispanic
0.25
0.00
0.00
1.00
.
.
Asian
0.03
0.00
0.00
0.00
.
.
Other race
0.04
0.00
0.00
0.00
.
.
Age
28.00
29.25
27.96
27.57
0.000
0.000
Male
0.93
0.90
0.93
0.93
0.000
0.000
Panel B: Encounter Characteristics
Indoors
0.23
0.16
0.26
0.21
0.000
0.000
Daytime
0.36
0.39
0.35
0.36
0.000
0.000
High-crime Area
0.56
0.52
0.57
0.55
0.000
0.000
High-crime Time
0.37
0.36
0.38
0.36
0.000
0.931
Police in Uniform
0.72
0.64
0.73
0.72
0.000
0.000
Photo ID
0.53
0.63
0.51
0.54
0.000
0.000
Verbal ID
0.43
0.34
0.45
0.43
0.000
0.000
Refused ID
0.02
0.01
0.03
0.02
0.000
0.000
Other ID
0.02
0.01
0.02
0.01
0.000
0.144
With Others Who Were Stopped
0.23
0.30
0.21
0.26
0.000
0.000
Wpn or Contraband Fnd
0.03
0.04
0.03
0.03
0.000
0.000
Panel C: Civilian Behavior
Carrying Suspicious Obj
0.03
0.04
0.02
0.03
0.000
0.000
Fit Relevant Descr
0.17
0.19
0.17
0.17
0.000
0.000
Preparing for Crm
0.29
0.35
0.27
0.30
0.000
0.000
Lookout for Crm
0.17
0.20
0.16
0.18
0.000
0.000
Dressed in Crm Attire
0.04
0.03
0.05
0.04
0.000
0.000
Appearance of Drug Tran
0.09
0.09
0.10
0.09
0.000
0.000
Suspicious Mvmnts
0.44
0.37
0.46
0.43
0.000
0.000
Engaging in Vlnt Crm
0.08
0.06
0.08
0.09
0.000
0.000
Concealing Suspicious Obj
0.09
0.04
0.10
0.08
0.000
0.000
Other Suspicious Bhvr
0.21
0.21
0.21
0.20
0.162
0.000
Panel D: Alternative Outcomes
Frisked
0.55
0.43
0.57
0.56
0.000
0.000
Searched
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.09
0.022
0.000
Arrested
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.000
0.000
Summonsed
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.010
0.000
Wpn or Contraband Fnd
0.03
0.04
0.03
0.03
0.000
0.000
Panel E: Use of Force
Hands
0.19
0.13
0.19
0.20
0.000
0.000
Push to Wall
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.000
0.000
Handcuﬀs
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.03
0.085
0.019


Draw Weapon
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.000
0.077
Push to Ground
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.000
0.000
Point Weapon
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.000
0.027
Pepper Spray/Baton
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.005
0.385
Panel F: Missing Variables
Missing Race
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
.
.
Missing Age
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.000
0.000
Missing Gender
0.03
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.000
0.000
Missing Indoors
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.000
0.000
Missing Daytime
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.503
0.093
Missing High-crm Area
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
.
.
Missing High-crm Time
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
.
.
Missing Police Uniform
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.132
0.314
Missing ID
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.196
0.093
Missing Others Stopped
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.000
0.000
Missing Wpn or Contra Fnd
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.164
0.007
Missing Carry Susp Obj
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
.
.
Missing Relevant Descr
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
.
.
Missing Preparing Crm
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
.
.
Missing Lookout Crm
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
.
.
Missing Crm Attire
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
.
.
Missing Drug Tran
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
.
.
Missing Suspicious Mvmnts
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
.
.
Missing Vlnt Crm
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
.
.
Missing Conceal Susp Obj
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
.
.
Missing Other Susp Bhvr
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
.
.
Observations
4,982,426
492,391
2,885,857
1,214,961
Notes: This table reports summary statistics. The sample consists of all NYC stop and frisks from 2003-2013. The ﬁrst column
includes the entire sample. The second column includes white civilians only. The third column includes black civilians only.
The fourth column includes hispanic civilians only. The ﬁfth column reports p-values for a ttest to see whether the mean for
white civilians is statistically similar to the mean for black civilians. The sixth column reports p-values for a ttest to see whether
the mean for white civilians is statistically similar to the mean for hispanic civilians.


Table 1B
Summary Statistics for Police-Public Contact Survey
Full Sample
White
Black
Hispanic
p-val
p-val
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(2) = (3)
(2) = (4)
Panel A: Civilian Demographics
White
0.72
1.00
0.00
0.00
.
.
Black
0.11
0.00
1.00
0.00
.
.
Other Race
0.05
0.00
0.00
0.00
.
.
Hispanic
0.12
0.00
0.00
1.00
.
.
Male
0.47
0.48
0.43
0.49
0.000
0.000
Female
0.53
0.52
0.57
0.51
0.000
0.000
Age
45.36
47.19
42.76
38.55
0.000
0.000
Employed last week or not
0.61
0.61
0.59
0.63
0.000
0.000
Income
1.95
2.03
1.64
1.73
0.000
0.000
Population size of Suspect’s Address
1.47
1.31
1.89
1.86
0.000
0.000
Panel B: Civilian Behavior
Disobeyed
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.013
0.013
Tried to Get Away
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.047
0.364
Hit Oﬃcer
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.224
0.225
Resisted
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.057
0.000
Complained
0.06
0.05
0.07
0.06
0.099
0.697
Argued
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.000
0.366
Threatened Oﬃcer
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.01
0.000
0.166
Used Physical Force
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.437
0.436
Panel C: Contact and Oﬃcer Characteristics
Incident type: Street Stop
0.19
0.18
0.19
0.22
0.000
0.000
Incident type: Traﬃc Stop
0.49
0.49
0.50
0.50
0.655
0.349
Incident type: Other
0.32
0.32
0.31
0.28
0.000
0.000
Time of Contact was Day
0.68
0.69
0.62
0.66
0.000
0.007
Time of Contact was Night
0.32
0.31
0.38
0.34
0.000
0.007
Hispanic
0.09
0.06
0.11
0.25
0.000
0.000
White
0.86
0.88
0.78
0.83
0.000
0.000
Black
0.08
0.07
0.20
0.07
0.000
0.201
Other Race
0.05
0.04
0.06
0.09
0.000
0.000
Panel D: Alternative Outcomes
Civilian injured
0.15
0.16
0.12
0.13
0.334
0.483
Civilian perceived excessive force
0.64
0.61
0.69
0.66
0.038
0.279
Civilian searched
0.05
0.04
0.10
0.09
0.000
0.000
Civilian arrested
0.03
0.02
0.05
0.04
0.000
0.000
Civilian guilty of carrying drugs/alcohol/weapon
0.17
0.19
0.11
0.16
0.005
0.327
Panel E: Use of Force
Any use of force
0.03
0.02
0.06
0.04
0.000
0.000
Grab
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.01
0.000
0.000
Kick
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.006
0.079
Point Gun
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.000
0.000


Handcuﬀ
0.03
0.02
0.06
0.04
0.000
0.000
Pepper spray/Stungun
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.051
0.037
Panel F: Missing Variables
Missing Gender
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
.
.
Missing Age
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
.
.
Missing Employed last week or not
0.14
0.13
0.16
0.15
0.000
0.000
Missing Income
0.14
0.14
0.14
0.14
0.509
0.165
Missing Population size of Suspect’s Address
0.28
0.28
0.29
0.29
0.000
0.000
Missing Disobeyed
0.95
0.94
0.95
0.96
0.000
0.000
Missing Tried to Get Away
0.95
0.94
0.95
0.96
0.000
0.000
Missing Hit Oﬃcer
0.95
0.94
0.95
0.96
0.000
0.000
Missing Resisted
0.95
0.94
0.95
0.96
0.000
0.000
Missing Complained
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.554
0.721
Missing Argued
0.95
0.94
0.95
0.96
0.000
0.000
Missing Threatened
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.518
0.803
Missing Used Physical Force
0.95
0.94
0.95
0.96
0.000
0.000
Missing Incident type
0.42
0.42
0.43
0.43
0.000
0.000
Missing Time of Contact
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.000
0.000
Missing Oﬃcer Hispanic
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.143
0.806
Missing Oﬃcer White
0.96
0.95
0.96
0.96
0.000
0.000
Missing Oﬃcer Black
0.96
0.95
0.96
0.96
0.000
0.000
Missing Oﬃcer Other Race
0.96
0.95
0.96
0.96
0.000
0.000
Observations
566,674
404,380
62,277
67,660
Notes: This table reports summary statistics. The sample consists of survey respondents of the Police Public Contact Survey
from 1996 to 2011. The ﬁrst column includes the entire sample. The second column includes white civilians only. The third
column includes black civilians only. The fourth column includes hispanic civilians only. The ﬁfth column reports p-values for
a ttest to see whether the mean for white civilians is statistically similar to the mean for black civilians. The sixth column
reports p-values for a ttest to see whether the mean for white civilians is statistically similar to the mean for hispanic civilians.


Table 1C
Summary Statistics for Oﬃcer Involved Shootings
Full Sample
Houston
Austin +
Florida
Los Angeles
OIS
Taser
Dallas
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel A: Suspect Demographics
Black
0.46
0.52
0.63
0.46
0.47
0.25
Hispanic
0.30
0.33
0.03
0.30
0.10
0.60
Non-Black, Non-Hisp
0.24
0.14
0.33
0.23
0.43
0.15
Male
0.96
0.96
0.94
0.97
0.97
0.97
Age
30.77
28.86
31.39
32.90
33.24
30.56
Panel B: Suspect Weapon
Firearm
0.51
0.52
.
0.52
0.45
0.54
Sharp Object
0.08
0.08
.
0.07
0.07
0.09
Vehicle
0.15
0.11
.
0.17
0.24
0.08
None
0.21
0.24
.
0.18
0.17
0.25
Other Weapon
0.06
0.05
.
0.06
0.06
0.03
Panel C: Oﬃcer Characteristics
Oﬃcer Unit Majority White
0.51
0.32
0.42
0.53
0.80
0.28
Oﬃcer Unit Majority Black
0.09
0.14
0.15
0.14
0.05
0.03
Oﬃcer Unit Majority Hisp
0.27
0.40
0.22
0.18
0.07
0.52
Oﬃcer Unit Majority Asian/Other
0.03
0.06
0.03
0.04
0.01
0.03
Oﬃcer Unit Split Race
0.09
0.08
0.18
0.11
0.07
0.14
Female Oﬃcers in Unit
0.06
0.06
0.13
0.06
0.05
0.10
Oﬃcer On-duty
0.86
0.75
.
0.90
0.94
0.95
Two+ Oﬃcers on Scene
0.29
0.22
0.37
0.28
0.33
0.41
Avg Oﬃcer Tenure
10.13
10.21
9.05
8.41
9.93
12.70
Panel D: Oﬃcer Response Reason
Robbery
0.20
0.26
0.07
0.23
0.15
0.08
Violent Disturbance
0.29
0.25
0.15
0.33
0.29
0.34
Traﬃc
0.18
0.18
0.08
0.09
0.22
0.20
Personal Attack
0.04
0.07
0.00
0.02
0.01
0.04
Warrant
0.05
0.05
0.00
0.05
0.08
0.03
Suspicious Persons
0.07
0.05
0.05
0.06
0.06
0.12
Narcotics
0.06
0.05
0.05
0.07
0.06
0.04
Suicide
0.03
0.02
0.07
0.03
0.04
0.02
Other Response Reason
0.09
0.08
0.53
0.11
0.07
0.11
Panel E: Other Encounter Characteristics
Daytime
0.37
0.35
0.38
0.38
0.43
0.39
Suspect Attacked or Drew Weapon
0.80
0.79
.
0.79
0.86
0.75
Panel F: Location
Austin
0.05
0.00
.
0.25
0.00
0.00
Dallas
0.15
0.00
.
0.75
0.00
0.00


Houston
0.38
1.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Jacksonville
0.03
0.00
.
0.00
0.11
0.00
Palm Beach County
0.06
0.00
.
0.00
0.23
0.00
Lee County
0.03
0.00
.
0.00
0.10
0.00
Brevard County
0.03
0.00
.
0.00
0.09
0.00
Pinellas County
0.03
0.00
.
0.00
0.11
0.00
Orange County
0.09
0.00
.
0.00
0.35
0.00
LA County
0.15
0.00
.
0.00
0.00
1.00
Panel G: Missing Variables
Missing Race
0.02
0.04
0.38
0.00
0.02
0.00
Missing Sex
0.02
0.02
0.38
0.00
0.01
0.05
Missing Age
0.23
0.08
0.38
0.75
0.13
0.08
Missing Weapon
0.05
0.03
1.00
0.00
0.07
0.08
Missing Oﬃcer Race
0.16
0.38
0.00
0.00
0.06
0.00
Missing Oﬃcer Sex
0.06
0.12
0.00
0.00
0.04
0.00
Missing Oﬃcer Duty
0.01
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.02
0.06
Missing Num Oﬃcers
0.03
0.06
1.00
0.00
0.03
0.00
Missing Oﬃcer Tenure
0.20
0.37
0.00
0.01
0.20
0.02
Missing Response Reason
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.07
Missing Time of Day
0.36
0.01
0.00
0.75
0.75
0.00
Missing Suspect Behavior
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Missing Injury Status
0.04
0.03
1.00
0.01
0.08
0.00
Observations
1,332
507
4,504
269
362
194
Notes: This table reports summary statistics. The sample consists of – (1) All oﬃcer involved shootings (OIS) between 2000 and
2015 (though exact time frame varies by location) from Austin, Dallas, six large Florida counties, Houston, and Los Angeles,
and (2) Arrests in Houston from 2005 to 2015 during which an oﬃcer reported using his or her charged electronic device (taser).
The ﬁrst column includes the entire OIS sample.
The second column includes OIS from Houston only.
The third column
includes arrests from Houston where a taser was discharged. The fourth column includes OIS from Austina and Dallas. The
ﬁfth column includes OIS from all Florida counties. The sixth column includes OIS from Los Angeles county.


Table 1D
Summary Statistics for Houston Police Department Arrests Data
Full Sample
Non-Black/
Black
Hispanic
p-val
p-val
Non-Hispanic
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(2) = (3)
(2) = (4)
Panel A: Suspect Demographics
Black
0.58
0.00
1.00
0.00
.
.
Hispanic
0.30
0.00
0.00
1.00
.
.
Non-black/non-hispanic
0.12
1.00
0.00
0.00
.
.
Male
0.82
0.79
0.83
0.82
0.325
0.478
Age
26.84
32.37
26.85
24.64
0.000
0.000
Panel B: Suspect Weapon
Firearm
0.03
0.04
0.03
0.01
0.880
0.226
Sharp Object
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.00
0.716
0.488
Vehicle
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.647
0.534
None
0.95
0.94
0.93
0.97
0.855
0.190
Other Weapon
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.965
0.488
Panel C: Oﬃcer Characteristics
Oﬃcer Unit Majority White
0.42
0.51
0.43
0.38
0.196
0.044
Oﬃcer Unit Majority Black
0.16
0.03
0.20
0.15
0.000
0.005
Oﬃcer Unit Majority Hisp
0.19
0.13
0.17
0.27
0.460
0.013
Oﬃcer Unit Majority Asian/Other
0.04
0.11
0.01
0.06
0.000
0.205
Oﬃcer Unit Split Race
0.18
0.22
0.19
0.14
0.504
0.101
Female Oﬃcers in Unit
0.10
0.14
0.10
0.08
0.246
0.171
Oﬃcer On-duty
0.87
0.86
0.84
0.92
0.781
0.093
Two+ Oﬃcers on Scene
0.66
0.63
0.67
0.66
0.483
0.620
Avg Oﬃcer Tenure
7.62
9.19
7.20
7.44
0.006
0.035
Panel D: Oﬃcer Response Reason
Robbery
0.06
0.04
0.06
0.07
0.439
0.327
Violent Disturbance
0.21
0.22
0.19
0.26
0.524
0.460
Traﬃc
0.16
0.14
0.12
0.23
0.617
0.121
Personal Attack
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.455
0.838
Warrant
0.02
0.02
0.03
0.01
0.867
0.327
Suspicious Persons
0.25
0.24
0.30
0.16
0.255
0.104
Narcotics
0.07
0.04
0.10
0.03
0.057
0.721
Suicide
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.650
0.279
Other Response Reason
0.22
0.29
0.19
0.23
0.046
0.291
Panel E: Other Encounter Characteristics
Daytime
0.48
0.47
0.53
0.40
0.427
0.399
Suspect Attacked or Drew Weapon
0.56
0.67
0.50
0.61
0.006
0.339
Panel F: Missing Variables
Missing Race
0.32
0.00
0.00
0.00
.
.
Missing Sex
0.31
0.00
0.00
0.00
.
.


Missing Age
0.33
0.02
0.01
0.03
0.562
0.835
Missing Weapon
0.31
0.02
0.03
0.01
0.855
0.333
Missing Oﬃcer Race
0.35
0.10
0.08
0.07
0.752
0.473
Missing Oﬃcer Sex
0.34
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.927
0.916
Missing Oﬃcer Duty
0.30
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.029
0.111
Missing Num Oﬃcers
0.30
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.029
0.111
Missing Oﬃcer Tenure
0.36
0.07
0.09
0.08
0.640
0.711
Missing Response Reason
0.30
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.029
0.111
Missing Time of Day
0.63
0.39
0.47
0.46
0.211
0.295
Missing Suspect Behavior
0.31
0.04
0.02
0.02
0.475
0.559
Observations
1,024
84
402
213
Notes: This table reports summary statistics. The sample consists of a random draw of arrests in Houston for the following
oﬀenses, from 2000 - 2015: aggravated assault on a peace oﬃcer, attempted capital murder of a peace oﬃcer, resisting arrest,
evading arrest, and interfering in an arrest. The ﬁrst column includes the entire sample. The second column includes non-
black/non-hispanic civilians only. The third column includes black civilians only. The fourth column includes hispanic civilians
only. The ﬁfth column reports p-values for a ttest to see whether the mean for non-black/non-hispanic civilians is statistically
similar to the mean for black civilians. The sixth column reports p-values for a ttest to see whether the mean for non-black/non-
hispanic civilians is statistically similar to the mean for hispanic civilians.


Table 2A
Racial Differences in Non-Lethal Use of Force, NYC Stop Question and Frisk,Any Use of Force
White Mean
Black
Hispanic
Asian
Other Race
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
No Controls
0.153
1.534∗∗∗
1.582∗∗∗
1.044
1.392∗∗∗
(0.144)
(0.149)
(0.119)
(0.121)
+ Baseline Characteristics
1.480∗∗∗
1.517∗∗∗
1.010
1.346∗∗∗
(0.146)
(0.146)
(0.122)
(0.114)
+ Encounter Characteristics
1.655∗∗∗
1.641∗∗∗
1.059
1.452∗∗∗
(0.155)
(0.157)
(0.133)
(0.121)
+ Civilian Behavior
1.456∗∗∗
1.513∗∗∗
1.049
1.368∗∗∗
(0.128)
(0.136)
(0.124)
(0.107)
+ Fixed Effects
1.173∗∗∗
1.120∗∗∗
0.951
1.057∗∗
(0.034)
(0.026)
(0.033)
(0.028)
Observations
4,927,467
Notes: This table reports odds ratios by running logistic regressions. The sample consists of all NYC stop and frisks from 2003-2013
with non-missing use of force data. The dependent variable is an indicator for whether the police reported using any force during a stop
and frisk interaction. The omitted race is white, and the omitted ID type is other. The ﬁrst column gives the unconditional average of stop
and frisk interactions that reported any force being used for white civilians. Columns (2) through (5) report logistic estimates for black,
hispanic, asian and other race civilians respectively. Each row corresponds to a different empirical speciﬁcation. The ﬁrst row includes
solely racial group dummies. The second row adds controls for gender and a quadratic in age. The third row adds controls for whether
the stop was indoors or outdoors, whether the stop took place during the daytime, whether the stop took place in a high crime area or
during a high crime time, whether the ofﬁcer was in uniform, civilian ID type, and whether others were stopped during the interaction.
The fourth row adds controls for civilian behavior. The ﬁfth row adds precinct and year ﬁxed effects. Each row includes missings in all
variables. Standard errors clustered at the precinct level are reported in parentheses.


Table 2B
Racial Differences in Non-Lethal Use of Force, Police Public Contact Survey, Any Use of Force
White Mean
Black
Hispanic
Other Race
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
No Controls
0.008
3.335∗∗∗
2.584∗∗∗
1.047
(0.349)
(0.299)
(0.262)
+ Baseline Characteristics
2.609∗∗∗
1.633∗∗∗
0.765
(0.283)
(0.195)
(0.192)
+ Encounter Characteristics
2.582∗∗∗
1.616∗∗∗
0.794
(0.286)
(0.194)
(0.198)
+ Civilian Behavior
2.653∗∗∗
1.763∗∗∗
0.758
(0.314)
(0.221)
(0.195)
+ Year
2.697∗∗∗
1.747∗∗∗
0.755
(0.321)
(0.226)
(0.197)
Observations
48,498
Notes: This table reports odds ratios by running logistic regressions. The sample consists of all Police Public Contact Survey respondents
from 1996 - 2011 with non-missing use of force data. The dependent variable is an indicator for whether the survey respondent reported
any force being used in a contact with the police. The omitted race is white. The sixth column gives the unconditional average of
contacts that reported any force being used by white civilians. Columns (1) - (4) report logistic estimates for black, hispanic, and other
race civilians respectively. Each row corresponds to a different empirical speciﬁcation. The ﬁrst row includes solely racial dummies.
The second row adds civilian gender, work, income, population size of civilian’s address and a quadratic in age. The third row adds
controls for contact time, contact type and ofﬁcer race. The fourth row adds a civilian behavior dummy. The ﬁfth row adds a control for
year. Each row includes missing in all variables. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.


Table 3
Analysis of Subsamples, Any Use of Force, NYC Stop Question and Frisk
White Mean
Coefﬁcient on Black
Coefﬁcient on Hispanic
Observations
Full Sample
0.153
1.173∗∗∗
1.120∗∗∗
4,927,467
Panel A: Crime Rate in Area
High Crime
0.143
1.165∗∗∗
1.115∗∗∗
2,750,262
(0.035)
(0.027)
Low Crime
0.163
1.196∗∗∗
1.136∗∗∗
2,177,205
(0.039)
(0.029)
p-value
0.260
0.321
Panel B: Time of Day
Day
0.126
1.255∗∗∗
1.162∗∗∗
1,783,796
(0.035)
(0.026)
Night
0.170
1.136∗∗∗
1.099∗∗∗
3,143,671
(0.039)
(0.029)
p-value
0.001
0.020
Panel C: Ofﬁcer in Uniform
Uniformed Ofﬁcer
0.132
1.176∗∗∗
1.124∗∗∗
3,546,056
(0.047)
(0.035)
Non-Uniformed Ofﬁcer
0.189
1.193∗∗∗
1.121∗∗∗
1,381,411
(0.032)
(0.023)
p-value
0.759
0.923
Panel D: Location
Indoors
0.144
1.125∗∗∗
1.092∗∗∗
1,129,443
(0.044)
(0.033)
Outdoors
0.154
1.184∗∗∗
1.125∗∗∗
3,798,024
(0.031)
(0.025)
p-value
0.101
0.252
Panel E: Civilian Gender
Male
0.160
1.170∗∗∗
1.120∗∗∗
4,446,921
(0.034)
(0.026)
Female
0.094
1.224∗∗∗
1.103∗∗∗
480,546
(0.052)
(0.040)
p-value
0.136
0.614
Panel F: Eventual Outcomes
Frisk
0.311
1.031
1.020
2,699,613
(0.024)
(0.021)
Search
0.411
1.054
1.039
409,255
(0.037)
(0.030)
Arrest
0.327
1.073∗∗
1.038
291,109
(0.034)
(0.025)
Summons
0.195
1.150∗∗∗
1.064∗
304,580
(0.044)
(0.035)
Weapon/Contra-
0.359
1.111∗∗∗
1.059∗∗∗
136,894
band found
(0.025)
(0.024)
p-value
0.003
0.394


Notes: This table reports odds ratios by running logistic regressions. The sample consists of all NYC stop and frisks from 2003-2013 in which
use of force and reported subgroup variables were non-missing. The dependent variable is whether any force was used during a stop and frisk
interaction, with each panel presenting results from the indicated subgroups. We control for gender, a quadratic in age, civilian behavior, whether
the stop was indoors or outdoors, whether the stop took place during the daytime, whether the stop took place in a high crime area or during a high
crime time, whether the ofﬁcer was in uniform, civilian ID type, whether others were stopped during the interaction, and missings in all variables.
Precinct and year ﬁxed effects were included in all regressions. Standard errors clustered at the precinct level are reported in parentheses.


Table 4
Analysis of Subsamples, Any Use of Force, Police Public Contact Survey
White Mean
Coefﬁcient on Black
Coefﬁcient on Hispanic
Observations
Full Sample
0.008
2.697∗∗∗
1.747∗∗∗
48,498
Panel A: Civilian Income
0 < 20,000
0.012
2.942∗∗∗
1.639∗∗
11,881
(0.532)
(0.332)
20,000 < 50,000
0.010
1.983∗∗∗
1.779∗∗
11,115
(0.515)
(0.411)
50,000+
0.004
3.989∗∗∗
1.874∗
15,849
(1.286)
(0.708)
p-value
0.218
0.937
Panel B: Civilian Gender
Male
0.013
2.719∗∗∗
1.815∗∗∗
25,194
(0.373)
(0.259)
Female
0.004
2.599∗∗∗
1.488
23,304
(0.613)
(0.453)
p-value
0.869
0.555
Panel C: Ofﬁcer Race
Black/Hispanic
0.011
2.646∗∗
3.886∗∗∗
2,272
(1.212)
(2.040)
White
0.008
2.790∗∗∗
1.743∗∗
20,711
(0.565)
(0.419)
p-value
0.916
0.165
Panel D: Time of Day
Day
0.004
3.169∗∗∗
2.178∗∗∗
16,313
(0.851)
(0.598)
Night
0.012
1.678∗
2.273∗∗∗
7,656
(0.476)
(0.591)
p-value
0.104
0.910
Notes: This table reports odds ratios by running logistic regressions. The sample consists of all Police Public Contact Survey respondents between
1996 to 2011 in which use of force and reported subgroup variables were non-missing. The dependent variable is whether any force was used
during a contact, with each panel presenting results from the indicated subgroups. We control for civilian gender, a quadratic in age, work, income,
population size of civilian’s address, civilian behavior, contact time, contact type, ofﬁcer race, year of survey and missings in all variables. Standard
errors are robust and reported in parentheses.


Table 5
Racial Differences in Lethal Use of Force
Extensive Margin, Ofﬁcer Involved Shootings
Approx OIS
Taser
Full Sample
With Narratives
W/O Narratives
W/O Narratives
Non-Black/
Non-Hispanic
Black
Hispanic
Non-Black
Black
Non-Black
Black
Mean
Mean
Mean
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
No Controls
0.455
0.762
0.915
0.185
0.633∗∗∗
0.150
0.666∗∗∗
(0.137)
(0.176)
(0.062)
(0.065)
+ Suspect Demographics
0.782
0.967
0.648∗∗∗
0.678∗∗∗
(0.150)
(0.176)
(0.066)
(0.067)
+ Ofﬁcer Demographics
0.779
1.113
0.728∗∗
0.746∗∗
(0.191)
(0.294)
(0.094)
(0.087)
+ Encounter Characteristics
1.105
0.990
0.686∗∗∗
0.782∗
(0.366)
(0.344)
(0.098)
(0.105)
+ Suspect Weapon
0.973
1.365
−
−
(0.428)
(0.600)
(-)
(-)
+ Year
0.924
1.256
0.691∗∗
0.784∗
(0.417)
(0.595)
(0.099)
(0.105)
Observations
1,531
5,011
6,035
Notes: This table reports odds ratios by running logistic regressions. The sample for each regression is displayed in the top row. For columns (1)-(3), the sample
consists of all ofﬁcer involved shootings in Houston from 2000 - 2015, plus a random draw of all arrests for the following offenses, from 2000 - 2015: aggravated
assault on a peace ofﬁcer, attempted capital murder of a peace ofﬁcer, resisting arrest, evading arrest, and interfering in an arrest. These arrests contain narratives from
police reports. For columns (4)-(5), the sample consists of all ofﬁcer involved shootings in Houston from 2000 - 2015, plus a sample of arrests where tasers were
used. These arrests do not contain narratives from police reports. For columns (6)-(7), the sample combines all ofﬁcer involved shootings in Houston from 2000 -
2015, plus a random draw of all arrests for the following offenses, from 2000 - 2015: aggravated assault on a peace ofﬁcer, attempted capital murder of a peace ofﬁcer,
resisting arrest, evading arrest, and interfering in an arrest, plus arrests where tasers were used. These arrests do not contain narratives from police reports. Data
without narratives have no information on ofﬁcer duty, civilian’s attack on ofﬁcer and civilian weapon. The dependent variable is whether the ofﬁcer ﬁred his gun
during the encounter. The omitted race is non-blacks (with the exception of the sample with narratives where the omitted race is non-black/non-Hispanic). The ﬁrst
column for each sample gives the unconditional average of omiited race contacts that resulted in an ofﬁcer ﬁring his gun. The second column for each sample reports
logistic estimates for black civilians. Each row corresponds to a different empirical speciﬁcation. The ﬁrst row includes solely racial dummies. The second row adds
civilian gender and a quadratic in age. The third row adds controls for the split of races of ofﬁcers present at the scene, whether any female ofﬁcers were present,
whether multiple ofﬁcers were present and the average tenure of ofﬁcers at the scene. The fourth row adds controls for the reason the ofﬁcers were responding at the
scene, whether the encounter happened during day time, and whether the civilian attacked or drew a weapon. The ﬁfth row adds controls for the type of weapon the
civilian was carrying. The sixth row adds year ﬁxed effects for columns (1)-(3). It adds year as a categorical variable for columns (4)-(7). Each row includes missing
in all variables. For arrest data without narratives missing indicators for ofﬁcer gender, ofﬁcer tenure, and number of ofﬁcers on the scene were removed to minimize
loss of observations in logistic regressions. For all regressions, missing indicator for response reason was removed for the same reason. Standard errors are robust
and are reported in parentheses.


Table 6
Racial Differences in Lethal Use of Force
Intensive Margin, Ofﬁcer Involved Shootings
Non-Black/
Black
Hispanic
Non-Hispanic
Mean
(1)
(2)
(3)
No Controls
0.534
0.987
1.114
(0.135)
(0.257)
+ Civilian Demographics
0.946
1.046
(0.103)
(0.267)
+ Ofﬁcer Demographics
0.835
0.896
(0.094)
(0.221)
+ Encounter Characteristics
0.693∗∗∗
0.759
(0.096)
(0.191)
+ Civilian Weapon
0.558∗∗∗
0.625∗∗
(0.066)
(0.149)
+ Fixed Effects
0.526∗∗∗
0.564∗∗
(0.037)
(0.131)
Observations
1,332
Notes: This table reports odds ratios by running logistic regressions. The sample consists
of ofﬁcer involved shootings from Dallas, Austin, six Florida counties, Houston and Los
Angeles between 2000 to 2015. The dependent variable is based on who attacked ﬁrst.
It is coded as 1 if the ofﬁcer attacked the civilian ﬁrst and 0 if the civilian attacked the
ofﬁcer ﬁrst. The omitted race is non-blacks and non-hispanics. The ﬁrst column gives
the unconditional average of non-black/non-hispanic contacts that resulted in an ofﬁcer
ﬁring his gun. The second column reports logistic estimates for black civilians. The third
column reports logistic estimates for hispanic civilians. Each row corresponds to a different
empirical speciﬁcation. The ﬁrst row includes solely racial dummies. The second row adds
civilian gender and a quadratic in age. The third row adds controls for the split of races of
ofﬁcers present at the scene, whether any female ofﬁcers were present, whether multiple
ofﬁcers were present and the average tenure of ofﬁcers at the scene. The fourth row adds
controls for the reason the ofﬁcers were responding at the scene, whether the encounter
happened during day time, and whether the civilian attacked or drew a weapon. The ﬁfth
row adds controls for the type of weapon the civilian was carrying. The sixth row adds
city and year ﬁxed effects. Each row includes missing in all variables. Standard errors are
clustered at the police department level and are reported in parentheses.


Table 7
Any Use of Force, NYC Stop Question and Frisk
Education
Income
Unemployment
Terciles
Terciles
Terciles
(1)
(2)
(3)
Tercile 1
1.174∗∗∗
1.194∗∗∗
1.113∗
(0.034)
(0.046)
(0.071)
N
2,275,062
1,941,664
1,472,862
Tercile 2
1.172∗∗∗
1.100∗
1.177∗∗∗
(0.070)
(0.060)
(0.044)
N
1,613,725
1,750,137
1,943,285
Tercile 3
1.180∗∗∗
1.259∗∗∗
1.246∗∗∗
(0.041)
(0.057)
(0.043)
N
1,030,997
1,227,983
1,503,637
Notes: This table reports odds ratios by running logistic regressions, subsampled for precinct demo-
graphics. Precinct demographics are calculated by collapsing data across census tracts received from
the American Community Survey 2007-2011. For each column, we take the tract’s white population
demographic minus the black population demographic and collapse the means of the differences over
precinct. We then take terciles in differences and calculate odds ratios for each tercile. Column (1)
shows odds ratios across education terciles. Education is measured as the fraction of high school grad-
uates in every census tract. Column (2) shows odds ratio across income terciles. Incomes is measured
as the median household income. Column (3) shows odds ratios across unemployment terciles. Unem-
ployment is calculated as the total number of unemployed people divided by the total number of people
in the labor force. The sample consists of all NYC stop and frisks from 2003-2013 in which use of
force and reported subgroup variables were non-missing. The dependent variable is whether any force
was used during a stop and frisk interaction, with each panel presenting results from the indicated sub-
groups. We control for gender, a quadratic in age, civilian behavior, whether the stop was indoors or
outdoors, whether the stop took place during the daytime, whether the stop took place in a high crime
area or during a high crime time, whether the ofﬁcer was in uniform, civilian ID type, whether others
were stopped during the interaction, and missings in all variables. Precinct and year ﬁxed effects were
included in all regressions. Standard errors clustered at the precinct level are reported in parentheses.


Table 8
Fraction weapon found, conditional on being
in an Oﬃcer Involved Shooting
Civilian White
Civilian Black
p-value
(1)
(2)
(3)
Oﬃcer White
0.851
0.810
(0.027)
(0.025)
0.268
Oﬃcer Black
0.625
0.742
(0.125)
(0.054)
0.354
p-value
0.010
0.115
Notes: This table presents results for Anwar and Fang (2006) test. The ﬁrst column
presents the fraction of white civilians carrying weapons in the Oﬃcer Involved Shoot-
ings (OIS) dataset. The second column presents the fraction of black civilians carrying
weapons in the OIS dataset. The third column displays the p-value for equality of means
in columns (1) and (2). The ﬁrst row presents the fractions when the majority of oﬃcers
present during the encounter were white. The second row presents the fractions when
the majority of oﬃcers present during the encounter were black.


Table 9
Weapon Found,
Conditional on Force Used
White Mean
Coeﬃcient on Black
Coeﬃcient on Hispanic
Observations
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
At Least Hands
0.036
−0.013∗∗∗
−0.008∗∗
1,028,625
(0.004)
(0.003)
At Least Pushing to Wall
0.036
−0.002
−0.000
253,643
(0.002)
(0.002)
At Least Using Handcuﬀs
0.040
−0.000
0.000
118,527
(0.002)
(0.003)
At Least Drawing a Weapon
0.053
0.003
0.001
58,443
(0.004)
(0.004)
At Least Pushing to Ground
0.054
0.005
0.002
51,083
(0.004)
(0.005)
At Least Pointing a Weapon
0.083
−0.011
−0.007
19,505
(0.010)
(0.010)
At Least Using Spray/Baton
0.092
−0.013
0.007
1,745
(0.027)
(0.033)
Notes: This table reports OLS estimates. The sample consists of all NYC stop and frisks from 2003-2013 in which use of force
and outcome variable were non-missing. The dependent variable is a binary variable that is coded as 1 whenever a weapon
was found on the civilian and 0 if weapon was not found. Each row looks at the fraction of white civilians carrying weapons
and racial diﬀerences in carrying weapons for black civilians versus white civilians and hispanic civilians versus white civlians,
conditional on at least a force level being used.
We control for gender, a quadratic in age, civilian behavior, whether the
stop was indoors or outdoors, whether the stop took place during the daytime, whether the stop took place in a high crime
area or during a high crime time, whether the oﬃcer was in uniform, civilian ID type, whether others were stopped during
the interaction, and missings in all variables. Precinct and year ﬁxed eﬀects were included in all regressions. Standard errors
clustered at the precinct level are reported in parentheses.


Figure 1: Odds Ratios by Use of Force, NYC Stop Question and Frisk
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
Odds Ratio for Black
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Use of Force Rank
Black vs White (None)
Black vs White CI (None)
Black vs White (Full)
Black vs White CI (Full)
Panel A
.5
1
1.5
2
Odds Ratio for Hispanic
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Use of Force Rank
Hispanic vs White (None)
Hispanic vs White CI (None)
Hispanic vs White (Full)
Hispanic vs White CI (Full)
Panel B
Notes: These ﬁgures plot odds ratios with 95% conﬁdence intervals from logistic regressions. For the ﬁgure on the left, the y-axis denotes the odds
ratio of reporting various uses of force for black civilians versus white civilians. For the ﬁgure on the right, the y-axis denotes the odds ratio of
reporting various uses of force for hispanic civilians versus white civilians. For both ﬁgures, the x-axis denotes diﬀerent use of force types: 1 is an
indicator for whether the police reported using at least hands or a more severe force on a civilian in a stop and frisk interaction. 2 is for whether
the police reported at least pushing a civilian to a wall or using a more severe force. 3 is for whether the police reported at least using handcuﬀs
or a more severe force. 4 is for whether the police reported at least drawing a weapon on a civilian or using a more severe force. 5 is for whether
the police reported at least pushing a civilian to the ground or using a more severe force. 6 is for whether the police reported at least pointing
a weapon at a civilian or using a more severe force. Finally, 7 is for whether the police reported at least using a pepper spray or a baton on a
civilian. All force indicators are coded as 0 when the police report using no force in a stop and frisk interaction. The line plot with no controls is
achieved by regressing the type of force (described above) on civilian race dummies only. The line plot with full controls is achieved by regressing
the type of force on civilian race dummies, civilian gender, a quadratic in age, civilian behavior, whether the stop was indoors or outdoors, whether
the stop took place during the daytime, whether the stop took place in a high crime area or a high crime time, whether the oﬃcer was in uniform,
civilian ID type, whether others were stopped during the interaction, and missings in all variables. Precinct and year ﬁxed eﬀects were included in
the controlled regression. Standard errors are clustered at the precinct level.


Figure 2: Odds Ratios of Any Use of Force, NYC Stop Question and Frisk
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
Odds Ratio for Black
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23
Hour
Black vs White
Black vs White CI
Panel A
.1
.15
.2
.25
.3
Average Use of Force
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23
Hour
Black
White
At Least Hands
Panel B
Notes: These ﬁgures plot odds ratios with 95% conﬁdence intervals from logistic regressions. For the ﬁgure in Panel A, the y-axis denotes the odds
ratio of reporting any use of force for black civilians versus white civilians. For the ﬁgure in Panel B, the y-axis denotes the average fraction of
white and black civlians who had any force used against them. For both ﬁgures, the x-axis denotes diﬀerent hours of the day. For Panel A, odds
ratios are achieved by regressing any use of force on civilian race dummies, civilian gender, a quadratic in age, civilian behavior, whether the stop
was indoors or outdoors, whether the stop took place during the daytime, whether the stop took place in a high crime area or a high crime time,
whether the oﬃcer was in uniform, civilian ID type, whether others were stopped during the interaction, and missings in all variables, for every
hour of day. Precinct and year ﬁxed eﬀects were included in all regressions. Standard errors are clustered at the precinct level.


Figure 3: Odds Ratios by Use of Force, Police Public Contact Survey
0
2
4
6
8
Odds Ratio for Black
1
2
3
4
Use of Force Rank
Black vs White (None)
Black vs White CI (None)
Black vs White (Full)
Black vs White CI (Full)
Panel A
1
2
3
4
5
Odds Ratio for Hispanic
1
2
3
4
Use of Force Rank
Hispanic vs White (None)
Hispanic vs White CI (None)
Hispanic vs White (Full)
Hispanic vs White CI (Full)
Panel B
Notes: These ﬁgures plot odds ratios with 95% conﬁdence intervals from logistic regressions. For the ﬁgure on the left, the y-axis denotes the odds
ratio of reporting various uses of force for black civilians versus white civilians. For the ﬁgure on the right, the y-axis denotes the odds ratio of
reporting various uses of force for hispanic civilians versus white civilians. For both ﬁgures, the x-axis denotes diﬀerent use of force types: 1 is an
indicator for whether the survey respondent report the oﬃcer at least grabbing him/her in an interaction. 2 is for whether the respondent reported
the police handcuﬃng him/her or using a more sever force in an interaction. 3 is for whether the survey respondent reported the police pointing a
gun at him/her or using a more severe force in an interaction. Finally, 4 is for whether the respondent reported the police kicking, using a stun gun
or using a pepper spray on him/her or using a more severe force. All force indicators are coded as 0 when the respondent reports the police using
no force in an interaction. The line plot with no controls is achieved by regressing the type of force (described above) on civilian race dummies
only. We control for civilian gender, a quadratic in age, work, income, population size of civilian’s address, civilian behavior, contact time, contact
type, oﬃcer race, year of survey and missings in all variables. Standard errors are robust.


Figure 4: Odds Ratios for Oﬃcer Involved Shootings, Extensive Margin, By Year Categories
.5
1
1.5
2
Odds Ratio for Black
2000-2005
2006-2010
2011-2015
Year
Black vs Non-Black
Black vs Non-Black CI
Notes: This ﬁgure plot odds ratios with 95% conﬁdence intervals from logistic regressions. The sample consists of all oﬃcer involved shootings in
Houston from 2000 - 2015, plus a random draw of all arrests for the following oﬀenses, from 2000 - 2015: aggravated assault on a peace oﬃcer,
attempted capital murder of a peace oﬃcer, resisting arrest, evading arrest, and interfering in an arrest ,plus a sample of arrests where tasers
were used. The y-axis denotes odds ratios of an oﬃcer shooting at a black civlian versus a white civilian. The x-axis denotes the period of years
for which the odds ratios were calculated. We control for civilian gender, a quadratic in age, oﬃcer demographics, encounter characteristics, and
missings in all variables (i.e. all variables included in the ﬁnal row of Table 5). Year ﬁxed eﬀects are included in all regressions. Robust standard
errors are reported in parentheses.


Figure 5: Odds Ratios by Use of Force for Perfectly Compliant Civilians, NYC Stop Question and Frisk
.6
.8
1
1.2
1.4
Odds Ratio for Black
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Use of Force Rank
Black vs White
Black vs White CI
Panel A
.4
.6
.8
1
1.2
Odds Ratio for Hispanic
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Use of Force Rank
Hispanic vs White
Hispanic vs White CI
Panel B
Notes: These ﬁgures plot odds ratios with 95% conﬁdence intervals from logistic regressions. For the ﬁgure on the left, the y-axis denotes the
odds ratio of reporting various uses of force for perfecly compliant black civilians versus perfect compliant white civilians. For the ﬁgure on the
right, the y-axis denotes the odds ratio of reporting various uses of force for perfectly compliant hispanic civilians versus perfectly compliant white
civilians. For both ﬁgures, the x-axis denotes diﬀerent use of force types: 1 is an indicator for whether the police reported using at least hands or
a more severe force on a civilian in a stop and frisk interaction. 2 is for whether the police reported at least pushing a civilian to a wall or using
a more severe force. 3 is for whether the police reported at least using handcuﬀs or a more severe force. 4 is for whether the police reported at
least drawing a weapon on a civilian or using a more severe force. 5 is for whether the police reported at least pushing a civilian to the ground or
using a more severe force. 6 is for whether the police reported at least pointing a weapon at a civilian or using a more severe force. Finally, 7 is
for whether the police reported at least using a pepper spray or a baton on a civilian. All force indicators are coded as 0 when the police report
using no force in a stop and frisk interaction. The line plot is achieved by regressing the type of force on civilian race dummies, civilian gender, a
quadratic in age, civilian behavior, whether the stop was indoors or outdoors, whether the stop took place during the daytime, whether the stop
took place in a high crime area or a high crime time, whether the oﬃcer was in uniform, civilian ID type, whether others were stopped during
the interaction, and missings in all variables. Precinct and year ﬁxed eﬀects were included in all regressions. Standard errors are clustered at the
precinct level.


An Empirical Analysis of Racial Diﬀerences in Police Use of Force∗
Roland G. Fryer, Jr.†
Draft: July 2016
Abstract
This paper explores racial diﬀerences in police use of force. On non-lethal uses of force,
blacks and Hispanics are more than ﬁfty percent more likely to experience some form of force
in interactions with police. Adding controls that account for important context and civilian
behavior reduces, but cannot fully explain, these disparities. On the most extreme use of force –
oﬃcer-involved shootings – we ﬁnd no racial diﬀerences in either the raw data or when contextual
factors are taken into account. We argue that the patterns in the data are consistent with a
model in which police oﬃcers are utility maximizers, a fraction of which have a preference for
discrimination, who incur relatively high expected costs of oﬃcer-involved shootings.
Keywords: discrimination, decision making, bias, police use of force
∗This work has beneﬁtted greatly from discussions and debate with Chief William Evans, Chief Charles McClelland,
Chief Martha Montalvo, Sergeant Stephen Morrison, Jon Murad, Lynn Overmann, Chief Bud Riley, and Chief
Scott Thomson. I am grateful to David Card, Kerwin Charles, Christian Dustmann, Michael Greenstone, James
Heckman, Richard Holden, Lawrence Katz, Steven Levitt, Jens Ludwig, Glenn Loury, Kevin Murphy, Derek Neal,
John Overdeck, Jesse Shapiro, Andrei Shleifer, Jorg Spenkuch, Max Stone, John Van Reenan, Christopher Winship,
and seminar participants at Brown University, University of Chicago, London School of Economics, University College
London, and the NBER Summer Institute for helpful comments and suggestions. Brad Allan, Elijah De La Campa,
Tanaya Devi, and William Murdock III provided truly phenomenal project management and research assistance.
Lukas Althoﬀ, Dhruva Bhat, Samarth Gupta, Julia Lu, Mehak Malik, Beatrice Masters, Ezinne Nwankwo, Charles
Adam Pfander, Sofya Shchukina and Eric Yang provided excellent research assistance. Financial support from EdLabs
Advisory Group and an anonymous donor is gratefully acknowledged. Correspondence can be addressed to the author
by email at rolandfryer@edlabs.harvard.edu. The usual caveat applies.
†Department of Economics, Harvard University, and the NBER, (rfryer@fas.harvard.edu);


Appendix A: Data Description and Coding of Variables
A. NYPD Stop, Question and Frisk
1. Civilian Race - The race variable is taken from the NYPD Stop, Question and Frisk database.
We code the race variables such that the ﬁve categories – white, black, hispanic, asian, other
– alongwith the missing indicator are complete and mutually exclusive. “Black” is coded to
include both black and black-hispanic civlians. “Hispanic” civlians includes white-hispanic
civilians only. “White” and “Asian” include white civilians and asian civilians respectively.
“Other” race categories includes any other races.
2. Civilian Age - Age variable is also taken from the NYPD Stop, Question and Frisk database.
However, for several observations, ages were incorrectly coded, for example, they were coded
as “**”. For these observations, we recalculated ages by subtracting date of birth from the
date of stop. After recalculating if we ended up with ages less than 10 or greater than 90, we
coded them as missing.
3. Civilian Gender - Gender variable is taken from the NYPD Stop, Question and Frisk database.
It is a dummy variable that is coded as 1 for “male” and 0 for “female”. Any “unknown”
gender is coded as missing.
4. Whether the stop occured indoors/outdoors - This was coded from the question “Was stop
inside or outside?” in the NYPD Stop, Question and Frisk database. It is a dummy variable
coded as 1 if the stop occured “inside” and 0 if the stop occured “outside”.
5. Whether the stop occured in a high crime or low crime area - This was coded from the variable
“Area has high crime incidence”. It is a dummy variable that is coded as 1 if the stop occured
in an area of high crime incidence and 0 if the stop occured in an area of low crime incidence.
6. Whether the stop occured in a high crime or low crime time - This was coded from the variable
“Time of Day ﬁts crime incidence”. It is a dummy variable that is coded as 1 if the stop
occured at a time of day that ﬁt crime incidence and 0 if it did not ﬁt crime incidence.
7. Whether the oﬃcer was wearing uniform - This was coded from the question “Was oﬃcer in
1


uniform?”. It is a dummy variable that is coded as 1 if the oﬃcer was in uniform and 0 if the
oﬃcer was not in uniform. Any “unknown” observations were coded as missing.
8. Kind of ID provided - This was coded from the variable “Stopped Person’s Identiﬁcation
Type”. A set of four mutually exclusive and exhaustive dummy variables were created based
on the response to this variable –
• Photo ID - Dummy variable coded as 1 if civilian provided Photo ID and coded as 0 if
not.
• Verbal ID - Dummy variable coded as 1 if civilian provided Verbal ID and coded as 0 if
not.
• Refused ID - Dummy variable coded as 1 if civilian refused to provide ID and coded as
0 if civilian did not refuse.
• Other ID - Dummy variable coded as 1 if civilian provided any other type of ID and
coded as 0 if he did not provide other forms of ID.
9. With others who were stopped - This was coded from the question “Were other persons
stopped, questioned, or frisked?”. It is a dummy variable that is coded as 1 if the civilian was
in a stop where other civilians were stopped as well, and 0 if other civilians were not stopped
with him.
10. Civilian behavior - This is a set of variables coded from responses to “Reason for stop” –
• Carrying suspicious object - Dummy variable coded as 1 if civilian was carrying suspi-
cious object and 0 otherwise.
• Fit relevant description - Dummy variable coded as 1 if civilian ﬁt a relevant description
and 0 otherwise.
• Preparing for crime - Dummy variable coded as 1 if oﬃcers were casing a victim or
location and 0 otherwise.
• Lookout for crime - Dummy variable coded as 1 if suspect was acting as a lookout and
0 otherwise.
2


• Dressed in criminal attire - Dummy variable coded as 1 if civilian was wearing clothes
commonly used in a crime and 0 otherwise.
• Appearance of drug transaction - Dummy variable coded as 1 if civilian was engaged in
actions indicative of a drug transaction and 0 otherwise.
• Suspicious movements - Dummy variable coded as 1 if civilian had furtive movements
and 0 otherwise.
• Engaging in violent crime - Dummy variable coded as 1 if civilian was engaged in a
violent crime and 0 otherwise.
• Concealing suspicious objects - Dummy variable coded as 1 if civilian had a suspicious
bulge and 0 otherwise.
• Other suspicious behavior - Dummy variable coded as 1 if there were any other reason
that the civilian was stopped. The variable is coded 0 otherwise.
11. Alternative Outcomes
• Frisked - This was coded from responses to “Reason for Frisk”. It is a dummy variable
that is coded as 1 if the oﬃcer stated any reason for the civilian to be frisked, and 0 if
the oﬃcer did not mention any reason for the civilian to be frisked.
• Searched - This was coded from responses to “Basis of Search”. It is a dummy variable
that is coded as 1 if the oﬃcer stated any reasons for the civilian to be searched, and 0
if the oﬃcer did not mention any reason for the civilian to be searched.
• Arrested - This variable was coded from the question “Was an arrest made?”. It is a
dummy variable that is coded as 1 if the oﬃcer made an arrest and 0 if the oﬃcer did
not make any arrests.
• Summonsed - This variable was coded from the question “Was a summons issued?”. It
is a dummy variable that is coded as 1 if the oﬃcer issued a summons and 0 if the oﬃcer
did not issue any summons.
• Weapon or Contraband Found - This variable was coded from a set of questions that
captured information about whether any contraband or weapon was found on the stopped
person. It is a dummy variable that was coded as 1 if contraband, pistol, riﬂe, assault
3


weapon, knife or cutting instrument, machine gun, or any other type of weapon was
found on the civilian. It is coded as 0 if none of the above were found on the civilian.
B. Police Public Contact Survey
1. Civilian Race - The race variable is taken from the Police Public Contact Survey. We code
the race variables such that the four categories – white, black, hispanic, other – alongwith
the missing indicator are complete and mutually exclusive. “Black” is coded to include both
black and black-hispanic civlians. “Hispanic” civlians includes white-hispanic civilians and
any other civilians who are coded as hispanic with a combination of another race. “White”
includes white civilians. “Other” race categories includes any other races.
2. Civilian Age - Civilian’s age variable is taken from the Police Public Contact Survey. It is a
discrete variable that gives the civlian’s age in years.
3. Civilian Gender - This variable was coded from the Police Public Contact Survey. It is a
dummy variable that is coded as 1 if the civilian was male and 2 if the civilian was female.
4. Civilian Income - The Police Public Contact Survey gathers information about civilian’s
income but only presents it as a categorical variable to protect identity. Hence, this variable
is categorical with the following categories – “1” for incomes less than $20,000, “2” for incomes
between $20,000 and $50,000, and ﬁnally “3” for incomes greater than $50,000.
5. Civlian employed or not last week - This variable was coded from responses to the question
“Did you have a job or work at a business last week?”. It is coded as 1 if the civilian had a
job or worked at a business in the previous week, and 0 otherwise.
6. Population size of civilian’s address - This was coded from the survey variable that gathers
information about the population size of the civilian’s address. It is a categorical variable
coded as “1” if there was no response or the population size was under 100,000. It is coded
as “2” if the population size was between 100,000 and 499,999, “3” if the population size
was between 500,000 and 999,999, and ﬁnally “4” if the population size was greater than 1
million.
4


7. Time of encounter - This was coded from survey variables that gather information about the
interaction. Since this question is asked diﬀerently in diﬀerent years, to maintain consistency,
we coded it as “1” if the interaction happened between 6 am and 12 noon, “2” if the interaction
happened between 12 noon and 6 pm, “3” if the interaction happened during day time but the
time is not speciﬁcally stated, “4” if the interaction happened during 6 pm and 12 midnight,
“5” if the interaction happened during 12 midnight and 6 am and ﬁnally “6” if the interaction
happened during night time but the time is not speciﬁcally stated.
8. Oﬃcer Race - Oﬃcer race was coded from responses to questions about the race of the police
oﬃcer or majority of police oﬃcers present during the interaction. It is represented by the
following set of race dummy variables – black, white, hispanic, other, or unknown. “Black” is
coded as 1 if the police oﬃcer was black or all/most of the police oﬃcers present were black.
“White” is coded as 1 if the police oﬃcer was white or all/most of the police oﬃcers present
were white. “Other” is coded as 1 if the police oﬃcer was of any other race or all/most of
the police oﬃcers present were of any other race. For 2011, variables were coded slightly
diﬀerently. There was a “hispanic” race included that is 1 if one or more of the oﬃcers were
of hispanic origin. Similarly, for 2011, “black”, “white” or “other” races were coded as 1 if
one or more of the oﬃcers present were black, white or of any other race and 0 otherwise.
9. Type of Incident - This is a categorical variable coded as “1” for a street stop, “2” for a traﬃc
stop and “3” for any other stop.
10. Civilian Behavior - This is a dummy variable coded as 1 if any of the following variables were
coded as 1 and 0 if all the following variables were coded as 0.
• Disobeyed - Dummy variable coded as 1 if the civilian said “Yes” to “At any time during
this contact, did you disobey or interfere with the oﬃcer(s)?”. It is coded as 0 if the
civilian said “No” to the question.
• Tried to get away - Dummy variable coded as 1 if the civilian said “Yes” to “At any
time during this contact, did you try to get away?”. It is coded as 0 if the civilian said
“No” to the question.
• Hit oﬃcer - Dummy variable coded as 1 if the civilian said “Yes” to “At any time during
5


this contact, did you push, grab or hit the police oﬃcer(s)?”. It is coded as 0 if the
civilian said “No” to the question.
• Resisted - Dummy variable coded as 1 if the civilian said “Yes” to “At any time during
this contact, did you resist being handcuﬀed arrested, or searched?”. It is coded as 0 if
the civilian said “No” to the question.
• Complained - Dummy variable coded as 1 if the civilian said “Yes” to “At any time
during this contact, did you complain to the oﬃcer(s)?”. It is coded as 0 if the civilian
said “No” to the question.
• Argued - Dummy variable coded as 1 if the civilian said “Yes” to “At any time during
this contact, did you argue with the oﬃcer(s)?”. It is coded as 0 if the civilian said “No”
to the question.
• Threatened oﬃcer - Dummy variable coded as 1 if the civilian said “Yes” to “At any time
during this contact, did you curse at, insult or verbally threaten the police oﬃcer(s)?”.
It is coded as 0 if the civilian said “No” to the question.
• Used physical force - Dummy variable coded as 1 if the civilian said “Yes” to “At any
time during this contact, did you physically do anything else?”. It is coded as 0 if the
civilian said “No” to the question.
11. Alternative Outcomes -
• Civilian searched - This variable coded from responses to questions about whether the
civilian was actually searched, frisked or patted down during the contact. It is coded as
1 if the civilian was searched, frisked or patted down and 0 otherwise.
• Civilian arrested - This variable is coded from responses to questions about whether the
civilian was arrested during the contact. It is coded as 1 if the civilian was arrested and
0 otherwise.
• Civilian guilty of carrying drugs, alcohol or weapon - This variable is coded from re-
sponses to questions about whether the civilian was guilty of carrying any illegal items
like weapons, drugs, or an open container of alcohol. It is coded as 1 if the civilian was
guilty and 0 otherwise.
6


Appendix B: Constructing a Database on Oﬃcer-Involved Shootings
Variable Construction - Variables were constructed from police reports and internet articles. In all
cases, information from police reports were given precedence over internet articles if there were any
discrepancies. For all variables explained below, if a variable was missing information we coded it
with a missing indicator .
1. Unique Identiﬁcation Number - The unique identiﬁer used to number oﬃcer reports or shoot-
ing incidents.
2. Date - Date of shooting (Format - MM/DD/YY)
3. Time - Time of shooting (Format - HHMM)
4. Location Address - Detailed address of shooting
5. Latitude - Latitude of shooting location. Unless explicitly mentioned in the excel reports,
these were obtained by overlapping the detailed address on google maps.
6. Longitude - Longitude of shooting location. Unless explicitly mentioned in the excel reports,
these were obtained by overlapping the detailed address on google maps.
7. Premise Category - Location category coded from oﬃcer reports and excel workbooks. Pos-
sible categories are
(a) Residence
(b) Street
(c) Business
(d) Yard/lot
(e) Park
(f) School
(g) Government property (e.g. police station)
(h) Other
7


8. Inside/Outside - Location category coded whether being inside or outside an enclosed space.
9. Precinct/Reporting District - Precinct in which shooting took place. Usually also reported
as sector or subsector in oﬃcer reports.
10. Suspect Name - Name of suspect involved in shooting
11. Suspect Injury - Coded as
(a) Deceased
(b) Shoot and Miss
(c) Injured
(d) Unknown
(e) None
12. Suspect Weapon - Weapon used by/found on the subject during the shooting.
13. Suspect Race - Coded as White, Black, Hispanic or Other
14. Suspect Sex - Coded as Male or Female
15. Suspect Age - Calculated as fractions at the time of the incident. For instance, a suspect who
is 24 years and 6 months old at the time of the shooting incident has age equal to 24.5. In
case only years were provided and months werent, we took an expected age based on year,
for example, somebody who could be 24 or 25 years old was given 24.5.
16. Number of oﬃcers present when shots ﬁred - All oﬃcers who were present during the shooting
but didnt shoot at the suspect.
17. Number of oﬃcers shooting - All oﬃcers who shot at the suspect.
18. Oﬃcer(s) Name - Names of all oﬃcers involved in shooting. Multiple names should be sepa-
rated by commas to keep observations at the suspect level.
19. Oﬃcer(s) Race - Races of all oﬃcers involved in shooting. Races are coded as White, Black,
Hispanic and Other. Multiple oﬃcers should be separated by commas to keep observations
at the suspect level.
8


20. Oﬃcer(s) Sex - Sex of all oﬃcers involved in shooting.
Sex is coded as Male or Female.
Multiple oﬃcers should be separated by commas to keep observations at the suspect level.
21. Oﬃcer(s) Age - Ages of all oﬃcers involved in shooting calculated as fractions at the time
of the incident. For instance, an oﬃcer who is 24 years and 3 months old at the time of the
shooting incident has age equal to 24.25. In case only years were provided and months werent,
we took an expected age based on year, for example, somebody who could be 24 or 25 years
old was given 24.5. Multiple oﬃcers should be separated by commas to keep observations at
the suspect level.
22. Oﬃcer(s) Rank - Ranks of all oﬃcers involved in shooting at the time of the shooting. Multiple
oﬃcers should be separated by commas to keep observations at the suspect level.
23. Oﬃcer(s) Tenure -Tenure of all oﬃcers involved at the time of the incident (calculated as
fractions at the time of the incident). This includes full-time concurrent and law enforce-
ment tenure of oﬃcers across all counties they have ever served. Multiple oﬃcers should be
separated by commas to keep observations at the suspect level.
24. Oﬃcer(s) PD Jurisdiction - Jurisdiction of all oﬃcers involved in shooting. This is the han-
dling unit or the jurisdiction that the oﬃcer answers to or is a part of. Multiple oﬃcers should
be separated by commas to keep observations at the suspect level.
25. Oﬃcer(s) Injury - Injuries of all oﬃcers involved in shooting. These are coded from categories
(a) Deceased
(b) Shoot and Miss
(c) Injured
(d) Unknown
(e) None
Multiple oﬃcers should be separated by commas to keep observations at the suspect level.
26. The next 5 variables are mutually exclusive and exhaustive. This implies that only one of
them can be 1 in a given shooting while the rest are 0s. All of them cannot be 0s for a given
shooting. Earlier variables take precedence over later variables.
9


(a) Suspect Fired or Attacked - Coded as 1 if the suspect ﬁred or attacked the oﬃcers. If
the suspect ﬁred or attacked a civilian (or shot warning shots in the air) but did it in
view of the oﬃcers, the variable is still coded as 1. Otherwise it is coded as 0.
(b) Suspect Drew or Revealed - Coded as 1 if the suspect drew his weapon or revealed his
weapon in front of the oﬃcers. If a suspect ﬁred his weapon and hence revealed his
weapon, only suspect ﬁred or attacked is coded as 1 and suspect drew or revealed is
coded as 0. If the variable is not coded as 1, it should be coded as 0.
(c) Suspect Attempted Draw - Coded as 1 if the suspect attempted to draw his weapon.
Otherwise, it should be coded as 0. Similar to variable above, if any of the aforementioned
variables were 1, then this would be coded as 0.
(d) Suspect Appeared to Have - Coded as 1 if the suspect appeared to have a weapon as
witnessed by the oﬃcers. Otherwise, it is coded as 0. Similar to variable above, if any
of the aforementioned variables were 1, then this would be coded as 0.
(e) No Weapon or Attack - Coded as 1 if the suspect did not have any weapon or did not
attack. Otherwise, it is coded as 0. Similar to variable above, if any of the aforementioned
variables were 1, then this would be coded as 0.
27. Oﬃcer or Suspect attacked ﬁrst - Coded as O if oﬃcer attacked the suspect ﬁrst and coded
as S if suspect attacked the oﬃcer ﬁrst. If the suspect resisted arrest but didnt explicitly use
force against the force, we do not take it as the suspect attacking the oﬃcer ﬁrst. In case the
suspect attempts to ﬂee but does so in the direction of the oﬃcers, the suspect is considered
to be attacking ﬁrst.
28. Oﬃcer verbal warning - Coded as 1 if any oﬃcer issued any verbal warnings. Coded as 0 if
the oﬃcer did not issue any verbal warnings. If the report does not explicitly mention any
verbal warnings, code this variable as 0.
29. Oﬃcer under-cover - Coded as 1 if the oﬃcer(s) was under-cover. Coded as 0 if he was not.
If the report does not explicitly mention oﬃcers being under-cover, then code this variable as
0.
30. Oﬃcer on-duty - Coded as 1 if oﬃcer(s) was on-duty. Coded as 0 if oﬃcer was oﬀ-duty.
10


31. Oﬃcer, involved in previous shootings - Coded as 1 if oﬃcer was involved in previous shootings
and 0 if he was not. Multiple oﬃcers are separated by commas.
32. Oﬃcer, number of shootings involved in previously - Coded as the number of shootings every
oﬃcer (who was involved in the shooting) was involved in previously. Multiple oﬃcers are
separated by commas.
33. Number of shots: oﬃcer - Number of shots ﬁred by the oﬃcer at the suspect. Multiple oﬃcers
separated by commas.
34. Number of shots: suspect - Number of shots ﬁred by the suspect at the oﬃcer.
35. Suspect ﬂed - Coded as 1 even if the report suggest that the suspect ﬂed or attempted to ﬂee.
Coded as 0 otherwise.
36. Suspect Mental Illness - Coded as 1 if suspect was suﬀering from a mental illness. Coded as
0 otherwise. Since this is rarely mentioned, variable is coded as 0 unless explicitly mentioned
in the reports.
37. Suspect on Drugs/Alcohol - Coded as 1 if suspect was under the inﬂuence of drugs or alcohol.
Coded as 0 otherwise. Since this is rarely mentioned, variable is coded as 0 unless explicitly
mentioned in the reports.
38. Type of Substance - If the answer to the previous question is 1, then mention what substance
suspect was under the inﬂuence of here. Otherwise code it as missing.
39. Suspect on Parole - Coded as 1 if the suspect was on parole. Coded as 0 otherwise. Since
this is rarely mentioned, variable is coded as 0 unless explicitly mentioned in the reports.
40. Suspect on Probation - Coded as 1 if the suspect was on probation. Coded as 0 otherwise.
Since this is rarely mentioned, variable is coded as 0 unless explicitly mentioned in the reports.
If the suspect was under arrest and was involved in a shooting on his way to prison, then this
variable is still 0.
41. Oﬃcer, force within policy - This variable is related to consequences the oﬃcer faced after
the shooting and relates to whether oﬃcers use of force was justiﬁed or not. It is coded as 1
11


if the oﬃcers use of force was justiﬁed to be within policy. It is coded as 0 otherwise.
42. Oﬃcer, tactics within policy - This variable is related to consequences the oﬃcer faced after
the shooting and relates to whether oﬃcers use of force was justiﬁed or not. It is coded as 1
if the oﬃcers tactics was justiﬁed to be within policy. It is coded as 0 otherwise.
43. Oﬃcer, training - This variable is related to consequences the oﬃcer faced after the shooting.
It is coded as 1 if the oﬃcer was put under training after the shooting. It is coded as 0
otherwise.
44. Oﬃcer, discipline - This variable is related to consequences the oﬃcer faced after the shooting.
It is coded as 1 if the oﬃcer was put under disciplinary measures after the shooting. It is
coded as 0 otherwise. If the oﬃcer was put under probation after the shooting, this variable
is coded as 1.
45. Oﬃcer Suspended - This variable is related to consequences the oﬃcer faced after the shooting.
It is coded as 1 if the oﬃcer was suspended after the shooting. It is coded as 0 otherwise.
46. Oﬃcer Terminated - This variable is related to consequences the oﬃcer faced after the shoot-
ing. It is coded as 1 if the oﬃcers employment was terminated after the shooting. It is coded
as 0 otherwise.
47. The next 9 variables are related to why the oﬃcers were in the crime scene in the ﬁrst place.
If there are multiple reasons for why a cop was at the crime scene, then several of the variables
below can be coded as 1 i.e. they are NOT mutually exclusive and exhaustive. -
(a) Respond Robbery - Coded as 1 if the oﬃcers were responding to a robbery. Coded as 0
otherwise.
(b) Respond Violent - Coded as 1 if the oﬃcers were responding to a violent activity (e.g.
a ﬁght, a murder, a kidnapping, a hostage situation). Coded as 0 otherwise.
(c) Respond Auto - Coded as 1 if the oﬃcers were responding to a situation that involved
an automobile. Coded as 0 otherwise.
(d) Respond Drugs - Coded as 1 if the oﬃcers were conducting a drug raid. Coded as 0
otherwise.
12


(e) Respond Warrant - Coded as 1 if the oﬃcers had a warrant and were at the crime scene
to arrest a suspect or conduct search under warrant. Coded as 0 otherwise.
(f) Respond Suspicious - Coded as 1 if the oﬃcers were responding to a suspect engaging
in suspicious activity. Coded as 0 otherwise.
(g) Respond as Victim - Coded as 1 if the oﬃcer was a victim and was responding to the
suspect. For example, if the oﬃcers home was being robbed or the oﬃcer was under
attack while oﬀ-duty, this variable is coded as 1. Coded as 0 otherwise.
(h) Respond Suicide - Coded as 1 if the oﬃcer was responding to a suicide. Coded as 0
otherwise.
(i) Respond Other - Coded as 1 if the reason to be at the crime scene does not fall under
any of the aforementioned categories. Coded as 0 otherwise.
(j) Reason Oﬃcer on Scene - If respond other is coded as 1, then the details of the reason
should be mentioned here. Otherwise, it is coded as missing.
48. Grand Jury Verdict - Contains links to the grand jury verdict. Coded as True bill, No Bill
or Pending from the grand jury verdict for Dallas.
49. Online Source 1 - Link to any online source that was referenced for shooting related informa-
tion.
50. Online Source 2 - Link to any online source that was referenced for shooting related informa-
tion.
51. Online Source 3 - Link to any online source that was referenced for shooting related informa-
tion.
52. EXTRA - Any other information that is relevant but does not ﬁt into any other columns
must be entered here.
13


Appendix C: A Note on Categorical Discrimination
Individuals sort information with the aid of categories. Fryer and Jackson (2008) provide a model
in which the routine sorting of information into a discrete set of categories in a way that maxi-
mizes cognitive eﬃciency can lead to biases in decision making.1 Consider the following thought
experiment. Imagine a population of employers and a population of workers. The population of
workers consists of 90 percent W workers and 10 percent B workers. Thus, the B workers are the
minority group. Workers come in two human capital levels: high and low. So, overall, workers
come in four ﬂavors: B-high, B-low, W-high, and W-low. Black and white workers are both just
as likely to be of high human capital levels as low. We can represent a worker’s type by a vector in
p0, 1q2, where p0, 0q represents B-low, p0, 1q represents B-high, p1, 0q represents W-low, and p1, 1q
represents W-high.
Let us suppose that an employer has fewer categories available in her memory than there
are types of people in the world, and start by examining the case where the employer has three
categories available. Suppose also that the employer has interacted with workers in the past roughly
in proportion to their presence in the population. How might the employer sort the past types that
s/he has interacted with into the categories? Fryer and Jackson (2008) suppose that this is done
in a way so that the objects (experiences with types of past workers in this case) in the categories
are as similar as possible. Speciﬁcally, objects are sorted to minimize the sum across categories of
the total variation about the mean from each category.
Now, consider a case where the employer has previously interacted with 100 workers in propor-
tion to their presence in the population. So the employer has interacted with 5 workers of type
p0, 0q; 5 of type p0, 1q; 45 of type p1, 0q and 45 of type p1, 1q. Let us assign these to three categories.
The most obvious way, and the unique way to minimize the sum across categories of the total
variation about the mean from each category, is to put all of the type p1, 1q’s in one category, all
of the type p1, 0q’s in another category, and all of p0, q’s in the third category. This means that the
white workers end up perfectly sorted, but the black workers end up only sorted by race and not
by their human capital level.
1There is a rich history in psychology investigating how categories eﬀect decision making. See Allport (1954) or
Fiske (1998).
14


And, perhaps more important for our particular application, more experience with a certain
race allows one to make ﬁner distinctions among them. This is consistent both with the model and
with an impressive literature using lab experiments (see Sporer 2001 for a nice review).
One partial test of the categorization theory of discrimination is to investigate whether black
police oﬃcers (who presumably make ﬁner distinctions in own race interactions) treat black suspects
diﬀerently than white oﬃcers treat black suspects. Consistent with the example above, if black
police oﬃcers have had more interactions with blacks than white oﬃcers then they will sort them
more ﬁnely and be able to make more nuanced distinctions between black suspects who pose danger
and those who may not. In fact, Goﬀet al. (2014) argue – using 176 white male police oﬃcers
from large urban areas – that white oﬃcers over estimate the age of young black males and more
generally categorize them more coarsely. Thus, under this theory – all else equal – black oﬃcers
will treat black suspects more fairly than white oﬃcers.
The data, however, seem to contradict a key prediction of the categorization theory – there is
no evidence that black oﬃcers employ diﬀerent levels of force on black civilians relative to white
oﬃcers. On non-lethal uses of force, black oﬃcers are no less likely to employ higher level uses
of force on black suspects – all else equal – than white oﬃcers. The black coeﬃcient on racial
diﬀerences in at least kicking, using a pepper spray spray or baton is -0.001 (0.003). The same
coeﬃcient on whether or not a white oﬃcer kicks a suspect or uses a pepper spray or baton is
0.000 (0.001). And, in oﬃcer-involved shootings, the fraction of black suspects that are unarmed,
conditional upon an oﬃcer discharging their weapon, is 25.8 percent when the oﬃcer is black and
19 percent when the oﬃcer is white. The p-value on the diﬀerence is 0.115.
15


Appendix Table 1
Data Collection
Dataset
Collection
Year
Variables
NYC’s “Stop, Question and Frisk”
Record each encounter where an ofﬁcer stops
2003-2013
Stop characteristics, civilian demographics,
a pedestrian, asks them questions,
ofﬁcer characteristics, encounter characteristics,
and frisks or searches them
post-encounter characteristics, and use of force
Police Public Contact Survey
Survey interviews a nationally representative
Civilian demographics, civilian behavior
sample of residents aged 16 or older on their
1996-2011 with a gap of 3 years between
contact characteristics, ofﬁcer demographics,
“contacts with police” during the year
any 2 surveys.
contact outcome, and use of force
Ofﬁcer Involved Shootings
Event summaries from all incidents in
2000-2015 depending on location
Incident location and date, civilian
in which ofﬁcers discharged their
demographics, ofﬁcer demographics,
ﬁrearms at civilians. Data was
civilian and ofﬁcer injuries, civilian
collected from Austin, Dallas, six large
weapon, ofﬁcer duty status, encounter
Florida counties, Houston, and Los Angeles
characteristics
Houston Police Arrest Data
Event summaries from a random draw of arrests in
2000 - 2015
which ofﬁcers may have been justiﬁed in using lethal force
Incident location and date, civilian
but did not. Arrest data was taken for the following
demographics, ofﬁcer demographics,
offenses, from 2000 - 2015: aggravated assault on
civilian and ofﬁcer injuries, civilian
a peace ofﬁcer, attempted capital murder
weapon, ofﬁcer duty status, encounter
of a peace ofﬁcer, resisting arrest, evading arrest,
characteristics
and interfering in an arrest. Data was collected
from the Houston Police Department.


Appendix Table 2A
Racial Differences in Non-Lethal Use of Force
At Least Hands, NYC Stop and Frisk
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Black
0.064∗∗∗
0.057∗∗∗
0.074∗∗∗
0.053∗∗∗
0.022∗∗∗
(0.014)
(0.015)
(0.014)
(0.012)
(0.004)
Hispanic
0.069∗∗∗
0.062∗∗∗
0.073∗∗∗
0.059∗∗∗
0.015∗∗∗
(0.015)
(0.015)
(0.015)
(0.013)
(0.003)
Asian
0.006
0.000
0.008
0.007
−0.006
(0.015)
(0.016)
(0.017)
(0.015)
(0.004)
Other race
0.048∗∗∗
0.042∗∗∗
0.053∗∗∗
0.043∗∗∗
0.006∗
(0.013)
(0.012)
(0.012)
(0.010)
(0.004)
Constant
0.153∗∗∗
(0.009)
No Controls
✓
Baseline Characteristics
✓
✓
✓
✓
Encounter Characteristics
✓
✓
✓
Civilian Behavior
✓
✓
Precinct and Year FE
✓
Observations
4,927,467
4,927,467
4,927,467
4,927,467
4,927,467
Notes: This table reports OLS estimates. The sample consists of all NYC stop and frisks from 2003-2013 with non-missing use of force data. The
dependent variable is an indicator for whether the police reported using at least hands or a more severe force on a civilian during a stop and frisk
interaction. The omitted race is white, and the omitted ID type is other. The ﬁrst column includes solely racial group dummies. The second column
adds controls for gender and a quadratic in age. The third column adds controls for whether the stop was indoors or outdoors, whether the stop
took place during the daytime, whether the stop took place in a high crime area or during a high crime time, whether the ofﬁcer was in uniform,
civilian ID type, and whether others were stopped during the interaction. The fourth column adds controls for civilian behavior. The ﬁfth column
adds precinct and year ﬁxed effects. Each column includes missings in all variables. Standard errors clustered at the precinct level are reported in
parentheses.


Appendix Table 2B
Racial Differences in Non-Lethal Use of Force
At Least Pushing to Wall, NYC Stop and Frisk
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Black
0.011∗∗
0.009∗
0.017∗∗∗
0.011∗∗∗
0.009∗∗∗
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.002)
Hispanic
0.013∗∗∗
0.011∗∗
0.017∗∗∗
0.014∗∗∗
0.004∗∗∗
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.001)
Asian
−0.006
−0.008
−0.006
−0.005
−0.002
(0.004)
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.001)
Other race
0.007
0.007
0.011∗∗∗
0.009∗∗∗
0.001
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.002)
Constant
0.052∗∗∗
(0.003)
No Controls
✓
Baseline Characteristics
✓
✓
✓
✓
Encounter Characteristics
✓
✓
✓
Civilian Behavior
✓
✓
Precinct and Year FE
✓
Observations
4,152,485
4,152,485
4,152,485
4,152,485
4,152,485
Notes: This table reports OLS estimates. The sample consists of all NYC stop and frisks from 2003-2013 with non-missing use of force data. The
dependent variable is an indicator for whether the police reported at least pushing a civilian to a wall or using a more severe force during a stop and
frisk interaction. The omitted race is white, and the omitted ID type is other. The ﬁrst column includes solely racial group dummies. The second
column adds controls for gender and a quadratic in age. The third column adds controls for whether the stop was indoors or outdoors, whether the
stop took place during the daytime, whether the stop took place in a high crime area or during a high crime time, whether the ofﬁcer was in uniform,
civilian ID type, and whether others were stopped during the interaction. The fourth column adds controls for civilian behavior. The ﬁfth column
adds precinct and year ﬁxed effects. Each column includes missings in all variables. Standard errors clustered at the precinct level are reported in
parentheses.


Appendix Table 2C
Racial Differences in Non-Lethal Use of Force
At Least Using Handcuffs, NYC Stop and Frisk
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Black
0.005∗∗
0.005∗∗
0.008∗∗∗
0.005∗∗∗
0.004∗∗∗
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.001)
Hispanic
0.003
0.002
0.004∗∗
0.003∗
0.001
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.001)
Asian
−0.001
−0.002
−0.001
−0.001
0.001
(0.002)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.002)
(0.001)
Other race
0.004∗
0.004∗∗
0.005∗∗∗
0.004∗∗∗
0.001
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.001)
(0.001)
Constant
0.026∗∗∗
(0.002)
No Controls
✓
Baseline Characteristics
✓
✓
✓
✓
Encounter Characteristics
✓
✓
✓
Civilian Behavior
✓
✓
Precinct and Year FE
✓
Observations
4,017,369
4,017,369
4,017,369
4,017,369
4,017,369
Notes: This table reports OLS estimates. The sample consists of all NYC stop and frisks from 2003-2013 with non-missing use of force data. The
dependent variable is an indicator for whether the police reported at least using handcuffs or a more severe force on a civilian during a stop and
frisk interaction. The omitted race is white, and the omitted ID type is other. The ﬁrst column includes solely racial group dummies. The second
column adds controls for gender and a quadratic in age. The third column adds controls for whether the stop was indoors or outdoors, whether the
stop took place during the daytime, whether the stop took place in a high crime area or during a high crime time, whether the ofﬁcer was in uniform,
civilian ID type, and whether others were stopped during the interaction. The fourth column adds controls for civilian behavior. The ﬁfth column
adds precinct and year ﬁxed effects. Each column includes missings in all variables. Standard errors clustered at the precinct level are reported in
parentheses.


Appendix Table 2D
Racial Differences in Non-Lethal Use of Force
At Least Drawing a Weapon (*100), NYC Stop and Frisk
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Black
0.268∗∗
0.222∗
0.477∗∗∗
0.326∗∗∗
0.251∗∗∗
(0.121)
(0.129)
(0.118)
(0.102)
(0.056)
Hispanic
0.164∗
0.111
0.262∗∗
0.200∗∗
0.063
(0.087)
(0.096)
(0.101)
(0.087)
(0.047)
Asian
−0.068
−0.112
−0.073
−0.039
0.042
(0.128)
(0.140)
(0.157)
(0.133)
(0.062)
Other race
0.233∗∗
0.187∗
0.294∗∗∗
0.265∗∗∗
0.016
(0.112)
(0.106)
(0.102)
(0.093)
(0.077)
Constant
1.278∗∗∗
(0.086)
No Controls
✓
Baseline Characteristics
✓
✓
✓
✓
Encounter Characteristics
✓
✓
✓
Civilian Behavior
✓
✓
Precinct and Year FE
✓
Observations
3,957,285
3,957,285
3,957,285
3,957,285
3,957,285
Notes: This table reports OLS estimates. The sample consists of all NYC stop and frisks from 2003-2013 with non-missing use of force data. The
dependent variable is an indicator for whether the police reported at least drawing a weapon on a civilian or using a more severe force (*100) during
a stop and frisk interaction. The omitted race is white, and the omitted ID type is other. The ﬁrst column includes solely racial group dummies.
The second column adds controls for gender and a quadratic in age. The third column adds controls for whether the stop was indoors or outdoors,
whether the stop took place during the daytime, whether the stop took place in a high crime area or during a high crime time, whether the ofﬁcer
was in uniform, civilian ID type, and whether others were stopped during the interaction. The fourth column adds controls for civilian behavior.
The ﬁfth column adds precinct and year ﬁxed effects. Each column includes missings in all variables. Standard errors clustered at the precinct level
are reported in parentheses.


Appendix Table 2E
Racial Differences in Non-Lethal Use of Force
At Least Pushing to Ground (*100), NYC Stop and Frisk
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Black
0.245∗∗
0.202∗
0.422∗∗∗
0.284∗∗∗
0.211∗∗∗
(0.109)
(0.117)
(0.109)
(0.095)
(0.049)
Hispanic
0.162∗∗
0.113
0.247∗∗
0.187∗∗
0.052
(0.081)
(0.089)
(0.094)
(0.082)
(0.041)
Asian
−0.055
−0.097
−0.051
−0.023
0.031
(0.117)
(0.128)
(0.142)
(0.123)
(0.052)
Other race
0.180∗
0.164
0.269∗∗∗
0.242∗∗∗
0.017
(0.102)
(0.101)
(0.097)
(0.090)
(0.073)
Constant
1.110∗∗∗
(0.079)
No Controls
✓
Baseline Characteristics
✓
✓
✓
✓
Encounter Characteristics
✓
✓
✓
Civilian Behavior
✓
✓
Precinct and Year FE
✓
Observations
3,949,925
3,949,925
3,949,925
3,949,925
3,949,925
Notes: This table reports OLS estimates. The sample consists of all NYC stop and frisks from 2003-2013 with non-missing use of force data. The
dependent variable is an indicator for whether the police reported at least pushing a civilian to the ground or using a more severe force (*100) during
a stop and frisk interaction. The omitted race is white, and the omitted ID type is other. The ﬁrst column includes solely racial group dummies.
The second column adds controls for gender and a quadratic in age. The third column adds controls for whether the stop was indoors or outdoors,
whether the stop took place during the daytime, whether the stop took place in a high crime area or during a high crime time, whether the ofﬁcer
was in uniform, civilian ID type, and whether others were stopped during the interaction. The fourth column adds controls for civilian behavior.
The ﬁfth column adds precinct and year ﬁxed effects. Each column includes missings in all variables. Standard errors clustered at the precinct level
are reported in parentheses.


Appendix Table 2F
Racial Differences in Non-Lethal Use of Force
At Least Pointing a Weapon (*100), NYC Stop and Frisk
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Black
0.096∗∗
0.085∗
0.184∗∗∗
0.132∗∗∗
0.098∗∗∗
(0.045)
(0.046)
(0.042)
(0.036)
(0.024)
Hispanic
0.006
−0.010
0.046
0.026
−0.004
(0.034)
(0.036)
(0.036)
(0.030)
(0.022)
Asian
−0.045
−0.056
−0.053
−0.044
−0.030
(0.048)
(0.050)
(0.057)
(0.050)
(0.033)
Other race
0.093∗∗
0.078∗
0.108∗∗
0.100∗∗
0.019
(0.043)
(0.043)
(0.044)
(0.041)
(0.037)
Constant
0.439∗∗∗
(0.035)
No Controls
✓
Baseline Characteristics
✓
✓
✓
✓
Encounter Characteristics
✓
✓
✓
Civilian Behavior
✓
✓
Precinct and Year FE
✓
Observations
3,918,347
3,918,347
3,918,347
3,918,347
3,918,347
Notes: This table reports OLS estimates. The sample consists of all NYC stop and frisks from 2003-2013 with non-missing use of force data. The
dependent variable is an indicator for whether the police reported at least pointing a weapon at a civilian or using a more severe force (*100) during
a stop and frisk interaction. The omitted race is white, and the omitted ID type is other. The ﬁrst column includes solely racial group dummies.
The second column adds controls for gender and a quadratic in age. The third column adds controls for whether the stop was indoors or outdoors,
whether the stop took place during the daytime, whether the stop took place in a high crime area or during a high crime time, whether the ofﬁcer
was in uniform, civilian ID type, and whether others were stopped during the interaction. The fourth column adds controls for civilian behavior.
The ﬁfth column adds precinct and year ﬁxed effects. Each column includes missings in all variables. Standard errors clustered at the precinct level
are reported in parentheses.


Appendix Table 2G
Racial Differences in Non-Lethal Use of Force
At Least Using Pepper Spray or Baton (*100), NYC Stop and Frisk
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Black
0.014∗∗
0.013∗∗
0.013∗∗∗
0.008∗
0.010∗∗
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.004)
Hispanic
−0.000
−0.001
−0.001
−0.003
−0.004
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.004)
Asian
−0.016∗∗
−0.016∗∗
−0.015∗∗
−0.015∗∗
−0.009
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.006)
Other race
0.008
0.003
0.001
−0.000
−0.004
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.006)
Constant
0.037∗∗∗
(0.005)
No Controls
✓
Baseline Characteristics
✓
✓
✓
✓
Encounter Characteristics
✓
✓
✓
Civilian Behavior
✓
✓
Precinct and Year FE
✓
Observations
3,900,587
3,900,587
3,900,587
3,900,587
3,900,587
Notes: This table reports OLS estimates. The sample consists of all NYC stop and frisks from 2003-2013 with non-missing use of force data. The
dependent variable is an indicator for whether the police reported at least using a pepper spray or a baton on a civilian or using a more severe force
(*100) during a stop and frisk interaction. The omitted race is white, and the omitted ID type is other. The ﬁrst column includes solely racial group
dummies. The second column adds controls for gender and a quadratic in age. The third column adds controls for whether the stop was indoors
or outdoors, whether the stop took place during the daytime, whether the stop took place in a high crime area or during a high crime time, whether
the ofﬁcer was in uniform, civilian ID type, and whether others were stopped during the interaction. The fourth column adds controls for civilian
behavior. The ﬁfth column adds precinct and year ﬁxed effects. Each column includes missings in all variables. Standard errors clustered at the
precinct level are reported in parentheses.


Appendix Table 3
Racial Differences in Non-Lethal Use of Force
Other Force, NYC Stop and Frisk
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Black
−0.002∗
−0.002∗
−0.002∗
−0.001
−0.000
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.000)
Hispanic
−0.001
−0.001
−0.001
−0.001
−0.001∗
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.000)
Asian
−0.001
−0.001
−0.001
−0.001
−0.001
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.001)
Other race
0.009∗∗∗
0.005∗∗∗
0.004∗∗∗
0.004∗∗∗
0.001
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
Constant
0.013∗∗∗
(0.001)
No Controls
✓
Baseline Characteristics
✓
✓
✓
✓
Encounter Characteristics
✓
✓
✓
Civilian Behavior
✓
✓
Precinct and Year FE
✓
Observations
4,982,426
4,982,426
4,982,426
4,982,426
4,982,426
Notes: This table reports OLS estimates. The sample consists of all NYC stop and frisks from 2003-2013 with non-missing use of force data. The
dependent variable is an indicator for whether the police used other force during a stop and frisk interaction. The omitted race is white, and the
omitted ID type is other. The ﬁrst column includes solely racial group dummies. The second column adds controls for gender and a quadratic in
age. The third column adds controls for whether the stop was indoors or outdoors, whether the stop took place during the daytime, whether the stop
took place in a high crime area or during a high crime time, whether the ofﬁcer was in uniform, civilian ID type, and whether others were stopped
during the interaction. The fourth column adds controls for civilian behavior. The ﬁfth column adds precinct and year ﬁxed effects. Each column
includes missings in all variables. Standard errors clustered at the precinct level are reported in parentheses.


Appendix Table 4A
Racial Differences in Non-Lethal Use of Force
At Least Grab, PPCS
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Black
0.019∗∗∗
0.016∗∗∗
0.016∗∗∗
0.014∗∗∗
0.014∗∗∗
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
Hispanic
0.013∗∗∗
0.007∗∗∗
0.007∗∗∗
0.007∗∗∗
0.007∗∗∗
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
Other race
0.000
−0.003
−0.003
−0.004∗
−0.003
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
Constant
0.008∗∗∗
(0.000)
No Controls
✓
Baseline Characteristics
✓
✓
✓
✓
Encounter Characteristics
✓
✓
✓
Civilian Behavior
✓
✓
Year
✓
Observations
48,498
48,498
48,498
48,498
48,498
Notes: This table reports OLS estimates. The sample consists of all Police Public Contact Survey
respondents from 1996 - 2011 with non-missing use of force data. The dependent variable is an
indicator for whether the survey respondent reported an ofﬁcer grabbing him/her or using a more
severe force in a contact with the police. The omitted race is white. Each column corresponds to a
different empirical speciﬁcation. The ﬁrst column includes solely racial dummies. The second column
adds civilian gender, work, income, population size of civilian’s address and a quadratic in age. The
third column adds controls for contact time, contact type and ofﬁcer race. The fourth column adds a
civilian behavior dummy. The ﬁfth column adds a control for year. Each column includes missing
in all variables. Standard errors are robust and are reported in parentheses. Each column includes
missings in all variables. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.


Appendix Table 4B
Racial Differences in Non-Lethal Use of Force
At Least use Handcuffs, PPCS
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Black
0.015∗∗∗
0.013∗∗∗
0.013∗∗∗
0.012∗∗∗
0.012∗∗∗
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
Hispanic
0.010∗∗∗
0.006∗∗∗
0.006∗∗∗
0.006∗∗∗
0.006∗∗∗
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
Other race
−0.000
−0.003∗
−0.003
−0.003∗
−0.003∗
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
Constant
0.005∗∗∗
(0.000)
No Controls
✓
Baseline Characteristics
✓
✓
✓
✓
Encounter Characteristics
✓
✓
✓
Civilian Behavior
✓
✓
Year
✓
Observations
48,300
48,300
48,300
48,300
48,300
Notes: This table reports OLS estimates. The sample consists of all Police Public Contact Survey
respondents from 1996 - 2011 with non-missing use of force data. The dependent variable is an
indicator for whether the survey respondent reported an ofﬁcer handcufﬁng him/her or using a more
severe force in a contact with the police. The omitted race is white. Each column corresponds to a
different empirical speciﬁcation. The ﬁrst column includes solely racial dummies. The second column
adds civilian gender, work, income, population size of civilian’s address and a quadratic in age. The
third column adds controls for contact time, contact type and ofﬁcer race. The fourth column adds a
civilian behavior dummy. The ﬁfth column adds a control for year. Each column includes missing
in all variables. Standard errors are robust and are reported in parentheses. Each column includes
missings in all variables. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.


Appendix Table 4C
Racial Differences in Non-Lethal Use of Force
At Least Point a Gun, PPCS
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Black
0.009∗∗∗
0.008∗∗∗
0.008∗∗∗
0.008∗∗∗
0.008∗∗∗
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
Hispanic
0.004∗∗∗
0.002∗
0.002∗
0.002∗∗
0.002∗∗
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
Other race
−0.000
−0.001
−0.001
−0.002
−0.001
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
Constant
0.002∗∗∗
(0.000)
No Controls
✓
Baseline Characteristics
✓
✓
✓
✓
Encounter Characteristics
✓
✓
✓
Civilian Behavior
✓
✓
Year
✓
Observations
48,103
48,103
48,103
48,103
48,103
Notes: This table reports OLS estimates. The sample consists of all Police Public Contact Survey
respondents from 1996 - 2011 with non-missing use of force data. The dependent variable is an
indicator for whether the survey respondent reported an ofﬁcer pointing a gun or using a more severe
force in a contact with the police. The omitted race is white. Each column corresponds to a different
empirical speciﬁcation. The ﬁrst column includes solely racial dummies. The second column adds
civilian gender, work, income, population size of civilian’s address and a quadratic in age. The third
column adds controls for contact time, contact type and ofﬁcer race. The fourth column adds a civilian
behavior dummy. The ﬁfth column adds a control for year. Each column includes missing in all
variables. Standard errors are robust and are reported in parentheses. Each column includes missings
in all variables. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.


Appendix Table 4D
Racial Differences in Non-Lethal Use of Force
At Least Kick, use a Stun Gun or Pepper Spray, PPCS
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Black
0.002∗∗
0.002∗∗
0.002∗∗
0.001∗
0.001∗
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
Hispanic
0.001∗
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
Other race
−0.001∗∗∗
−0.002∗∗∗
−0.002∗∗∗
−0.002∗∗∗
−0.002∗∗∗
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
Constant
0.001∗∗∗
(0.000)
No Controls
✓
Baseline Characteristics
✓
✓
✓
✓
Encounter Characteristics
✓
✓
✓
Civilian Behavior
✓
✓
Year
✓
Observations
48,007
48,007
48,007
48,007
48,007
Notes: This table reports OLS estimates. The sample consists of all Police Public Contact Survey
respondents from 1996 - 2011 with non-missing use of force data. The dependent variable is an
indicator for whether the survey respondent reported an ofﬁcer kicking or using a stun gun or pepper
spray in a contact with the police. The omitted race is white. Each column corresponds to a different
empirical speciﬁcation. The ﬁrst column includes solely racial dummies. The second column adds
civilian gender, work, income, population size of civilian’s address and a quadratic in age. The third
column adds controls for contact time, contact type and ofﬁcer race. The fourth column adds a civilian
behavior dummy. The ﬁfth column adds a control for year. Each column includes missing in all
variables. Standard errors are robust and are reported in parentheses. Each column includes missings
in all variables. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.


Appendix Table 5
Analysis of Subsamples, Extensive Margin, Ofﬁcer Involved Shootings
Coefﬁcient on Black
Coefﬁcient on Hisp.
Observations
Full Sample
−0.014
0.008
1,531
Panel A: Number of Ofﬁcers
2+ Ofﬁcers
0.001
0.038
579
(0.024)
(0.026)
1 Ofﬁcer
−0.006
0.021
618
(0.038)
(0.042)
p-value
0.857
0.710
Panel B: Civilian Attack
Civlian Attacked/Drew
−0.020
−0.017
791
(0.025)
(0.026)
Appeared to Draw/No Attack
0.043
0.067
740
(0.058)
(0.062)
p-value
0.293
0.198
Panel C: Ofﬁcer Duty
On-Duty Ofﬁcer
−0.007
0.009
1,006
(0.028)
(0.030)
Off-Duty Ofﬁcer
−0.095
−0.046
220
(0.070)
(0.073)
p-value
0.195
0.428
Panel D: Majority Ofﬁcer Unit
White/Asian/Other
−0.051
0.006
427
(0.035)
(0.039)
Black/Hispanic
−0.001
0.031
549
(0.040)
(0.043)
p-value
0.328
0.654
Notes: This table reports OLS estimates. The sample consists of all ofﬁcer involved shootings in
Houston from 2000 - 2015, plus a random draw of all arrests for the following offenses, from 2000
- 2015: aggravated assault on a peace ofﬁcer, attempted capital murder of a peace ofﬁcer, resisting
arrest, evading arrest, and interfering in an arrest. The dependent variable is whether the ofﬁcer ﬁred
his gun during the encounter, with each panel presenting results from the indicated subgroups. We
control for civilian gender, a quadratic in age, ofﬁcer demographics, encounter characteristics, weapon
that the civilian was carrying and missings in all variables (i.e. all variables included in the ﬁnal row
of Table 5). Year ﬁxed effects are included in all regressions. Robust standard errors are reported in
parentheses.


Appendix Table 6
Analysis of Risk Sets, Houston Police Arrest Data
Coefﬁcient on Black
Coefﬁcient on Hisp.
Observations
Full Sample
−0.014
0.008
1,531
Resist/Interfere Arrest
−0.034
−0.022
748
(0.030)
(0.030)
Evade Arrest
0.000
0.048
988
(0.033)
(0.035)
Assault
−0.005
−0.038
588
(0.024)
(0.027)
Aggravated Assault/Attempted Murder
0.017
0.012
587
(0.033)
(0.037)
p-value
0.557
0.098
Notes: This table reports OLS estimates. The sample consists of all ofﬁcer involved shootings in
Houston from 2000 - 2015, plus a random draw of all arrests for the following offenses, from 2000
- 2015: aggravated assault on a peace ofﬁcer, attempted capital murder of a peace ofﬁcer, resisting
arrest, evading arrest, and interfering in an arrest. The dependent variable is whether the ofﬁcer ﬁred
his gun during the encounter, with each panel presenting results from the indicated subgroups. We
control for civilian gender, a quadratic in age, ofﬁcer demographics, encounter characteristics, weapon
that the civilian was carrying and missings in all variables (i.e. all variables included in the ﬁnal row
of Table 5). Year ﬁxed effects are included in all regressions. Robust standard errors are reported in
parentheses.


Appendix Table 7
Analysis of Subsamples, Ofﬁcer Involved Shootings, Intensive Margin
Black
Hispanic
Observations
Full Sample
−0.095∗∗∗
−0.088∗
1,332
Panel A: Number of Ofﬁcers
2+ Ofﬁcers
−0.149∗∗
−0.119∗∗
374
(0.051)
(0.050)
1 Ofﬁcer
−0.076∗∗
−0.073∗
917
(0.026)
(0.038)
p-value
0.253
0.281
Panel B: Civilian Attack
Civilian Attacked/Drew
−0.105∗∗∗
−0.097∗
1,069
(0.020)
(0.043)
Appeared to Draw/No Attack
−0.038
−0.023
263
(0.033)
(0.023)
p-value
0.122
0.112
Panel C: Ofﬁcer Duty
On-Duty Ofﬁcer
−0.086∗∗∗
−0.073
1,130
(0.019)
(0.041)
Off-Duty Ofﬁcer
−0.137∗∗
−0.067
183
(0.045)
(0.081)
p-value
0.268
0.945
Panel D: Majority Ofﬁcer Unit
White/Asian/Other
−0.094∗∗
−0.111∗
608
(0.037)
(0.054)
Black/Hispanic
−0.095
−0.061
510
(0.052)
(0.045)
p-value
0.983
0.321
Panel E: Call Type
Violent Crime
−0.130∗∗
−0.146
383
(0.049)
(0.066)
Robbery
−0.018
−0.070
263
(0.105)
(0.112)
Auto Crime
0.006
0.015
233
(0.061)
(0.063)
Routine Call
−0.278∗∗
−0.175∗∗
159
(0.112)
(0.071)
p-value
0.002
0.205
Panel F: City
Los Angeles
−0.031
0.001
194
(0.096)
(0.084)
Florida
−0.101∗∗
−0.058
362


(0.051)
(0.085)
Houston
−0.129∗∗
−0.146∗∗
507
(0.065)
(0.070)
Dallas/Austin
−0.104
−0.144∗∗
269
(0.072)
(0.073)
p-value
0.832
0.394
Notes: This table reports OLS estimates. The sample consists of ofﬁcer involved shootings from
Dallas, Austin, six Florida counties, Houston and Los Angeles between 2000 to 2015 where reported
subgroup variables were non-missing. The dependent variable is based on who attacked ﬁrst. It is
coded as 1 if the ofﬁcer attacked the civilian ﬁrst and 0 if the civilian attacked the ofﬁcer ﬁrst. We
control for civilian gender, a quadratic in age, ofﬁcer demographics, encounter characteristics, weapon
that the civilian was carrying and missings in all variables (i.e. all variables included in the ﬁnal row
of Table 6). City and year ﬁxed effects are included in all regressions. Standard errors are clusteed at
the police department level and reported in parentheses.


Appendix Table 8A
Racial Differences in Non-Lethal Use of Force, NYC Stop Question and Frisk
White Mean
Black
Hispanic
Asian
Other Race
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
At Most Hands
0.134
0.021∗∗∗
0.015∗∗∗
−0.005
0.006∗
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.004)
N
4,820,923
At Most Pushing to Wall
0.144
0.022∗∗∗
0.015∗∗∗
−0.006
0.006∗
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.004)
N
4,875,877
At Most Using Handcuffs
0.149
0.022∗∗∗
0.015∗∗∗
−0.005
0.006∗
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.004)
N
4,909,257
At Most Drawing a Weapon
0.150
0.022∗∗∗
0.015∗∗∗
−0.005
0.006∗
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.004)
N
4,913,456
At Most Pushing to Ground
0.152
0.022∗∗∗
0.015∗∗∗
−0.005
0.006∗
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.004)
N
4,923,239
At Most Pointing a Weapon
0.153
0.022∗∗∗
0.015∗∗∗
−0.005
0.006∗
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.004)
N
4,927,057
At Most Using Pepper Spray/Baton
0.153
0.022∗∗∗
0.015∗∗∗
−0.006
0.006∗
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.004)
N
4,927,467
Notes: This table reports OLS estimates. The sample consists of all NYC stop and frisks from 2003-2013 with non-missing use of force data. The dependent variable
is an indicator for whether the police reported using at most a speciﬁc intensity of force during a stop and frisk interaction and is reported in the ﬁrst column. Column
(1) displays the fraction of white civilians who had at most a speciﬁc level of force used against them. Column (2) displays coefﬁcient for black civlians versus white
civlians. Columns (3) - (5), similarly, display coefﬁcients for hispanic, asian or other race civlians versus white civilians. We control for gender, a quadratic in age, civilian
behavior, whether the stop was indoors or outdoors, whether the stop took place during the daytime, whether the stop took place in a high crime area or during a high
crime time, whether the ofﬁcer was in uniform, civilian ID type, whether others were stopped during the interaction, and missings in all variables. Precinct and year ﬁxed
effects were included in all regressions. Standard errors clustered at the precinct level are reported in parentheses.


Appendix Table 8B
Racial Differences in Non-Lethal Use of Force, NYC Stop Question and Frisk
White Mean
Black
Hispanic
Asian
Other Race
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Min. Hands
0.134
0.021∗∗∗
0.015∗∗∗
−0.005
0.006∗
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.004)
N
4,820,923
Min. Pushing to Wall
0.013
0.001∗∗∗
0.001∗∗
−0.001∗∗
−0.000
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.001)
N
3,953,796
Min. Using Handcuffs
0.008
0.001∗∗
0.000
0.000
0.000
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
N
3,932,222
Min. Drawing a Weapon
0.001
0.000
−0.000
−0.000
−0.000∗
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
N
3,903,041
Min. Pushing to Ground
0.002
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
N
3,908,625
Min. Pointing a Weapon
0.001
0.000
−0.000
−0.000∗∗
0.000
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
N
3,902,660
Min. Using Pepper Spray/Baton
0.000
0.000
−0.000
−0.000
−0.000
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
N
3,899,252
Notes: This table reports OLS estimates. The sample consists of all NYC stop and frisks from 2003-2013 with non-missing use of force data. The dependent variable
is an indicator for the minimum intensity of force used during a stop and frisk interaction and is reported in the ﬁrst column. Column (1) displays the fraction of white
civilians with a minimum level of force used against them. Column (2) displays the coefﬁcient for black civlians versus white civlians. Columns (3) - (5), similarly,
display coefﬁcients for hispanic, asian or other race civlians versus white civilians. We control for gender, a quadratic in age, civilian behavior, whether the stop was
indoors or outdoors, whether the stop took place during the daytime, whether the stop took place in a high crime area or during a high crime time, whether the ofﬁcer
was in uniform, civilian ID type, whether others were stopped during the interaction, and missings in all variables. Precinct and year ﬁxed effects were included in all
regressions. Standard errors clustered at the precinct level are reported in parentheses.


Appendix Table 8C
Racial Differences in Non-Lethal Use of Force, NYC Stop Question and Frisk
White Mean
Black
Hispanic
Asian
Other Race
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Max. Hands
0.112
0.017∗∗∗
0.013∗∗∗
−0.004
0.006∗
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
N
4,673,824
Max. Pushing to Wall
0.027
0.005∗∗∗
0.004∗∗∗
−0.002∗∗
0.000
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
N
4,033,958
Max. Using Handcuffs
0.013
0.002∗∗∗
−0.000
0.000
0.000
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.001)
(0.001)
N
3,958,926
Max. Drawing a Weapon
0.002
0.000∗∗∗
0.000
0.000
−0.000
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
N
3,906,202
Max. Pushing to Ground
0.007
0.001∗∗∗
0.001∗
0.001
−0.000
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.001)
N
3,930,420
Max. Pointing a Weapon
0.004
0.001∗∗∗
0.000
−0.000
0.000
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
N
3,916,602
Max. Using Pepper Spray/Baton
0.000
0.000∗∗
−0.000
−0.000
−0.000
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
N
3,900,587
Notes: This table reports OLS estimates. The sample consists of all NYC stop and frisks from 2003-2013 with non-missing use of force data. The dependent variable is an
indicator for the maximum intensity of force used during a stop and frisk interaction and is reported in the ﬁrst column. Column (1) displays the fraction of white civilians
with a maximum level of force used against them. Column (2) displays coefﬁcient for black civlians versus white civlians. Columns (3) - (5), similarly, display coefﬁcients
for hispanic, asian or other race civlians versus white civilians. We control for gender, a quadratic in age, civilian behavior, whether the stop was indoors or outdoors,
whether the stop took place during the daytime, whether the stop took place in a high crime area or during a high crime time, whether the ofﬁcer was in uniform, civilian
ID type, whether others were stopped during the interaction, and missings in all variables. Precinct and year ﬁxed effects were included in all regressions. Standard errors
clustered at the precinct level are reported in parentheses.


Appendix Table 9
Racial Diﬀerences in Non-Lethal Use of Force, NYC Stop and Frisk
Clustering Standard Errors at Diﬀerent Levels
White Mean
Black
Hispanic
Asian
Other Race
Observations
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Clustering at
Precinct
0.153
1.173∗∗∗
1.120∗∗∗
0.951
1.057∗∗
4,927,467
(0.034)
(0.026)
(0.033)
(0.028)
Precinct*Time of Day
0.153
1.173∗∗∗
1.120∗∗∗
0.951∗
1.057∗∗
4,924,303
(0.030)
(0.023)
(0.027)
(0.025)
Block
0.150
1.149∗∗∗
1.108∗∗∗
0.957∗∗∗
1.044∗∗∗
3,973,092
(0.011)
(0.010)
(0.013)
(0.013)
Block*Time of Day
0.150
1.149∗∗∗
1.108∗∗∗
0.957∗∗∗
1.045∗∗∗
3,970,568
(0.010)
(0.009)
(0.012)
(0.013)
Notes: This table reports odds ratios by running logistic regressions. The sample consists of all NYC stop and frisks from 2003-2013
with non-missing use of force data. Rows represent diﬀerent levels at which standard errors were clustered. The dependent variable
is an indicator for whether the police reported using any force during a stop and frisk interaction. Column (1) displays the fraction
of white civilians who have any force used against them. Column (2) displays odds ratios for black civlians versus white civlians.
Columns (3) - (5), similarly, display odds ratios for hispanic, asian or other race civlians versus white civilians. We control for
gender, a quadratic in age, civilian behavior, whether the stop was indoors or outdoors, whether the stop took place during the
daytime, whether the stop took place in a high crime area or during a high crime time, whether the oﬃcer was in uniform, civilian
ID type, whether others were stopped during the interaction, and missings in all variables. Precinct and year ﬁxed eﬀects were
included in all regressions. Standard errors clustered at diﬀerent levels are reported in parentheses.


Appendix Table 10A
Any Use of Force, NYC Stop Question and Frisk
Based on Fraction High School Graduates Terciles
Variance
Tercile 1
Tercile 2
Tercile 3
(1)
(2)
(3)
Mean Tercile 1
1.211∗∗∗
1.099∗
1.177∗∗∗
(0.051)
(0.053)
(0.058)
N
798,326
853,852
622,884
Mean Tercile 2
1.057
1.245∗∗∗
1.158∗∗∗
(0.124)
(0.073)
(0.060)
N
543,268
637,205
433,252
Mean Tercile 3
1.173∗∗∗
1.193∗∗∗
1.230∗∗∗
(0.056)
(0.038)
(0.051)
N
381,172
308,831
340,994
Notes: This table reports odds ratios of subsamples based on the fraction of high school graduates in
precincts. Precinct fractions of high school graduates are calculated by collapsing data across census
tracts received from the American Community Survey 2007-2011. For the rows, we take the tract’s
white population demographic minus the black population demographic and collapse the means of the
differences over precinct. We then take terciles in differences. For the columns, we keep the mean
tercile constant and make terciles of difference in variances of the precinct demographic. The sample
consists of all NYC stop and frisks from 2003-2013 in which use of force and reported subgroup
variables were non-missing. The dependent variable is whether any force was used during a stop
and frisk interaction, with each panel presenting results from the indicated subgroups. We control
for gender, a quadratic in age, civilian behavior, whether the stop was indoors or outdoors, whether
the stop took place during the daytime, whether the stop took place in a high crime area or during a
high crime time, whether the ofﬁcer was in uniform, civilian ID type, whether others were stopped
during the interaction, and missings in all variables. Precinct and year ﬁxed effects were included in
all regressions. Standard errors clustered at the precinct level are reported in parentheses.


Appendix Table 10B
Any Use of Force, NYC Stop Question and Frisk
Based on Median Income Terciles
Variance
Tercile 1
Tercile 2
Tercile 3
(1)
(2)
(3)
Mean Tercile 1
1.205∗∗∗
1.133∗
1.199∗∗∗
(0.057)
(0.086)
(0.083)
N
696,941
605,983
638,740
Mean Tercile 2
1.056
1.217∗∗∗
1.107∗∗∗
(0.086)
(0.036)
(0.019)
N
678,401
499,777
571,959
Mean Tercile 3
1.227∗∗∗
1.222∗∗∗
1.414∗∗∗
(0.068)
(0.046)
(0.123)
N
416,099
402,730
409,154
Notes: This table reports odds ratios of subsamples based on the median household income in
precincts. Precinct median household income is calculated by collapsing data across census tracts
received from the American Community Survey 2007-2011. For the rows, we take the tract’s white
population demographic minus the black population demographic and collapse the means of the dif-
ferences over precinct. We then take terciles in differences. For the columns, we keep the mean tercile
constant and make terciles of difference in variances of the precinct demographic. The sample consists
of all NYC stop and frisks from 2003-2013 in which use of force and reported subgroup variables were
non-missing. The dependent variable is whether any force was used during a stop and frisk interaction,
with each panel presenting results from the indicated subgroups. We control for gender, a quadratic in
age, civilian behavior, whether the stop was indoors or outdoors, whether the stop took place during
the daytime, whether the stop took place in a high crime area or during a high crime time, whether
the ofﬁcer was in uniform, civilian ID type, whether others were stopped during the interaction, and
missings in all variables. Precinct and year ﬁxed effects were included in all regressions. Standard
errors clustered at the precinct level are reported in parentheses.


Appendix Table 10C
Any Use of Force, NYC Stop Question and Frisk
Based on Fraction Unemployed Terciles
Variance
Tercile 1
Tercile 2
Tercile 3
(1)
(2)
(3)
Mean Tercile 1
1.016
1.215∗∗∗
1.166∗∗∗
(0.089)
(0.043)
(0.053)
N
545,204
579,193
490,207
Mean Tercile 2
1.181∗∗∗
1.122∗
1.159
(0.051)
(0.066)
(0.106)
N
711,259
675,538
546,482
Mean Tercile 3
1.300∗∗∗
1.318∗∗∗
1.057
(0.056)
(0.097)
(0.064)
N
477,879
497,303
396,719
Notes: This table reports odds ratios of subsamples based on the fraction of unemployed in precincts.
Precinct fractions of unemployment are calculated by collapsing data across census tracts received
from the American Community Survey 2007-2011. For the rows, we take the tract’s white population
demographic minus the black population demographic and collapse the means of the differences over
precinct. We then take terciles in differences. For the columns, we keep the mean tercile constant
and make terciles of difference in variances of the precinct demographic. The sample consists of all
NYC stop and frisks from 2003-2013 in which use of force and reported subgroup variables were non-
missing. The dependent variable is whether any force was used during a stop and frisk interaction,
with each panel presenting results from the indicated subgroups. We control for gender, a quadratic in
age, civilian behavior, whether the stop was indoors or outdoors, whether the stop took place during
the daytime, whether the stop took place in a high crime area or during a high crime time, whether
the ofﬁcer was in uniform, civilian ID type, whether others were stopped during the interaction, and
missings in all variables. Precinct and year ﬁxed effects were included in all regressions. Standard
errors clustered at the precinct level are reported in parentheses.


Appendix Table 11
Analysis of Subsamples, Any Use of Force, Police Public Contact Survey
White Mean
Coefﬁcient on Black
Coefﬁcient on Hispanic
Observations
Panel A: At least Grab
Black/Hispanic Ofﬁcer
0.011
0.009
0.031∗∗
2,352
(0.007)
(0.013)
White Ofﬁcer
0.008
0.011∗∗∗
0.006∗∗
20,711
(0.003)
(0.003)
p-value
0.800
0.061
Panel B: At least Use Handcuffs
Black/Hispanic Ofﬁcer
0.007
0.008
0.023∗∗
2,340
(0.006)
(0.011)
White Ofﬁcer
0.004
0.010∗∗∗
0.005∗∗
20,626
(0.003)
(0.002)
p-value
0.795
0.126
Panel C: At least Point Weapon
Black/Hispanic Ofﬁcer
0.003
0.003
0.009
2,319
(0.004)
(0.007)
White Ofﬁcer
0.001
0.003∗
0.000
20,539
(0.002)
(0.001)
p-value
0.935
0.237
Panel D: At least Kick/Spray/Baton
Black/Hispanic Ofﬁcer
0.002
−0.001
0.003
2,313
(0.003)
(0.004)
White Ofﬁcer
0.001
0.000
0.000
20,516
(0.001)
(0.001)
p-value
0.647
0.457
Notes: This table reports OLS estimates. The sample consists of all Police Public Contact Survey respondents between 1996 to 2011 in which use
of force and reported subgroup variables were non-missing. The dependent variable is displayed in panel titles, with each panel’s rows presenting
results from the indicated subgroups. We control for civilian gender, a quadratic in age, work, income, population size of civilian’s address, civilian
behavior, contact time, contact type, ofﬁcer race, year of survey and missings in all variables. Standard errors are robust and reported in parentheses.


Appendix Table 12
Racial Differences in Lethal Use of Force
Intensive Margin, Ofﬁcer Involved Shootings, Alternatively Coded Data
Non-Black/
Black
Hispanic
Non-Hispanic
Mean
(1)
(2)
(3)
No Controls
0.565
0.979
0.882
(0.168)
(0.141)
+ Suspect Demographics
0.893
0.788
(0.121)
(0.160)
+ Ofﬁcer Demographics
0.833
0.743
(0.111)
(0.142)
+ Encounter Characteristics
0.824
0.742
(0.123)
(0.158)
+ Suspect Weapon
0.835
0.716∗
(0.120)
(0.138)
+ Fixed Effects
0.817
0.692∗
(0.117)
(0.137)
Observations
1,215
Notes: This table reports odds ratios by running logistic regressions. The sample consists
of ofﬁcer involved shootings from Dallas, Austin, six Florida counties, Houston and Los
Angeles between 2000 to 2015. The dependent variable is based on who attacked ﬁrst.
It is coded as 1 if the ofﬁcer attacked the suspect ﬁrst and 0 if the suspect attacked the
ofﬁcer ﬁrst. The omitted race is non-blacks and non-hispanics. The ﬁrst column gives
the unconditional average of contacts that resulted in an ofﬁcer ﬁring his gun. The second
column reports logistic estimates for black civilians. Each row corresponds to a different
empirical speciﬁcation. The ﬁrst row includes solely racial dummies. The second row adds
civilian gender and a quadratic in age. The third row adds controls for the split of races of
ofﬁcers present at the scene, whether any female ofﬁcers were present, whether multiple
ofﬁcers were present and the average tenure of ofﬁcers at the scene. The fourth row adds
controls for the reason the ofﬁcers were responding at the scene, whether the encounter
happened during day time, and whether the civilian attacked or drew a weapon. The ﬁfth
row adds controls for the type of weapon the civilian was carrying. The sixth row adds
city and year ﬁxed effects. Each row includes missing in all variables. Standard errors are
clustered at the police department level and are reported in parentheses.


Appendix Table 13
Racial Differences in Lethal Use of Force
Extensive Margin, Ofﬁcer Involved Shootings, Alternatively Coded Data
Approx OIS
Taser
Full Sample
With Narratives
W/O Narratives
W/O Narratives
Non-Black/
Non-Hispanic
Black
Hispanic
Non-Black
Black
Non-Black
Black
Mean
Mean
Mean
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
No Controls
0.432
0.745
0.851
0.165
0.650∗∗∗
0.133
0.684∗∗∗
(0.138)
(0.168)
(0.068)
(0.070)
+ Suspect Demographics
0.775
0.909
0.664∗∗∗
0.697∗∗∗
(0.150)
(0.168)
(0.070)
(0.072)
+ Ofﬁcer Demographics
0.769
0.939
0.836
0.782∗∗
(0.189)
(0.243)
(0.111)
(0.090)
+ Encounter Characteristics
0.827
0.789
0.768
0.827
(0.290)
(0.296)
(0.123)
(0.127)
+ Suspect Weapon
0.882
0.966
−
−
(0.496)
(0.575)
(-)
(-)
+ Year
0.989
1.428
0.759∗
0.817
(0.754)
(1.126)
(0.122)
(0.126)
Observations
1,487
4,967
5,991
Notes: This table reports odds ratios by running logistic regressions. The sample for each regression is displayed in the top row. For columns (1)-(3), the sample
consists of all ofﬁcer involved shootings in Houston from 2000 - 2015, plus a random draw of all arrests for the following offenses, from 2000 - 2015: aggravated
assault on a peace ofﬁcer, attempted capital murder of a peace ofﬁcer, resisting arrest, evading arrest, and interfering in an arrest. These arrests contain narratives
from police reports. For columns (4)-(5), the sample consists of all ofﬁcer involved shootings in Houston from 2000 - 2015, plus a sample of arrests where tasers
were used?. These arrests do not contain narratives from police reports. For columns (6)-(7), the sample combines all ofﬁcer involved shootings in Houston from
2000 - 2015, plus a random draw of all arrests for the following offenses, from 2000 - 2015: aggravated assault on a peace ofﬁcer, attempted capital murder of a peace
ofﬁcer, resisting arrest, evading arrest, and interfering in an arrest, plus arrests where tasers were used. These arrests do not contain narratives from police reports.
Data without narratives have no information on ofﬁcer duty, civilian’s attack on ofﬁcer and civilian weapon. The dependent variable is whether the ofﬁcer ﬁred his
gun during the encounter. The omitted race is non-blacks (with the exception of the sample with narratives where the omitted race is non-black/non-Hispanic). The
ﬁrst column for each sample gives the unconditional average of contacts that resulted in an ofﬁcer ﬁring his gun. The second column for each sample reports logistic
estimates for black civilians. Each row corresponds to a different empirical speciﬁcation. The ﬁrst row includes solely racial dummies. The second row adds civilian
gender and a quadratic in age. The third row adds controls for the split of races of ofﬁcers present at the scene, whether any female ofﬁcers were present, whether
multiple ofﬁcers were present and the average tenure of ofﬁcers at the scene. The fourth row adds controls for the reason the ofﬁcers were responding at the scene,
whether the encounter happened during day time, and whether the civilian attacked or drew a weapon. The ﬁfth row adds controls for the type of weapon the civilian
was carrying. The sixth row adds year ﬁxed effects for columns (1)-(3). It adds year as a categorical variable for columns (4)-(7). Each row includes missing in all
variables. For arrest data without narratives missing indicators for ofﬁcer gender, ofﬁcer tenure, and number of ofﬁcers on the scene were removed to minimize loss
of observations in logistic regressions. For all regression, missing indicator for response reason was removed for the same reason. Standard errors are robust and are
reported in parentheses.


Appendix Table 14
Summary Statistics for Oﬃcer Involved Shootings Locations
National
Houston
Austin
Dallas
Los Angeles
Average
County
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Median Age of Males
36.11
31.60
31.20
32.20
33.40
Median Age of Females
38.56
33.50
32.00
34.20
35.70
Median Houshold Income
52282.85
53799.00
56756.00
53468.00
56266.00
Fraction Black
0.11
0.19
0.08
0.17
0.09
Fraction White
0.77
0.61
0.71
0.64
0.52
Fraction High School Graduates (White)
0.88
0.80
0.91
0.84
0.79
Fraction High School Graduates (Black)
0.83
0.86
0.88
0.87
0.87
Fraction Unemployed (White)
0.07
0.06
0.06
0.06
0.09
Fraction Unemployed (Black)
0.14
0.12
0.13
0.13
0.15
Violent Crime Rate
3.68
9.63
3.63
6.64
0.53
Murder and Non-negligient Manslaughter Rate
0.05
0.10
0.03
0.11
0.01
Robbery Rate
1.09
4.54
0.89
3.35
0.14
Aggravated Assault Rate
2.29
4.71
2.46
2.74
0.37
Motor Vehicle Theft Rate
2.21
6.23
2.52
5.88
0.35
Notes: This table reports summary statistics. The ﬁrst column displays the national average of statistics. The second column
displays statistics from Houston, Texas. The third column displays statistics from Austin, Texas. The fourth column displays
statistics from Dallas/Fort Worth/Arlington, Texas for demographics. It displays statistics from Dallas, Texas only for crime
variables.
The ﬁfth column displays statistics from Los Angeles County, California.
Crime Rates are calculated per 1000
inhabitants.


Appendix Table 14
Summary Statistics for Oﬃcer Involved Shootings Locations
National
Florida Counties
Average
Brevard
Duval
Lee
Orange
Palm Beach
Pinellas
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Median Age of Males
36.11
43.80
34.10
43.40
32.50
41.60
44.50
Median Age of Females
38.56
46.20
36.70
46.40
34.60
45.00
47.30
Median Houshold Income
52282.85
50068.00
49964.00
49444.00
49731.00
52951.00
45891.00
Fraction Black
0.11
0.10
0.29
0.08
0.20
0.17
0.10
Fraction White
0.77
0.84
0.62
0.84
0.65
0.76
0.84
Fraction High School Graduates (White)
0.88
0.92
0.90
0.89
0.90
0.90
0.90
Fraction High School Graduates (Black)
0.83
0.79
0.83
0.73
0.81
0.75
0.77
Fraction Unemployed (White)
0.07
0.10
0.08
0.11
0.09
0.09
0.08
Fraction Unemployed (Black)
0.14
0.14
0.15
0.20
0.14
0.17
0.13
Violent Crime Rate
3.68
1.62
6.20
1.85
4.28
1.47
1.09
Murder and Non-negligient Manslaughter Rate
0.05
0.01
0.11
0.02
0.04
0.02
0.01
Robbery Rate
1.09
0.22
1.68
0.53
1.16
0.36
0.15
Aggravated Assault Rate
2.29
1.19
3.87
1.16
2.72
0.94
0.80
Motor Vehicle Theft Rate
2.21
0.36
1.86
0.74
1.63
0.79
0.29
Notes: This table reports summary statistics. The ﬁrst column displays the national average of statistics. The second column
displays statistics from Brevard County, Florida. The third column displays statistics from Duval County, Florida for demo-
graphics. It displays statistics from Jacksonville, Florida for crime variables. The fourth column displays statistics from Lee
County, Florida. The ﬁfth column displays statistics from Orange County, Florida. The sixth column displays statistics from
Palm Beach County, Florida. The seventh column displays statistics from Pinellas County, Florida. Crime rates are calculated
per 1000 inhabitants.