INFLUENCE OF GENDER STEREOTYPES 
ON CAREER CHOICE 
A CROSS-SECTIONAL STUDY ON CATALAN ADOLESCENTS 
Xènia Dalmau Valls, Guillem Sitges i Puy and Mireia Tort Alier 
Tutored by Paolo Sospiro 
-  ECC 14   - 
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 2017/2018 
Abstract 
This thesis provides empirical evidence on how gender stereotypes affect Catalan
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
students’ career choice. In contrast with the existing literature we create a variable that isolates
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
the effect of gender stereotypes and we measure its significance through regression analysis.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Controls for other determinants of career choice are taken into account. We find that although
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
women appear to be more stereotyped than men, gender stereotypes only play a significant role
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
in men’s career choice decision.  
Key words: Gender stereotypes, career choice, SCCT framework.


 
ECC14                                            INFLUENCE OF GENDER STEREOTYPES ON CAREER CHOICE 
INDEX 
 
1. ​Executive Summary
2 
2. ​Introduction
3 
2.1. ​Motivation
3 
2.2. ​Objectives
3 
3. ​Literature Review
4 
3.1. Horizontal segregation in Spain
4 
3.2. SCCT framework
4 
3.3. Influence of gender stereotypes on career choice
6 
4. ​Methodology
8 
4.1. ​Survey design
8 
4.2. ​Econometric framework
9 
5. ​Data and Sample
12 
5.1. Pre-test
12 
5.2. Final test and sample
12 
6. ​Results and Discussion
14 
6.1. Preliminary study
14 
6.2. Analysis of gender
17 
6.3. The model
19 
6.4. Path analysis
22 
7. ​Conclusions
25 
8. ​Bibliography
27 
9. ​Appendix
29 
9.1. Grouping of subjects
29 
9.2. Comparisons of means
30 
9.3. Control variables
32 
9.4. Survey
33 
 
 
1 


 
ECC14                                            INFLUENCE OF GENDER STEREOTYPES ON CAREER CHOICE 
1.
Executive Summary 
This thesis analyses whether gender stereotypes play a significant role in the career
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
choice decision of Catalan students. Although this question has been raised by many other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
researchers, almost none of the existing papers measure gender stereotypes directly. Thus, in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this paper we create a new variable that isolates the effect of gender stereotypes on career
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
choice so we can measure them directly.  
In order to do so, we use a regression analysis with the variable of interest being
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“gender stereotypes” and a set of control variables. The control variables are selected by looking
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
into the other determinants of career choice according to the Social Cognitive Career framework
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Lent et al., 1994) that are correlated to both gender stereotypes and our outcome variable. Data
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for regression analysis is collected in five different Catalan high schools through a survey
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
conducted among 338 students. 
The reminder of this thesis is structured as follows. In section 2 we introduce the topic,
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
motivation and the main objectives of the paper. Section 3 briefly reviews several studies in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
field and explains the framework we use for our analysis. Section 4 describes the methodology
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
we use and in Section 5 we explain how data was collected and the main characteristics of our
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dataset. Section 6 presents the analysis and results of the study and tests the fitness of the
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
model we use. Section 7 concludes. 
 
 
2 


 
ECC14                                            INFLUENCE OF GENDER STEREOTYPES ON CAREER CHOICE 
2.
Introduction 
2.1.
Motivation 
Our society is claiming for a change, a radical transformation to an egalitarian world,
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
where women lead their own lives and professional careers, where we have equal promotion
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
opportunities and labor rights as men do, so that our work can be seriously taken. 
The well-known gender pay gap has been tried to be explained by several different
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reasons such as more women working in part-time jobs relative to men, choosing low-paid
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
occupations and spending greater time out of the workforce, thus, impacting career progression
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and opportunities, in addition to wage discrimination. 
Regulations that prohibit gender wage discrimination are just the first steps. What will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be harder and conclusive is breaking the gender stereotypes chains which pigeonholes female in
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
house and family caring chores. 
2.2.
Objectives 
Our paper aims to determine three main points: (1) whether gender stereotypes in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Catalan adolescents are statistically significant for career choice; (2) if they are significant, how
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
important they are; and (3) whether students without such stereotypes would do a less
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
gender-differentiated choice.  
Thanks to the literature review we will set up a career choice model, based on the Social
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cognitive Career Theory proposed by Lent et al. (1994), and a framework to determine different
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
factors that influence the decision on what to study.  
Through a field experiment, we will determine to which extent catalan adolescents are
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
gender-stereotyped and this influences their career choice. 
Finally, using statistics tools, we will focus on estimating the effect gender stereotypes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on career choice as well as the observable differences between both genders on which intrinsic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and external factors are the main drivers for their career choice. We also will test the fitness of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the model.  
 
 
 
3 


 
ECC14                                            INFLUENCE OF GENDER STEREOTYPES ON CAREER CHOICE 
3.
Literature Review 
In this section we present the theoretical framework behind our study and we explain
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
several concepts that will be used in the remaining of the paper. First, we review the existing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
literature on the natural segregation of men and women into different bachelor programs in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Spain. Then, we present the Social Cognitive Career Theory framework (SCCT), which is the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
prominent approach to career choice decisions in the recent literature. Finally, we explain what
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
gender stereotypes are and how they can be measured, as well as the main findings on how they
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
influence career choice.  
3.1.
Horizontal segregation in Spain 
In 1996-1997 there was a significant larger proportion of women in majors related to
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their traditional social roles such as teaching, psychology, chemistry, medicine, philology and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
humanities. This pre labour market differences led to gender segregation even before any other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
type of discrimination could take place. However, those differences were not attributable to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
lower academic performance of women in high school, but to self-efficacy expectations,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
vocational maturity, gender roles and stereotypes (Mosteiro García, 1997). The Spanish Ministry
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of Education Statistics report that in 2017, there were more than twenty women for each man
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
enrolled in an Early Childhood Education degree in Spain . It is no coincidence that, at the same
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
1
time, five times more women than men, studied a degree in nursing, social work or education in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
general. On the other side, for degrees in informatics, engineering or sports, the number of men
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is nearly ten times higher. This paper analyses whether gender stereotypes are still one of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
explanatory variables for this segregation.  
3.2.
SCCT framework 
A relatively new approach to students’ career choice is the one proposed by Lent et al.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1994), known as the Social Cognitive Career Theory framework (SCCT). The theory explains
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
career choice by incorporating personal input variables (gender, race…), together with social
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
influences,
academic
background,
abilities
(self-perspective)
and
future
job
position
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expectations. The different variables interact to determine personal interest (Interest model).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Based on the interest model, the theory also develops a framework for career choice and career
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
performance. 
1 Data extract from S.G. de Coordinación y Seguimiento Universitario. Ministerio de Educación,
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Cultura y Deporte. Statistics of Spanish students for the 2016/17 academic  year. 
 
4 


 
ECC14                                            INFLUENCE OF GENDER STEREOTYPES ON CAREER CHOICE 
Hence, the SCCT model tries to explain three different things about career development:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) how basic academic interests develop; (2) how educational choices are made; and (3) how
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
education and career success is achieved by the individual. The three building blocks of this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
theory are self-efficacy beliefs, outcome expectations and goals. Self-efficacy beliefs refer to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
capabilities and the confidence one individual has when performing a certain task. Outcome
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
expectations are what people think they will achieve when performing a certain job and those
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
expectations refer not only to economic gains, but also to social and self approval among other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
things. In the follow graph, we can see how all these factors interact when choosing a career
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
track.
 
Figure 1.​  A simplified view of how career-related interests and choices develop over time, according to SCCT 
2
As we already pointed out, the Interest model is the foundation of career choice. This
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
model is the result of the interaction between self-efficacy beliefs and outcome expectations. It
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
assumes that if one individual can perform well in a field and can obtain a positive outcome out
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
of his performance, he will develop an interest for the field. Once the person is interested in a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
particular activity or branch of knowledge he will develop specific career goals related to that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
field.  
The Interest model is the baseline of the Choice model because if a person sets specific
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
goals regarding his career he will undertake actions in order to achieve those goals.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nevertheless, choices are not only influenced by interests but also by environmental variables
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
such as the level of support an individual has from his family and friends, the educational and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
economic barriers and the opportunities one is given. Thus, an important component of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Choice model are the external factors that determine career choices. Those factors, specifically
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 SOURCE: Lent, R. W., Brown, S. D., & Hackett, G. (2002). Social cognitive career theory. Career
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
choice and development, 4, 255-311. 
5 


 
ECC14                                            INFLUENCE OF GENDER STEREOTYPES ON CAREER CHOICE 
gender stereotypes, are the ones we will focus on this paper in order to determine how
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
important they are for student’s career choices.  
The last step of the SCCT framework is the Performance model, which tries to measure
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the level of success or achievement of one’s goals and how persistent one is in front of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
difficulties. The Performance model is influenced by both the ability and motivation of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
individual. These two factors are in turn determined by the self-efficacy beliefs, the outcome
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expectations and the goals one person sets for himself.  
3.3.
Influence of gender stereotypes on career choice 
Once we have explained the framework behind our study we can explain what gender
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stereotypes are and review the existing literature on the influence of gender stereotypes on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
career choice. 
“A gender stereotype is a generalised view or preconception about attributes or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
characteristics that are or ought to be possessed by, or the roles that are or should be performed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
by, men and women.
Gender stereotyping is the practice of ascribing to an individual man or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
woman specific attributes, characteristics or roles by reason only of her or his membership in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
social group of men or women.”​ (Cusack, 2013, p.17) 
A common approach to measure gender stereotypes is the Implicit Association Test
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(GRT-36) designed by Fernandez et al. (2011). This survey is a collection of 36 questions that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
takes into account not only the answers of the respondent, but also her or his response time.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Combining the information provided by the answers and their response time, it is possible to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
determine how much stereotyped a person is. The details of this test are discussed in the next
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
section, when explaining our survey design.  
The existing literature finds a significant influence of gender stereotypes in students’
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
career choice decisions. Even before entering university, high school students already have a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
gender-stereotyped perception of bachelors and careers that should be pursued by men and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
women (Heredia, 2007). Hence, both Nicolao (2014) and Ramaci et al. (2017) find that men are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interested in more realistic professions such as science and business, while women are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interested in social and artistic tracks like teaching or nursing. In spite of this, girls might
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
consider male and female-dominated jobs, while boys only consider male-dominated jobs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Shapiro et al., 2012). This is consistent with the evidence found by van der Vleuten et al. (2016)
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that gender expectations are stricter for boys than for girls and that the more traditional the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 


 
ECC14                                            INFLUENCE OF GENDER STEREOTYPES ON CAREER CHOICE 
gender ideology of a boy the higher the probability of entering a traditional occupation,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
although this is not the case for girls.  
The SCCT framework emphasises the role of self-efficacy and competence beliefs in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
students’ career choice decisions. Thus, if boys perceive themselves as mathematically
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
competent or overestimate their abilities and girls do not, then it is likely that more boys will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
pursue a math, science or technological related career than girls. So cultural gender beliefs could
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be biasing the competence belief of boys and girls, which in turn leads to more boys enrolling in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STEM majors not because they are better at math related subjects, but because they think they
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are (Correl, 2001). Van der Vleuten et al. (2016) present evidence in a similar direction: they
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
find that boys competence beliefs are not affected by gender stereotypes, while girls are.  
Finally, the Choice model of the SCCT framework also takes into account the influence of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
environmental variables other than personal interests. Heredia (2007) and van der Vleuten et
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
al. (2016) find that boys are more influenced by future earnings, power and influence a job has
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
associated than girls, who are more concerned in helping others. Moreover, father’s profession
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is also a determinant variable in career choice for boys (Ramaci et al., 2017).  
 
In conclusion, the Spanish university system exhibits horizontal gender segregation.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
According to the SCCT framework this segregation is partly explained by gender stereotypes,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which influence the interest, self-efficacy and competence beliefs of boys and girls and thus,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their professional careers. Consequently, releasing the society from those stereotypes would
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reduce gender segregation among professional careers and to a larger extent, closing the pay
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
gap.  
 
 
  
 
 
 
7 


 
ECC14                                            INFLUENCE OF GENDER STEREOTYPES ON CAREER CHOICE 
4.
Methodology 
In the previous section we described the framework of our study and the conclusions of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
several papers on how gender stereotypes influence career choice. This section aims to explain
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the method we used to collect data and the model to analyze it in order to estimate the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
importance of gender stereotypes for Catalan students when choosing a career track. Section 4.1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
describes how the survey is designed and section 4.2 the models used to analyse the data. 
4.1.
Survey design 
Data collection for our study was done through an online survey created using Qualtrics,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
an online survey software. The survey consists of two different parts: the first one tries to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3
measure how much stereotyped a person is, and the second part is a collection of personal and
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
demographic questions. 
In order to measure how stereotyped a person is, we use the Implicit Association Test
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(GRT-36) developed by Fernandez et al. (2011). This test is a set of 36 questions describing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
different daily activities. For each question the respondent can choose whether the activity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
should be carried out by a man, a woman or it does not matter who performs it. Moreover, we
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
also measure the time devoted to answer each question. Hence, in order to estimate the level of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stereotyping we take into account those two dimensions: the choice and the response time.  
On the other hand, Fernandez et al. (2011) distinguish between different types of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
questions: some of them are activities carried out in the domestic sphere and others in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
workplace. The Implicit Association Test provides the “right” or stereotyped answer to each one
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of them. So for each category - domestic or work sphere - we have tasks that should be carried
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
out by a man, by a woman and tasks that are neutral (it does not matter who carries them out)
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
according to a gender stereotyped view. A person will be more stereotyped if he or she chooses
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
the socially accepted or “right” answer to each question. Even more, by measuring the response
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
time we know that a stereotyped person will devote more time to answer a neutral question, in
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
contrast to a non-stereotyped one, who sees all questions neutral and has on average, the same
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
response time for all type of questions. Our test also has four control questions to make sure the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
respondent is paying attention to the survey. 
The second part of the survey is a set of personal questions that tries to measure the
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interests and environmental constraints of career choice, as well as some demographic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 See in Appendix 9.4 the survey structure and questions. 
8 


 
ECC14                                            INFLUENCE OF GENDER STEREOTYPES ON CAREER CHOICE 
questions such as age, sex, school, father’s and mother’s nationality and profession, siblings and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
religion. 
The set of questions that tries to measure high school students’ interests in different
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
subjects and the external constraints they face when choosing a bachelor program are a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
collection of questions from Indra-Caro et al. (2017), Indra-Caro et al. (2016) and Chen et al.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2013). Some of the questions are variations of the ones proposed in those papers, some are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
directly taken from them and other are self-made questions following the guidelines proposed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in those studies.  
4.2.
Econometric framework 
Two types of econometric analysis are performed: regression analysis and path analysis. 
Regression analysis 
The analysis of the data is conducted performing a regression analysis of the form:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
.
Y = β0 + β1 * X1 + β2 * X2 + βi * W i 
The dependent variable (Y) is a continuous variable that takes values from negative
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
infinity to positive infinity. Negative values correspond to female-dominated bachelors (each
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
value equals the women/men ratio of a given bachelor) and positive values correspond to
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
male-dominated bachelors (each value corresponds to the men/women ratio of a given degree). 
The two main independent variables (
and
) measure how stereotyped men and
 
 
 
 
 X1 
 X2 
 
 
 
 
 
women are respectively. Both are dummy variables that take a value equal to 1 if the individual
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
shows stereotyped preferences and 0 if he or she does not. A person is considered to be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stereotyped if he or she has a D score that takes a value larger than zero. The D score, in turn, is
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
constructed according to the procedure described in the paper by Fernandez et al. (2011). In
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
order to construct the D score we take the time a given individual spends in each question and
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
we take the difference between the average response time for non-stereotyped responses and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the average response time for stereotyped responses. We divide this value by the standard
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
deviation of his or her response time.  
Finally, we include a set of control variables into the regression that determine career
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
choice. Although Lent et al. (1994) argue that there are a large number of career choice
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
determinants - which we indeed measure in our survey - we only include those that are
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
correlated with our variable of interest (gender stereotypes) in order to avoid omitted variable
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bias. It should be clear that we are not trying to estimate the importance of each determinant of
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 


 
ECC14                                            INFLUENCE OF GENDER STEREOTYPES ON CAREER CHOICE 
career choice as other authors have already done; our only concern is the effect of gender
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stereotypes in career choice.  
Thereby, we include fourteen variables that are correlated to both gender stereotypes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and career choice. A first set of controls are factors influencing career choice like future
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
earnings, if plenty of friends are entering that major, the social acceptance of the bachelor
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
program, the work-life balance, how easy the major is, and whether the person knows someone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
studying in the same field. A second set of controls refer to expectations: satisfaction of the job
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and how easy it is to find one. We also include an environmental variable: whether the parents
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
like the degree. Finally, we include a set of variables regarding ability, interest and tastes
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
aggregated into five categories (humanities, science, social science, technology and design). The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
value of each category is determined taking the average of all the scores that correspond to a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
subject in that category whenever that question is correlated with gender stereotypes. 
Path analysis 
The results of this regression are not valid if the SCCT framework (Lent et al, 1994) does
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
not fit our dataset. Hence, we also conduct a path analysis in order to see how the different
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
variables we measure interact and whether the path diagram is similar to the one depicted in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
the SCCT framework.  
The following table shows the variables used in the analysis as well as how they are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
grouped: 
Group 
Variables name 
Description 
Person Input 
Gender 
Woman=2, Man=1 
Religion 
Religious=1, Not religious=0 
StypedM/StypedW 
1 if a man is stereotyped and a woman is
   
  
 
  
  
stereotyped respectively, 0 otherwise. 
Background environmental 
influences 
influencia_avg 
Takes the average of the questions on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the survey regarding influence. Positive
 
 
 
 
 
values means positive influence on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
career chosen 
Expectation Outcomes 
expectations_avg 
Takes into account outcomes from 
studying the degree chosen such as 
salary, degree of satisfaction...  
10 


 
ECC14                                            INFLUENCE OF GENDER STEREOTYPES ON CAREER CHOICE 
Interest 
preferencia_X 
It takes into account the preferences
 
 
 
 
 
 
over 5 major fields of study: 
●
Hum:humanities 
●
Soc: Social science 
●
Sci: Science 
●
Tech: technology 
●
Des: design 
Supports and Barriers 
experiences 
entorn_avg  
Takes into account if social environment 
dislikes the study choosen. 
factors_X (decomposes into
 
 
 
two variables to capture the
 
 
 
 
 
different effect for women
 
 
 
 
and men) 
Degree of importance of: 
●
Factor_6:
“Study chosen is
 
 
 
 
social acceptable”. 
●
Factor_7:
“Working-life
 
 
balance”. 
●
Factor_12: “More people of
 
 
 
 
my gender is studying my
 
 
 
 
 
same degree”. 
Table 1:​ Variables used for path analysis. Self-made table. 
The set of variables are grouped into different blocks. The first one measures
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expectations variables that are, in turn, determined by person input variables (religion and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
gender) and background environmental variables (external influences). The second one is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
compost of interest variables, while the third one includes variables that determine the support
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and barriers in the decision process, which are also partially explained by person input
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
variables. In each one of this blocks the variables are interrelated, but they are not related to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
variables of other blocks so that we can measure the impact each block has on decision of a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
given degree. Apart from those blocks there are our two variables of interest - stypedM and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
stypedW - that are not related to any other variable. 
 
In conclusion, in order to answer the questions we raised in the introduction of this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
paper we designed a survey that was conducted to high school students. The results of this
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
survey are analysed using an OLS regression that tries to estimate the effect of gender
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stereotypes on career choice while controlling for other variables that correlate not only with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the outcome, but also with how much stereotyped a person is.  
11 


 
ECC14                                            INFLUENCE OF GENDER STEREOTYPES ON CAREER CHOICE 
5.
Data and Sample 
In the previous section we have described the survey and the econometric framework
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
we use for our analysis. The aim of this section is to explain how we collected the data and to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
describe the main demographic characteristics of our dataset.  
5.1.
Pre-test 
The survey was answered by 338 students from 5 different catalan high-schools, mostly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
aged between 16 and 18.  
A pre-test was done in order to test whether the questionnaire we had designed and its
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
implementation had any flaws. Thereby, a first set of 125 students attending Altafulla’s high
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
school answered the survey. The sample was balanced in terms of gender with almost a 50-50
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
split between males and females (see Table 1 below), but it was unbalanced regarding the
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
number of students surveyed in each course.  
Gender/Year 
2n ESO 
4t ESO 
1r BAT 
2n BAT 
Total 
Female 
23 
15 
8 
16 
62 
Male 
22 
16 
11 
14 
63 
Total 
45 
31 
19 
30 
125 
Table 2​: Number of students who did the pre-test by gender and course they are enrolled. Self-made
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
table. 
During the pre-test we noticed that students younger than 15-16 years old had
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
difficulties in understanding some of the questions and that their career was not something they
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
had thought about. Moreover, the grading of some questions was confusing for them and due to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the extension of the survey some students were distracted. Hence, the final questionnaire was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
designed for students aging between 16 and 18. The grading system of the questions was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
simplified, and several control questions were introduced in order to assess the validity of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
answers given by an individual. 
5.2.
Final test and sample 
The modified survey was conducted over a new sample of students from four other high
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
schools and the sample was restricted to students aging between 16 and 18 who were in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
two final years of high school (i.e. preparatory school for entering university). Provided that we
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
had introduced control questions in order to obtain reliable answers to the questionnaire, when
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 


 
ECC14                                            INFLUENCE OF GENDER STEREOTYPES ON CAREER CHOICE 
we first analysed the dataset we eliminated the observations that failed to answer correctly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
those control questions. The final dataset is composed of 128 observations out of the 338 we
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
initially had. The average respondent is a non-practicant catholic, with one sibling and Spanish
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
parents.  
Prior to analyse the data, in order to obtain answers for our research questions, we
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
checked for any unbalances the dataset could have. The first point to highlight, is that the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
remaining observations for analysis are unbalanced in terms of gender: there are 40 male
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
answers, 88 female answers and 4 respondents that do not specify his or her gender (there is an
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
option to do that). Apart from this, if we look into religious beliefs, number of siblings and
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
number of answers for each grade we do not find significant different answers for males and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
females (Table 2). 
 
To sum up, the survey we designed was conducted to 338 students aging between 16
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and 18 from five catalan high schools. From those 338 answers, 127 correspond to a pre-test
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
that allowed us to introduce several improvements to the questionnaire. The final dataset is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
composed of 128 valid observations and the average respondent is a female, non practicant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
catholic, with one sibling and Spanish parents. The sample is unbalanced in terms of gender, but
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
conditional on gender it is balanced for religious beliefs, number of siblings and grade.  
 
 
 
 
13 


 
ECC14                                            INFLUENCE OF GENDER STEREOTYPES ON CAREER CHOICE 
6.
Results and Discussion 
Up until this point have described the methods we use for analysis, as well as the main
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
demographic characteristics of our dataset. In this section we present the main results of our
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
study. We first conduct a preliminary study of the data at our disposal in order to determine if
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
there are any differences across gender (assuming none of them are stereotyped), we then
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
introduce a new variable (i.e. gender stereotypes) that tries to account for the observed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
differences. In subsection 6.3 we develop a model to measure the importance and significance of
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this new variable. Finally, in subsection 6.4 we study how the different variables interact with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
each other in order to yield a career choice and we test the fitness of our data into the SCCT
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
framework. 
6.1.
Preliminary study 
The objective of this preliminary study is to determine whether it exist any significant
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
difference over sex, assuming both genders are not stereotyped.  
Results are presented separately for Men (sexe==1) and Women (sexe==2). Table 3
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
includes only variables with mean significantly different for men and women at a 95%
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
confidence level. 
Variable 
Mean Women 
Mean Men 
 
Variable 
Mean 
Women 
Mean Men 
gustos_4 
 4.34 
3.42 
 
interes_5 
 3.38  
2.13  
gustos_7 
 4.23 
3.16 
 
interes_7 
3.39 
2.29 
gustos_13 
4.02  
2.74 
 
interes_13 
3.06 
2.05 
gustos_15 
4.41 
3.08 
 
interes_15 
 4.05 
 2.39  
gustos_16 
3.88 
2.66 
 
interes_16 
3.02  
 1.84  
gustos_23 
3.07 
2.26  
 
entorn_2 
2.22 
1.50  
Table 3: Variables for which difference in means are significantly different from zero at a 95% confidence
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
level. Self-made table. 
Women appear to have higher preferences (gustos_X) over subjects on the field of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
humanities: “Audiovisual culture“ (gustos_4), “Design” (gustos_7), “Greek” (gustos_13), “History
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of art” (gustos_15), “latin” (gustos_16) and “Spanish literature” (gustos_23). 
14 


 
ECC14                                            INFLUENCE OF GENDER STEREOTYPES ON CAREER CHOICE 
Related to preferences, women appear to have greater interest (interes_X) on the field of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
humanities too: “Artistic drawing” (interes_5), “Design” (interes_7), “Greek” (interes_13),
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“History of art” (interes_15), “latin” (interes_16). 
Variable entorn_2 refers to the statement: “My father does not like the career I have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
chosen” with higher values meaning higher degree of agreement with the sentence. Women
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
appear to be more agree with the statement. 
As described in section 5.Data and Sample, the dataset is unbalanced in terms of sex.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thus, lower observations of men might create too big confidence intervals. In order to better
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
understand potential factors explaining differences in females and males career choice, we have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reduced the confidence interval for the comparison in means by sex. Table 4 shows variables
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
with mean significantly different for man and woman at a 90% confidence level, not appearing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
in table 3. 
Variable 
Mean Women 
Mean Men 
Variable 
Mean Women Mean Men 
expectations_6 
3.64 
2.47  
gustos_22  
3.28  
2.66 
entorn_7 
2.41  
1.74  
interes_27  
4.67 
3.97  
gustos_5 
3.95  
2.97 
 
 
 
Table 4: ​Variables for which difference in means are significantly different from zero at a 90% confidence
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
level. Self-made table. 
Variable expectations_6 refers to the statement: “I think it will be harder to find job
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
opportunities in the field I have chosen due to my gender” with higher values meaning higher
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
degree of agreement with the sentence. Women appear to be more agree with the statement. 
Variable entorn_7 refers to the statement: “I am worried about the possibility of being
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
discriminated in job if working in the field I will study” with higher values meaning higher
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
degree of agreement with the sentence. Women appear to be more agree with the statement. 
Women appear to have higher preferences (gustos_X) over subjects on the field of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
humanities: “Artistic drawing” (gustos_5) and “Catalan literature” (gustos_22).  
Women appear to have more interest on topics related to social issues and social
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
awareness (interes_27). 
15 


 
ECC14                                            INFLUENCE OF GENDER STEREOTYPES ON CAREER CHOICE 
We have also grouped subjects into 5 main fields: Humanities, Social Science, Science,
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Technology and Design . Through comparison of means, we have also concluded that women
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4
have stronger preferences and interest over Humanities and Design while both sex report
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
similar abilities to all the fields (see tables 12-14 annex 9.2). 
We have also observed some interesting differences in response by gender, although
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
they are not statistically significant. 
Contrary to the conclusions of Correl (2001) and Van de Vleuten (2016), we have not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
observed significant differences over self-reported ability. Men tend to report higher ability on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Science. Both sex report similar abilities on Social Science. Women report slightly higher ability
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on Technology and Design. Finally, women report higher ability on Humanities. All at a non
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
statistically significant level. 
Women appear to be more affected by social influence (entorn_X).
Women are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
especially influenced by parents (both father and mother) compared to men. Woman also show
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
higher concern about the fact that her gender is underrepresented in the field she chooses and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the possibility to be discriminated. Mirroring on adults working in the same field of study
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(entorn_5) is the only social influence factor affecting men more. 
Regarding social support/barriers, women appear to be more aligned with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
statement related to people considering her good at the field of study chosen (influencia_1 -
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
influencia_5). While men tend to be more agree with the statements related to parents doing the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
same job as the field of study. (influencia_6 and influencia_7). Thus, it seems that woman rely
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
more on her own abilities while man rely more on specific information about the career and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
future opportunity jobs. 
With respect to work-life balance, women take more into account having time to spend
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with family, friends and hobbies while men are more work focused. Both gender show identical
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
results regarding statements consil_5 and consil_6, that refer to the easiness to find a job and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
greater importance of one's career over partner’s career.  
As regards to factors influencing career choice, women are mainly influenced by interest
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on one field over others (factors_1). Men are highly influenced by extra curricular and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
environmental aspects such as earnings perspective, trends, family and social acceptance. It is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
4 See Appendix 9.1. Grouping of subjects. 
16 


 
ECC14                                            INFLUENCE OF GENDER STEREOTYPES ON CAREER CHOICE 
important to highlight that men show greater preference for jobs performed by people of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
same gender. Both gender show similar concern over grades and preferences. 
Relative to constraints binding career choice, we have found that minimum grade is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
influencing women more. This might be due to the fact that women are trying to enter a more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
demanded career or that, on average, they have lower grades. The last is rejected when
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
comparing self-reported PAU grades by gender. 
In contrast with the previous analysis on factors influencing career choice, women are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
more agree with expectations regarding high earnings while men are more agree with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expectations regarding satisfaction with job. This evidence might be caused by the fact that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
women value interest more than earnings but they assume that, in general, their choice will give
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
them enough earnings. While men value extra-curricular facts more and those factors give them
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
higher satisfaction with their jobs. 
Based on the preliminary analysis we could conclude that women have higher
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
preferences and interest over topics on humanities and social awareness. Thus, the greater
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
presence of women on careers of this field might be caused by differences in tastes. In the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
following section we will try to determine if this differences in tastes are generated by gender
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stereotyped factors. We have also observed that career choice on women is based on interest on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
the field of study while men take into account other factors when choosing their studies. 
6.2.
Analysis of gender 
The existing literature and most of the papers reviewed in section 3.3 that focus on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
gender and labor market do not measure gender stereotypes directly, instead they focus on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
correlations between variables and at most try to capture gender stereotypes effect by all
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
unexplained factors or residuals. One of the main improvements of our study is the introduction
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
of a specific variable that directly captures individuals’ gender stereotyped mindset. 
Based on our findings on the previous subsection, we introduce gender stereotyped
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
variable as a potential explanatory variable for different career choice. 
 
Men 
Women 
Mean Stereotype Score 
-0.03 
0.17 
Table 5: ​Mean values of D score for men and women. Self-made table. 
As explained by Fernandez et al. (2011) in their paper on measuring gender stereotypes,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the higher the D score the greater is the association between activities and stereotyped
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17 


 
ECC14                                            INFLUENCE OF GENDER STEREOTYPES ON CAREER CHOICE 
responses. Although differences are not significant at a 95% confidence level, women appear to
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
be more stereotyped than men. 
We are interested not only in the mean value of stereotyped measure by gender, but also
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in the distribution of stereotyped individuals. The two following graphs show the density of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stereotyped measurement for both man and woman: 
Graph 1: ​Density function of D for men
Graph 2: ​Density function of D for women 
We can observe that the graph for women is more skewed to the right. Hence, more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
women are stereotyped. 
We have conducted a difference in means test to test for significant differences in
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
responses for stereotyped and not stereotyped individuals. We have considered stereotyped
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
individuals those with a D score greater than zero and non-stereotyped individuals otherwise. 
The following tables show the variables with statistically significant differences. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
results are grouped by gender. 
 
Stereotyped Women 
Non-stereotyped Women 
factors_12* 
1.24 
1.69 
consil_5* 
4.26 
3.67 
Table 6: Variables with significant differences for stereotyped and non-stereotyped women. Self-made
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
table. 
 
 
 
18 


 
ECC14                                            INFLUENCE OF GENDER STEREOTYPES ON CAREER CHOICE 
 
Stereotyped Men 
Non-stereotyped Men 
Habilitat_22** 
3.60 
2.61 
Gustos_22* 
3.10 
2.17 
Gustos_26* 
4.25 
3.33 
Table 7: Variables with significant differences for stereotyped and non-stereotyped men. Self-made table.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Notes: *Significant at a 90% confidence level. **Significant at a 95% confidence level. 
Regarding differences between stereotyped and non-stereotyped women, we find that it 
is more important for non-stereotyped women to have people of the same gender working with 
them. Stereotyped women also consider that is easier for them to find a job with their career 
choice. 
Stereotyped men have preferences and report higher ability on Catalan literature and 
History than non-stereotyped man. 
We have also generated a dependent variable from the variable “grau” which refers to
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the study chosen by each individual. This new variable is build from the ratio men to women or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
women to men in the university degree selected. The variable takes values from negative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
infinite to positive infinite. Value of 1 represents parity among gender. Values greater than one
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
show greater presence of male while values lower than one represent greater presence of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
women. This ratios are taken from the Spanish Ministry of Education . 
5
 
Stereotyped 
Non-stereotyped 
Woman 
-1.23 
-1.65 
Man 
1.87 
0.97 
Table 8: ​Mean of “grau” variable by sex and stereotype. Self-made table. 
The results shows that stereotyped Men tend to choose a degree with a higher ratio Men
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
to Women. However, contrary to basic intuition, stereotyped Women tend to choose a degree
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
with also higher ratio Men to Women.  
6.3.
Regression analysis 
In order to test formally the causal effect of gender stereotypes on career choice, we
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have developed an econometric model (explained in section 4.2). 
5 Data extract from S.G. de Coordinación y Seguimiento Universitario. Ministerio de Educación,
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Cultura y Deporte. Statistics of Spanish students for the 2016/17 academic  year. 
19 


 
ECC14                                            INFLUENCE OF GENDER STEREOTYPES ON CAREER CHOICE 
The model consists of an OLS regression to determine the effect of gender stereotypes,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
controlling for several variables correlated with both the dependent variable and one of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
independent variables. The regression takes the following form: 
Y=β​
0​+β​
1​*X​
1​+β​
2​*X​
2​+β​
i​*W​
i 
Y: ​ratio men/women or women/men ​taking continuous values from negative infinity to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
positive infinity 
X​
1​: ​men stereotyped taking value equal to 1 if the individual is an stereotyped man or zero
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
otherwise. 
X​
2​: ​women stereotyped taking value equal to 1 if the individual is an stereotyped woman or
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
zero otherwise. 
Wi: set of control variable correlated with both Y and X1 or X2 
Table 9:​ Description of the variables used for regression. Self-made table. 
This simple model assumes that a non-stereotyped individual, either man or woman,
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
would choose a career with the same ratio. In order to obtain unbiased estimators of X1 and X2,
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
we also include Control variables correlated with the dependent variable and the independent
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
variable. We plot a table of correlation to select Control Variables. Selection criterion is based on
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
keeping those variables correlated at least at 0.1 with both Y and Xi. The following variables are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
used as control variables: factors_3,4,6,7,9,10,13 ; expectations_4,5; entorn_2; habilitat_3,10,20;
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
interes_5,7,10,13,15,16,19,27; gustos_2,7,13,22. Appendix 9.3 contains the correlations between
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the selected variables with the outcome and the variables of interest. 
We have aggregate this variables into different groups: 
●
Variables factors are not aggregate but we eliminate factors_13 as it refers to “Others”. 
●
Habilitat_x, interes_x and gustos_x all refer to opinion over a set of subjects in school. We
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
have aggregate them into 5 main fields: humanities, science, social science, technology
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and design following the same structure as in the previous section. Only 3 of this areas
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
have control variables. 
After regressing variable grau on the two explanatory variables and the set of control 
variables, we obtain the following results: 
 
 
20 


 
ECC14                                            INFLUENCE OF GENDER STEREOTYPES ON CAREER CHOICE 
Table 10:​ Determinants of career choice 
stypedM 
2.779** 
(0.89) 
stypedW 
0.152 
(0.68) 
factors_3 
1.602** 
(0.374) 
factors_4 
1.904** 
(0.608) 
factors_6 
-0.585* 
(0.35) 
factors_7 
-1.165** 
(0.396) 
factors_9 
-0.797* 
(0.439) 
factors_10 
0.059 
(0.334) 
expectations_4 
0.221 
(0.467) 
expectations_5 
0.069 
(0.232) 
entorn_2 
-0.016 
(0.237) 
subject_hum 
0.18 
(0.276) 
subject_sci 
0.513* 
(0.293) 
subject_des 
-0.527** 
(0.24) 
constant 
-3.9 
(3.041) 
Notes: *Significant at a 90% confidence level. **Significant at a 95% confidence level. 
The results of the regression evidence that gender stereotypes play a significant role in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
men’s career choice decision, although this is not the case for women.  
21 


 
ECC14                                            INFLUENCE OF GENDER STEREOTYPES ON CAREER CHOICE 
This result might seem to contradict the previous result that women are more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stereotyped than men, but in fact it does not. The regression does not look in to how much
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stereotyped a person is, but rather how his or her stereotypes affect the decision of career
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
choice. By controlling for relevant environmental factors, expectations, abilities, interests and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tastes we isolate the part of gender stereotypes that fully drives career choice. Hence, we find
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that despite being highly stereotyped those gender stereotypes do not influence women’s career
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
choice (environmental variables and personal interests do). Whereas for men gender
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stereotypes have a direct impact on career choice.  
6.4.
Path analysis 
Data fit of the SCCT model was also studied. We measured several parameters in order
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to choose the path diagram that best fits the data. Measures used are: chi-squared test of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
significance, Root mean squared error of approximation (RMSEA), Comparative fit index (CFI),
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tucker-Lewis index (TLI), and Standardized root mean squared residual (SRMR).
The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
estimations of this measures are shown in the following table: 
 
Value 
p>chi2 
0.21 
RMSEA 
0.04 
CFI 
0.861 
TLI 
0.772 
SRMR 
0.044 
 
   ​Table 11: ​Measurement of fitness 
Hoyle (1995) and Hooper et al. (2008) suggest values at least 0.9 or above for CFI and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TLI to consider our model to be correctly fitting the data. They also propose a cut-off of 0.05 for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
RMSEA and SRMR. Finally, chi2 should not be significant. 
According to the postestimation values, our model fits the data relatively well. CFI and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TLI are close to 0.9. The authors also highlight the fact that this measures might not be suitable
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for samples lower than 150 observations. Our dataset contains 128 observations. Thus, we
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
might not rely completely on these results. Moreover, RMSEA and SRMR are below 0.05. Finally,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
p-value of chi2 is well-above the minimum significance level of 0.05. 
22 


 
ECC14                                            INFLUENCE OF GENDER STEREOTYPES ON CAREER CHOICE 
The selection criterion for the variables to include in the model is based in the SCCT
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conceptual diagram proposed by Lent et al. (2002), as explained in section 4. We estimated the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
path shown in Figure 2 following the directions of the SCCT model. Several remarkable aspects
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were found. 
Figure 2:​ Path analysis of the SCCT model for our dataset. Self-made figure with Stata. 
Our analysis resulted in several statistically significant causal relationship between
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different variables. Dummy religion is significant at a 90% confidence level causing entorn_avg
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
to be lower and expectations_avg to be higher. Entorn_avg measures negative impact of social
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
environment on studies chosen. Thus, religious people perceive more positive feedback on their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
choices. There could be two possible explanations to this fact: either religious people tend to be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
more tolerant and support individual interest or a religious individual tends to choose a study
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
degree taking already into account the degree of conformity of her community. Dummy religion
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is also significant for expectations_avg meaning that a religious individual has higher
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expectations on future outcomes.  
Gender is also statistically significant for explaining differences in entorn_avg. Woman
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
perceive more negative feedback on their choices. A potential explanation to this fact is that
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
woman are more prone to choose degrees male dominant which might be difficult to accept for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their families. 
23 


 
ECC14                                            INFLUENCE OF GENDER STEREOTYPES ON CAREER CHOICE 
Preferences over a field also play a role. They are significant for technology, social
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
science and design fields. Preferences over social science and technology increases the chances
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to choose a male dominated degree while preferences over design increases probability of
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
choosing a female dominated degree. Gender is highly correlated with preference only for
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
humanities and design. Hence, high significance and positive impact on “grau” of preferences
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
over technology while not being correlated with gender means that both man and woman have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the same interest on technology. Moreover, this interest leads to choosing degrees with higher
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ratio of man (correlated with degrees on the field of technology, thus, some aspects must be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
preventing woman to enroll on technology studies.  
Factor_6 is statistically significant for women and has a negative impact, meaning that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
women more concerned about others opinion tends to choose a degree with higher proportion
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
of women. This might reflect the fact that, although the individual is not stereotyped, she finally
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
chooses a female-role study due to environmental factors. This finding is supported by the
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
empirical evidence finding that being a stereotyped woman does not imply higher probability of
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
choosing a female-role degree (stypedW is not statistically significant). In the other hand,
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stereotyped man tend to choose a male-role degree, at a statistically significant level. These
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
findings are aligned with the conclusions from Shapiro et al. (2012). 
 
In conclusion, women have higher preferences and interest in the field of humanities,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
social issues and awareness. They are affected by social influence, especially that of parents, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are concerned for being underrepresented or discriminated in the field of their studies.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Although they are more influenced by gender stereotypes than men their career choice is not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
significantly influenced by those. On the other hand, men are more work-focused than women
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and take into account their earnings perspective, family and social acceptance when choosing a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
job. Gender stereotypes play a significant role in their career choice. In this section we also have
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proven that the variables of our dataset interact in a similar way as the one depicted by Lent et
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
al. (1994) in the SCCT framework. Hence, the underlying theory of our study further validates
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
our results. 
 
 
24 


 
ECC14                                            INFLUENCE OF GENDER STEREOTYPES ON CAREER CHOICE 
7.
Conclusions 
In light of the weakness of the existing literature in yielding a reliable measure of how
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
gender stereotypes influence career choice, in this paper we have tried to shed light into this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
question. By conducting a survey over a sample of 338 Catalan students we have been able to
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
create a variable that measures the impact of gender stereotypes of catalan adolescents on their
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
career choice. We are quite confident that such variable isolates the effect of gender stereotypes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
because we have controlled for any other determinants of career choice contemplated in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
work of Lent et al. (1994) that correlate with gender stereotypes and our outcome variable. 
The results of our analysis suggest that although women are more stereotyped than
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
men, gender stereotypes only play a significant role in men’s career choice. Hence, stereotyped
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
men tend to choose a major with a larger ratio men to women, while stereotyped women also
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tend to choose a major with a larger ratio men to women.  
In the other hand, regardless of being stereotyped or not, women are more binded by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
social judgement. Thus, women tend to choose a more socially accepted degree. 
Regarding intrinsic motivations of career choice, we find that women exhibit a higher
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
preference and interest in the field of humanities, topics related to social issues and awareness.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We do not find statistically significant differences in reported abilities across gender. If we look
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
into external factors that influence career choice we find that women are affected by social
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
influence (especially that of parents), underrepresentation and discrimination in a given job or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
major. They also state that minimum grade is a constraint when choosing a bachelor program,
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
not because they have lower grades than men but because they tend to choose high-demanded
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
degrees. The only social influence for men is whether they know any adults working in that field
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
or not. We also find that women value more work-life balance, while men are more work
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
focused. 
Thus, factors that influence career choice for women are their interest in the field and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
how people sees them in terms of abilities, while men are affected by future earnings
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
perspective, family and social acceptance as well as the jobs people of their same gender
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
perform. A path analysis confirms that the SCCT model fits our dataset quite well. 
All in all, if we come back to the research questions stated in subsection 2.2 of this paper
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
we can conclude that gender stereotypes are indeed a statistically significant variable that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
drives career choice for men, but not for women. Even more, they are a quite important driver
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
of
career
choice
for
men
so
that
students
without
such
stereotypes
enter
less
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 


 
ECC14                                            INFLUENCE OF GENDER STEREOTYPES ON CAREER CHOICE 
gender-differentiated majors. However, this is just the opposite for women as the less
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stereotyped they are, the more gender-differentiated choice they produce. 
Thereby, any policy directed to eradicate gender stereotyping from early ages can have a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
huge impact not only on career choice, but also on labour market horizontal segregation.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Teachers and parents are at the core of this transformation, but governments and authorities
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
might have an important role too. Promoting gender-neutral schools like the ones in place in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sweden might be the first step to eradicate those stereotypes among the youngest generations. 
As all research, our study has some limitations. One of them is short number of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
observations and the specificity of the geographical, cultural and economic context of those
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
observations (all observations used in the final analysis come from Lestonnac de Barcelona High
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
School). Observations were homogeneous in terms of nationality and religion as well. Thus,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
external validity of the study should be considered.  
We suggest to extend the study to larger and more diverse samples to capture the effect
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of demographic variables. Moreover, other econometric models could be used, such as discrete
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
choice models. 
 
26 


 
ECC14                                            INFLUENCE OF GENDER STEREOTYPES ON CAREER CHOICE 
8.
Bibliography 
Chen, J. A., & Usher, E. L. (2013). ​Profiles of the sources of science self-efficacy. Learning and
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Individual Differences, 24, 11-21. 
Correll, S. J. (2001). ​Gender and the career choice process: The role of biased self-assessments.
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
American journal of Sociology, 106(6), 1691-1730. 
Cusack, S. (2013). G​ender Stereotyping as a Human Rights Violation: Research Report. Prepared
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
for
the
UN
Office
of
the
High
Commissioner
for
Human
Rights.
Available
at:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Issues/Women/WRGS/StudyGenderStereotypin​g.doc 
Fernández, J., Quiroga, M. Á., del Olmo, I., Aróztegui, J., & Martín, A. (2011). ​Objective assessment
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
of gender roles: Gender Roles Test (GRT-36)​. The Spanish journal of psychology, 14(2), 899-911. 
Heredia, E. B. (2007). ​Equilibrio de género en la preparación profesional. Revista Fuentes, (7),
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6-19. 
Hooper, D., Coughlan, J., & Mullen, M. (2008). ​Structural equation modelling: Guidelines for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
determining model fit.​ Articles, 2. 
Hoyle, R. H. (1995). ​Structural equation modeling: Concepts, issues, and applications.​ Sage. 
Inda-Caro, M., Rodríguez-Menendez, M. D. C., & Torío-López, S. (2017). ​Evaluación del modelo
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cognitivo social de desarrollo de la carrera para la predicción de las metas en las materias
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tecnológicas de estudiantes de bachillerato. 
Inda-Caro, M., Rodríguez-Menéndez, C., & Peña-Calvo, J. V. (2016). ​Spanish high school students’
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
interests in technology: Applying social cognitive career theory. Journal of Career Development,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43(4), 291-307. 
Lent, R. W., Brown, S. D., & Hackett, G. (1994). ​Toward a unifying social cognitive theory of career
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
and academic interest, choice, and performance.​ Journal of vocational behavior, 45(1), 79-122.  
Lent, R. W., Brown, S. D., & Hackett, G. (2002). ​Social cognitive career theory. Career choice and
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
development​, 4, 255-311. 
Mosteiro García, M. J. (1997). ​El género como factor condicionante de la elección de carrera: hacia
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
una orientación para la igualdad de oportunidades entre los sexos. 
27 


 
ECC14                                            INFLUENCE OF GENDER STEREOTYPES ON CAREER CHOICE 
Nicolao, J. S. (2014). ​The Effects of Gender Stereotyping on Career Choice Among Secondary
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Students in Dar es Salaam​ (Doctoral dissertation, The Open University of Tanzania). 
Ramaci, T., Pellerone, M., Ledda, C., Presti, G., Squatrito, V., & Rapisarda, V. (2017). ​Gender
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stereotypes in occupational choice: a cross-sectional study on a group of Italian adolescents.
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Psychology research and behavior management, 10, 109. 
S.G. de Coordinación y Seguimiento Universitario. Ministerio de Educación, Cultura y Deporte.
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
(2017).
Estadística
de
estudiantes
universitarios.
Curso
2016-2017.
Retrieved
from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
http://estadisticas.mecd.gob.es/EducaDynPx/educabase/index.htm?type=pcaxis&path=/Unive
rsitaria/Alumnado/Estadistica/2016-2017/1GradoCiclo/CapituloI/&file=pcaxis 
Shapiro, M., Deyton, P., Martin, K. L., Carter, S., Grossman, D., & Hammer, D. E. (2012). ​Dreaming
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
Big: What’s Gender Got to Do with It? The Impact of Gender Stereotypes on Career Aspirations of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Middle Schoolers​ (Simmons School of Management, Girl Scouts of America). 
van der Vleuten, M., Jaspers, E., Maas, I., & van der Lippe, T. (2016). ​Boys’ and girls’ educational
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
choices in secondary education. The role of gender ideology.​ Educational Studies, 42(2), 181-200. 
 
 
28 


 
ECC14                                            INFLUENCE OF GENDER STEREOTYPES ON CAREER CHOICE 
9.
Appendix 
9.1.
Grouping of subjects 
Subject group 
Subjects included 
Humanities 
Music (1), Greek (13), Art history (15), Latin (16), Spanish 
literature (23), English (24), Philosophy (25) 
Social Sciences 
Business economics (8), Geography (12), History (26) 
Science 
Biology (2), Science of the earth and environment (3), 
Electronics (9), Chemistry (20) 
Technology 
Technical drawing (6), Electronics (9) 
Design 
Audiovisual culture (4), Artistic drawing (5), Design (7) 
 
 
29 


 
ECC14                                            INFLUENCE OF GENDER STEREOTYPES ON CAREER CHOICE 
9.2.
Comparisons of means 
Table 12: ​Comparison of means in terms of abilities 
Variable 
Mean men 
Mean women 
habilitat_hum 
3.921* 
(0.16) 
4.245* 
(0.076) 
habilitat_soc 
4.57* 
(0.15) 
4.54* 
(0.112) 
habilitat_sci 
3.75* 
(0.192) 
3.49* 
(0.127) 
habilitat_tech 
4.26* 
(0.239) 
4.39* 
(0.171) 
habilitat_des 
4.895* 
(0.228) 
5.008* 
(0.135) 
Note: *Significant at a 95% confidence level. 
 
Table 13:​ Comparison of means in terms of interest 
Variable 
Mean men 
Mean women 
interes_hum 
2.613* 
(0.146) 
3.344* 
(0.102) 
interes_soc 
3.474* 
(0.154) 
3.807* 
(0.127) 
interes_sci 
3.072* 
(0.187) 
3.216* 
(0.133) 
interes_tech 
3.026* 
(0.244) 
3.045* 
(0.2) 
interes_des 
2.509* 
(0.223) 
3.519* 
(0.179) 
Note: *Significant at a 95% confidence level. 
 
 
30 


 
ECC14                                            INFLUENCE OF GENDER STEREOTYPES ON CAREER CHOICE 
Table 14:​ Comparison of means in terms of tastes 
Variable 
Mean men 
Mean women 
gustos_hum 
2.879* 
(0.174) 
3.717* 
(0.103) 
gustos_soc 
3.79* 
(0.181) 
4* 
(0.128) 
gustos_sci 
3.368* 
(0.194) 
3.454* 
(0.136) 
gustos_tech 
3.592* 
(0.244) 
3.608* 
(0.196) 
gustos_des 
3.184* 
(0.255) 
4.174* 
(0.167) 
Note: *Significant at a 95% confidence level. 
 
 
31 


 
ECC14                                            INFLUENCE OF GENDER STEREOTYPES ON CAREER CHOICE 
9.3.
Control variables 
Control Variable 
Y 
X1 
X2 
factors_3 
 0.3360  
 -0.0324  
-0.1760 
factors_4 
 0.1922  
-0.0316  
-0.1160  
factors_6 
-0.1120  
-0.0180  
-0.1285  
factors_7 
-0.2173  
0.0207  
-0.1300  
factors_9 
-0.1412  
-0.0387  
-0.1089 
factors_10 
0.1489  
0.1518  
-0.1727  
expectations_4 
 0.1108  
0.1611  
-0.1370 
expectations_5 
 0.1009  
 -0.1149  
-0.0912 
entorn_2 
-0.1434  
-0.1646  
0.1726 
subjects_hum 
-0.1693  
-0.2038  
0.1281  
subjects_sci 
 0.1876  
0.1061  
-0.1254  
subjects_des 
 -0.2120  
-0.1377  
0.0883 
 
 
32 


 
ECC14                                            INFLUENCE OF GENDER STEREOTYPES ON CAREER CHOICE 
9.4.
Survey 
Due to the extension of the survey we cannot directly reproduce it in this appendix. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
exact
questions
and
format
can
be
examined
in
the
following
link:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
https://pompeufabraeec.eu.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/SV_6Pxs5TbnM1Bocex  
33