LGBT Applicants and Challenges 
for Admission: 
Five Cases
by Benjamin S. Baum 


FALL 2012 JOURNAL OF COLLEGE ADMISSION |
25
WWW.NACACNET.ORG
Case One: Finances and Families
One day in April 2010, I received an email from a public high school 
guidance counselor. The counselor’s student, John, had applied to 
Tufts, been admitted, received financial aid, yet the counselor told 
me that John could not afford Tufts. John and his family, based 
on their need, were asked to pay approximately $10,000 (known 
as the “expected family contribution”). His parents refused to pay. 
Why?
John’s parents refused to pay because John is gay. 
Like many LGBT teenagers, John began to come out to friends 
in high school before he told his family. As news spread at his 
suburban public school, John’s younger siblings discovered his 
sexuality and reported it to their parents. When his parents con-
fronted John and he admitted that he was gay, John’s parents beat 
him. He vividly described his mother’s physical abuse; ironically 
her wedding ring cut into his face. The police got involved, a report 
was filed, and John moved in with friends for the remainder of his 
senior year of high school. 
Without his parents’ financial support, John had no way to pay for 
college. According to most college financial aid policies, John’s 
parents were financially able to pay at least part of his tuition, so 
John did not qualify for any additional need-based financial aid. 
This was the conundrum. 
It is not unusual for students and parents to select a college based 
on cost. Tufts meets the full demonstrated need of each admitted 
student by providing need-based financial aid. Some colleges offer 
merit-based financial aid over-and-above need that attracts these 
students and their families. Other parents, financially able to pay 
tuition at a place like Tufts, might refuse to pay because they do 
not like a child’s choice of major, their friends or the distance from 
home. Parents cannot refuse to pay tuition and expect to receive 
financial aid. Any other rule would defeat the whole premise of 
supplying financial aid to those who need it. 
I made the argument to Tufts’ director of financial aid that she should 
use her professional discretion to treat John as an independent 
minor. Such a maneuver is known as a “dependency override.” As 
an independent minor, John’s financial need would no longer be 
a function of his parents’ resources, so he would qualify for full 
need-based financial aid. Under federal law, which applies to any 
institution using federal funds for financial aid, a director can make 
a dependency override in a number of specific circumstances, such 
Few professional processes are more personally intrusive than the college application. 
It demands information about your family, your finances, your interests, and your desires. 
For lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) applicants in their teenage years who 
may not be comfortable with their sexuality, admission officers need be sensitive to a key 
difference that can make their circumstances especially complex. That difference: in most 
cases, an LGBT applicant does not have LGBT parents, and his or her parents may or may 
not know or approve of their child’s sexuality. Further, the applicant may not be “out” to 
anyone yet or perhaps even ready to acknowledge LGBT orientation.
This article highlights five cases from my experience coordinating LGBT recruitment 
at Tufts University (MA). The names and some details are modified to protect the 
individuals’ privacy.


| FALL 2012 JOURNAL OF COLLEGE ADMISSION
26
WWW.NACACNET.ORG
as age, orphan status, marriage, and homelessness, though none 
of these were John’s case. However, a director can also “make… 
a documented determination of independence by reason of other 
unusual circumstances” (HEA §480(d)(7)).
Did John’s case qualify as one of “unusual circumstances?” By the 
broad language of federal law, one might think so. A dependency 
override is permitted in circumstances where it would be inap-
propriate to expect a parental contribution toward the student’s 
college expenses. Per United States Department of Education 
Dear Colleague Letter (GEN) 03-07, any override must involve (1) 
a case-by-case determination of unusual circumstances and (2) 
documentation of those unusual circumstances. 
However, the Department of Education provides the following list 
of circumstances that are not unusual, all of which seemed to be 
the situation with John:
1.	
Parents refusing to contribute to the student’s education
2.	
Parents unwilling to provide information on the application or 
for verification
3.	 Parents not claiming the students as a dependent for income 
tax purposes
4.	 Students demonstrating total self-sufficiency (GEN 03-07).
Given these limitations, there was only one factor in John’s case 
that made his dependency override possible, his physical abuse 
at the hands of his parents. The Department of Education specifi-
cally says that “an abusive family environment or abandonment by 
parents” could constitute the requisite unusual circumstances. 
I spoke with John’s guidance counselor, acquired written statements 
from her and from John himself, and procured the police report. 
With this documentation, the director made a dependency override.
As a result, John received his financial aid and enrolled at Tufts, 
but his case raises big questions about how sexual orientation and 
financial aid eligibility are intertwined. What if there had not been 
physical abuse? Without this abuse, could the director have used 
her discretion to make a dependency override? Should she have?
While the law is specific about what cannot count toward a depen-
dency override, it gives broad latitude to financial aid officers to 
determine what counts as unusual circumstances (GEN 03-07).
I propose one way to employ this broad latitude is through the 
lens of the individual university’s non-discrimination statement. 
At Tufts, “[i]t is the policy of the University not to discriminate 
on the basis of race, color, national or ethnic origin, age, religion, 
disability, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity and expression, 
or status as a veteran, in the administration of its educational 
policies, admissions policies, employment policies, scholarship 
and loan programs, and athletic or other university-sponsored pro-
grams.” A denial of financial aid to a student whose parents refuse 
to pay for Tufts on the basis of the child’s sexual orientation could 
be said to implicate the non-discrimination statement.
Ideally, a financial aid policy needs to be flexible enough to ac-
commodate the unusual circumstances of some LGBT applicants, 
whether or not they suffer physical abuse. A four-pronged require-
ment for a dependency override could consist of:
1.	
Parental refusal to pay for the education of a child on the basis 
of a protected category in the university non-discrimination 
statement
2.	
Parental refusal to pay for basic, daily expenses of the child 
(including food and housing) on the basis of a protected cat-
egory in the university non-discrimination statement
3.	 Parental behavior that rises to the level of physical or emo-
tional abuse
4.	 Third party documentation of such refusal, discrimination 
and abuse.
There are several advantages to the above-suggested policy. 
The policy is rooted in a non-discrimination statement and does 
not single out one class of students; it could protect other students 
who are discriminated against for their religious beliefs, for instance. 
The policy prevents gaming of the system by giving ultimate authority 
to the university officer and by looking for serious signs of familial 
support breakdown beyond refusal to pay for education. The policy 
also meets the federal standard of “unusual circumstances” because 
a university officer must find abuse and document her determinations. 
Case Two: Sex and Prejudice
One day in May, a colleague forwarded an email to me from Mr. 
Smith, the parent of a student who had not been admitted to Tufts. 
In fact, Mr. Smith’s son had not even applied to Tufts—Mr. Smith’s 
reason to email was an effort to sabotage the candidacy of his son’s 
high school classmate, Henry. Henry had been admitted to Tufts 
and intended to enroll for the fall. Mr. Smith not only emailed, but 
one day he arrived on campus, apparently having driven about one 
thousand miles just to inform our office that Henry should never 
have been admitted.


FALL 2012 JOURNAL OF COLLEGE ADMISSION |
27
WWW.NACACNET.ORG
Mr. Smith told our office that Henry had raped his son. In Mr. 
Smith’s words, Henry engaged in the “homosexual rape of a non-
gay, non-consenting fellow male student whom the perpetrator 
knew to have a girlfriend.” Mr. Smith’s mission was to ensure that 
his son’s rapist did not enroll in college. Henry had problems well 
beyond his admission to Tufts; Mr. Smith had pressed charges 
against Henry in his home county and successfully derailed a 
scholarship he had been awarded. 
In following up on the circumstances, I found a complicated story. 
Henry had the full support of his high school, which did not believe 
the rape allegations were founded. In fact, other students reported 
that Henry’s accuser had been secretly dating Henry, and it was 
only when Henry’s accuser informed his family of their relationship 
that chaos broke loose. As the parent informed us, his son was not 
gay (despite evidence to the contrary) and the sex was nonconsen-
sual (despite evidence to the contrary). Henry was never convicted 
of a crime.
Leaving aside the details of Henry’s case, the admission process, 
which delves so deeply into applicants’ personal lives, is fertile 
ground for prejudice related to sexual orientation. Henry’s orien-
tation, his legal troubles and his admission to college were all 
inextricably bound. A mechanical response to allegations of rape, 
a blanket rule to keep such applicants at bay, disproportionately 
impacts LGBT applicants, due to widespread prejudice in their 
home communities. In Henry’s situation, there were weeks of com-
munication between his high school and our office, with university 
counsel and, in the end, Henry himself. This is not typical fare 
for college admission officers, but it demonstrates the depth of 
involvement prejudice against LGBT people can necessitate just to 
make their applications’ viable. In the end, Henry enrolled at Tufts.
Case Three: Gender Identity and Change
The director of the Tufts LGBT Center called me because an ap-
plicant we had admitted was in the process of transitioning from a 
woman to a man. When Peter had applied to Tufts, there were no 
LGBT indicators in his file, and he identified himself as a woman 
and used a woman’s name. Now Peter wanted our office to aid his 
transition to college by erasing any records of his former gender. 
Going forward, Peter would only be identified as a man (known as 
“stealth trans”). 
Changing genders is complicated not only for the person doing 
so, but also for those people who know about the former gender. 
Which pronoun do you use? Which pronoun do you use when refer-
ring to things that happened before the change of gender? Even 
more complex is when the person may be undergoing surgery, 
but in stages. Peter would have “top” surgery before arriving on 
campus but wait until later for “bottom” surgery. Starting at Tufts, 
Peter wanted a fresh beginning with a new name and new gender 
identity, and as little baggage as possible.
The director of the LGBT Center and I went about trying to ef-
fect these changes. In the process, we made a deliberate effort to 
keep the circumstances and name of the student from becoming 
widespread. He got approval from the Office of Residential Life 
to house Peter in a single room without a roommate. I spoke with 
the dean of undergraduate admission and a single member of 
our support team—the only two people in the office aware of the 
situation—to have name and gender on such forms as housing, 
orientation and registration changed. Most of these changes could 
be made electronically, but part of the process involved black-
ing out his former name and gender on the application materials 
and replacing these with his new name and gender, plus printing 
new labels for Peter’s application folder—the same application 
materials and folder that would migrate to Student Services for his 
permanent academic record. The only indicator of Peter’s former 
name and gender remained on a document that I chose not to 
change, his high school transcript. There, I attached a signed let-
ter noting the change in name and confirming that this high school 
transcript belonged to Peter.
Case Four: Subtle Recruitment 
There is a growing industry of recruitment tools for LGBT appli-
cants to college. The best known of these is the traditional college 
fair with a twist—fairs that are especially for LGBT applicants and 
LGBT friendly colleges. The Campus Pride organization’s fairs in 
Boston and New York feature a large collection of colleges. 
Who attends an LGBT college fair? You see a heart-melting col-
lection of mothers with their gay sons and occasional groups of 
LGBT friends who have shown up together. These students are 
“out.” They are more or less comfortable with their sexuality (or as 
comfortable as any teenager can be with issues of sexuality) and 
more or less comfortable visiting an LGBT friendly college fair as 
much as any other college fair, which they probably also attended. 
Who does not attend an LGBT college fair? The vast majority of 
high school students struggling with their sexuality, or those not 
out to their friends or families. As one recent study showed, only 
about 46 percent of LGBT high school seniors are out to their 
family members (Rankin, et al. 2010). This is true even across 
vast socioeconomic and cultural divides. There is a fair in New 
York City, for example, sponsored by the Hetrick-Martin Institute 
and hosted at the Harvey Milk High School (the only public high 


| FALL 2012 JOURNAL OF COLLEGE ADMISSION
28
WWW.NACACNET.ORG
school in the country geared toward LGBT students), where the 
students are by-and-large black and Latino urban youths learning 
about the college process for the first time. They, too, attend this 
fair because they managed to get themselves to an LGBT high 
school to begin with.
As a new industry, the LGBT college fair may have an opportunity 
to grow and improve. At the moment, for those students unsure or 
struggling with their sexuality, college fairs are not how we reach 
these applicants. 
At the National Association for College Admission’s Counseling’s 
2011 National Conference in New Orleans, an admission officer 
from Tulane University (LA) talked about the subtle placement of 
LGBT friendly images in college viewbooks. Tulane’s viewbook was 
filled with typical images of college students studying outdoors, or 
professors lecturing in classrooms; a careful eye would have also 
noticed a rainbow flag, a common symbol of the LGBT community, 
hanging from a storefront in one photo. The Tufts admission Web 
site displays a photo album of the well-known Tufts cannon, which 
is painted nightly by student groups for any number of fun or seri-
ous reasons. More than one of those cannon photos depicts a time 
when an LGBT group painted the cannon with a rainbow flag. While 
a heterosexual applicant might pass over these images as quickly 
as they ignore ubiquitous pictures of smiling students on a verdant 
quad, an LGBT applicant takes notice.1 
Empirical evidence shows that LGBT applicants take notice of 
such subtleties. One applicant to Tufts in 2012 wrote: “When 
I went to the Tufts Web site, the existence of the Lesbian Gay 
Bisexual and Transgender Center convinced me that Tufts really 
has an atmosphere of freedom.” Many others also referred to 
information they found online about the LGBT Center. Some 
noticed pride flags hanging on campus, or how the diversity 
publication at Tufts includes, among categories such as “racial 
and ethnic diversity,” “geographic diversity,” “religious diversity,” 
and “sexuality and gender diversity.” LGBT applicants, closeted 
or not, have easy access to these resources and subtle forms of 
inclusion online.
Similarly, Tufts was the first university in the US to offer appli-
cants the option of checking “gender, other” on the application. 
In 2012, two applicants checked this box, but many more found 
its presence comforting. One LGBT applicant to Tufts in 2012 re-
ferred specifically to the “gender, other” option as influencing her 
decision to apply. Another wrote: “I want a school where ‘other’ 
is a gender option on forms.” A third explained her rationale for 
applying: “As a student with a million interests and questions, I 
want a college with a wide variety of undergraduate programs, 
which will guarantee the opportunity to learn anything and every-
thing. I want an atmosphere of both cooperation and academic 
rigor, both quirky fun and impassioned work, at a college that 
encourages students to ‘specify other’ in the box labeled gen-
der.” And a fourth said: “I love that Tufts is so accepting that 
the supplement has gender options male, female and other.” At 
present, only one university in the US, Elmhurst College (IL), 
directly asks applicants about their sexual orientation, though 
there is debate about adding such a question to the Common 
Application (Hoover, 2011). A question about sexual orientation, 
like a question that allows for a “gender, other” option, may only 
cause a limited number of applicants comfortable with their 
sexuality to check the box, but may make many more appreciate 
the university as one that values LGBT students.
Case Five: Convincing Them to Come 
A small but increasing number of students reveal their sexuality 
on their college applications. Sometimes these are applicants 
engaged in their high school LGBT communities who write about 
extracurricular activities that make their sexual orientation obvi-
ous. Others write an essay about their sexuality (the Common 
Application personal essay gives broad prompts to allow this topic, 
but so too does the Tufts Supplement, which asks applicants to 
tell us about their self identity, however they define it). When an 
applicant writes about his or her sexuality, however, they are not 
always out. It is not uncommon for an applicant to tell us about his 
or her orientation in an essay, but then also tell us that we are the 
only ones who know about it. 
Three years ago, Tufts began experimenting with a new way to 
reach LGBT admitted students. As readers, we flagged any stu-
dent who identifies as LGBT in the application. I invite a group of 
current Tufts students involved with the Tufts LGBT Center and 
have them call the list of LGBT-identified admitted students as 
part of our diversity outreach phone-a-thon. 
There is one big caveat to these calls: whoever answers the phone, 
whether student or parent, does not know that the reason they are 
being called is because of sexual orientation. The Tufts student greets 
the voice on the other end of the line, offers congratulations on accep-
tance, offers to answer any questions about Tufts, and then identifies 
himself as a current student majoring in X, playing Y sport, living in Z 
dorm, and, by the way, also involved with the LGBT Center.
1 Others have noted similar recruiting trend at many universities, including many LGBT Centers, and the University of Southern California (CA), which advertises how prospective students can stay 
overnight in a LGBT-oriented dormitory (Cegler, 2012).


FALL 2012 JOURNAL OF COLLEGE ADMISSION |
29
WWW.NACACNET.ORG
Benjamin S. Baum is associate 
director of admissions at Tufts 
University (MA). He received his B.A. 
from Amherst College (MA), M.St. in 
Modern History from the University 
of Oxford (UK), and J.D. from the 
University of Michigan Law School.
Cegler, T. (2012). Targeted Recruitment of GLBT by Colleges and Universities. The Journal of 
College Admission, 215, 18-23.
Higher Education Act of 1965 (HEA) §480(d)(7).
Hoover, E. (2011). Elmhurst College Will Ask Applicants About Sexual Orientation. The 
Chronicle of Higher Education. Retried from http://chronicle.com/blogs/headcount/elmhurst-
college-will-ask-applicants-about-sexual-orientation/28553.
Rankin, S., Weber, G., Blumenfeld, W. & Frazer, S. (2010). 2010 State of Higher Education 
for Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual & Transgender People. Campus Pride. Retrieved from http://www.
campuspride.org/Campus%20Pride%202010%20LGBT%20Report%20Summary.pdf.
Tufts University Nondiscrimination Policy (2010). Retrieved from http://oeo.tufts.edu/
wp-content/uploads/NonDiscriminationPolicyEnglishVersion.pdf.
United States Department of Education Dear Colleague Letter (GEN) 03-07.
REFERENCES
Responses to these calls run the gamut. Sometimes the students 
merely leave a message or talk to a parent. Sometimes the admit-
ted student does not have questions, or only has questions about 
academic life at Tufts. In the minority of cases the admitted student 
eagerly asks questions about LGBT life. In the majority, after the cur-
rent student leaves his or her email address, the admitted student 
calls later the same evening with the questions he or she really wanted 
to ask about being LGBT at Tufts. Maybe they were not comfortable 
asking those questions over the phone on the spur of the moment. 
Maybe their parents were sitting in the same room. What I have tried 
to enable is a conversation between LGBT applicants and students 
that respects the applicants’ privacy, their varying degrees of “out-
ness,” and their need to know more about LGBT life in college.
As seen through these five cases, LGBT applicants can pose some spe-
cial challenges during the admission process. Admission officers are 
used to considering demographic factors when reading and recruiting 
students, but being LGBT does not quite align with how we treat race, 
religion, socioeconomics, or other statuses. The defining difference 
is that most demographics are shared between parents and children. 
There are rare exceptions where parents and children do not have the 
same race or socioeconomic status, or where religion or disability set 
family members apart. Differences in sexual orientation stand out as 
a characteristic that needs to be treated with special consideration.
AlAbAmA  birmingham - Southern College Samford University Spring Hill College AlASkA  Alaska Pacific University  Arizona Prescott College ArkAnSAS Hendrix College CAliforniA California institute of Technology (Caltech) California 
lutheran University Chapman University Claremont mckenna College Concordia University irvine Dominican University of California Harvey mudd College loyola marymount University menlo College mills College mount St. mary’s College notre 
Dame de namur University occidental College Pepperdine University Pitzer College Pomona College Saint mary’s College of California Santa Clara University Scripps College Soka University of America Stanford University University of la Verne 
University of redlands University of San Diego University of San francisco University of Southern California University of the Pacific Westmont College Whittier College Woodbury University ColorADo Colorado College Colorado State University 
naropa University regis University University of Denver ConneCTiCUT Connecticut College eastern Connecticut State University fairfield University Quinnipiac University Sacred Heart University Trinity College University of Connecticut University 
of Hartford University of new Haven University of Saint Joseph Wesleyan University Yale University DelAWAre University of Delaware DiSTriCT of ColUmbiA American University Catholic University George Washington University Howard 
University floriDA eckerd College flagler College florida institute of Technology florida Southern College lynn University new College of florida ringling College of Art & Design rollins College Saint leo University St. Thomas University Stetson 
University University of miami University of Tampa GeorGiA Agnes Scott College berry College emory University mercer University morehouse College oglethorpe University Spelman College iDAHo College of idaho illinoiS Augustana College 
blackburn College bradley University Columbia College Chicago DePaul University illinois College illinois institute of Technology illinois Wesleyan University knox College lake forest College northwestern University School of the Art institute of 
Chicago University of Chicago University of illinois at Chicago inDiAnA butler University DePauw University earlham College Goshen College Hanover College manchester University Saint mary’s College University of evansville University of 
notre Dame Valparaiso University Wabash College ioWA Coe College Cornell College Drake University Grinnell College luther College Simpson College Wartburg College kenTUCkY Centre College Transylvania University University of kentucky 
loUiSiAnA Centenary College of louisiana Dillard University loyola University new orleans University of new orleans Xavier University of louisiana mAine bates College bowdoin College Colby College College of the Atlantic Husson University 
Saint Joseph’s College of maine Thomas College University of maine University of maine at farmington University of maine at machias University of new england University of Southern maine mArYlAnD College of notre Dame of maryland 
Goucher College Hood College Johns Hopkins University loyola University maryland mcDaniel College St. John’s College St. mary’s College of maryland Salisbury University Stevenson University Towson University University of maryland 
baltimore County Washington College mASSACHUSeTTS Amherst College Anna maria College Assumption College babson College bentley University boston College boston University brandeis University Clark University College of the Holy 
Cross Curry College elms College emerson College emmanuel College franklin W. olin College of engineering Hampshire College Harvard College lasell College lesley College massachusetts College of liberal Arts massachusetts College of 
Pharmacy and Health Sciences merrimack College mount Holyoke College newbury College nichols College northeastern University regis College Simmons College Smith College Stonehill College Suffolk University Tufts University University 
of massachusetts Amherst University of massachusetts boston University of massachusetts Dartmouth University of massachusetts lowell Wellesley College Wentworth institute of Technology Western new england University Wheaton College 
Wheelock College Williams College WPi (Worcester Polytechnic institute miCHiGAn Albion College Alma College Calvin College Hillsdale College Hope College kalamazoo College lawrence Technological University University of michigan 
minneSoTA Augsburg College Carleton College College of Saint benedict & Saint John’s University Gustavus Adolphus College Hamline University macalester College St. Catherine University Saint mary’s University of minnesota St. olaf College 
miSSiSSiPPi millsaps College miSSoUri Drury University fontbonne University maryville University of Saint louis Saint louis University Stephens College Washington University in St. louis Webster University Westminster College William Jewell 
College monTAnA Carroll College University of Great falls nebrASkA Creighton University neVADA Sierra nevada College neW HAmPSHire Colby - Sawyer College Dartmouth College franklin Pierce University keene State College new 
england College Plymouth State University Saint Anselm College Southern new Hampshire University University of new Hampshire neW JerSeY Caldwell College Centenary College new Jersey The College of new Jersey Drew University 
Princeton University ramapo College of new Jersey richard Stockton College rider University rowan University Saint Peter’s College Seton Hall University Stevens institute of Technology neW meXiCo St. John’s College neW York Adelphi 
University Albany College of Pharmacy & Health Sciences Alfred University bard College barnard College Canisius College Cazenovia College Clarkson University Colgate University College of mount Saint Vincent College of new rochelle The 
College of Saint rose Columbia University Concordia College - new York Cornell University Daemen College Dowling College elmira College fordham University Hamilton College Hartwick College Hobart & William Smith Colleges Hofstra 
University iona College ithaca College keuka College le moyne College list College long island University - brooklyn Campus long island University - C.W. Post Campus manhattan College manhattanville College marist College marymount 
manhattan College molloy College mount Saint mary College nazareth College new school - eugene lang College new York institute of Technology new York University niagara University Pace University Polytechnic institute of nYU rensselaer 
Polytechnic institute rochester institute of Technology russell Sage College Sage College of Albany St. bonaventure University St. John fisher College St. Joseph’s College - brooklyn Campus St. Joseph’s College - long island Campus St. 
lawrence University St. Thomas Aquinas College Sarah lawrence College Siena College Skidmore College (SUnY) binghamton University (SUnY) buffalo State College (SUnY) College at brockport (SUnY) College at Geneseo (SUnY) College at 
old Westbury (SUnY) College at oneonta (SUnY) College of environmental Science & forestry (SUnY) Cortland (SUnY) fredonia (SUnY) institute of Technology(SUnY) maritime College (SUnY) new Paltz (SUnY) oswego (SUnY) Plattsburgh (SUnY) 
Potsdam (SUnY) Purchase College (SUnY) Stony brook University (SUnY) University at Albany (SUnY) University at buffalo Syracuse University Union College University of rochester Utica College Vassar College Wagner College Wells College 
norTH CArolinA Davidson College Duke University Guilford College meredith College Salem College University of north Carolina Asheville University of north Carolina at Chapel Hill University of north Carolina at Wilmington Wake forest 
University Warren Wilson College oHio baldwin - Wallace College Case Western reserve University College of Wooster Denison University Hiram College John Carroll University kenyon College marietta College miami University oberlin College 
ohio Wesleyan University otterbein University The ohio State University University of Dayton University of findlay Wittenberg University Xavier University oklAHomA oklahoma City University University of Tulsa oreGon Concordia University 
lewis & Clark College linfield College Pacific University reed College University of Portland Willamette University PennSYlVAniA Albright College Allegheny College Arcadia University bryn mawr College bucknell University Carnegie mellon 
University Cedar Crest College Chatham University DeSales University Dickinson College Drexel University elizabethtown College franklin & marshall College Gannon University Gettysburg College Haverford College immaculata University 
Juniata College keystone College king’s College la Salle University lafayette College lehigh University lincoln University of Pennsylvania lycoming College mercyhurst College moravian College muhlenberg College Philadelphia University 
rosemont College Saint francis University Saint Joseph’s University Saint Vincent College Seton Hill University Susquehanna University Swarthmore College Thiel College University of Pennsylvania University of Scranton University of the 
Sciences in Philadelphia Ursinus College Villanova University Washington & Jefferson College Westminster College Wilson College rHoDeiSlAnD brown University bryant University Providence College rhode island College rhode island School 
of Design roger Williams University Salve regina University University of rhode island SoUTH CArolinA Converse College furman University Presbyterian College Wofford College SoUTH DAkoTA Augustana College TenneSSee belmont 
University Christian brothers University fisk University lipscomb University rhodes College Sewanee: The University of the South Tennessee Wesleyan College The University of Tennessee knoxville Vanderbilt University TeXAS Austin College 
rice University St. edward’s University Southern methodist University Southwestern University TCU (Texas Christian University) Trinity University University of Dallas UTAH Westminster College VermonT bennington College burlington College 
Castleton State College Champlain College College of St. Joseph Green mountain College Johnson State College lyndon State College marlboro College middlebury College Saint michael’s College University of Vermont VirGiniA Christopher 
newport University College of William & mary emory & Henry College Hampden - Sydney College Hollins University marymount University randolph College randolph - macon College roanoke College Sweet briar College University of mary 
Washington University of richmond University of Virginia Virginia intermont College Washington and lee University WASHinGTon Gonzaga University Pacific lutheran University Saint martin’s University Seattle Pacific University Seattle 
University University of Puget Sound Whitman College Whitworth University WeST VirGiniA Wheeling Jesuit University WiSConSin beloit College Carroll University lawrence University marquette University northland College ripon College St. 
norbert College inTernATionAl The American University of Paris The American University of rome franklin College Switzerland Hult international business School (United kingdom) Jacobs University bremen (Germany John Cabot University 
(italy) keele University (United kingdom) richmond The American international University in london University of St Andrews (UniTeD kinGDom) University of Stirling (United kingdom) Yale nUS College (Singapore) 
New look. Same miSSioN. Summer 2013.