Key takeaways
-       Disabled adults face more obstacles in building credit and maintaining financial health than non-disabled adults.
-       For example, adults with disabilities are less likely to be approved for and hold a credit card or loan.
-       People with disabilities can begin to improve their creditworthiness by focusing on their credit score, considering a secured credit card or credit-builder loan and making sure they understand their legal rights.
The credit landscape for Americans with disabilities is uneven.
Low credit scores and lacking credit health are common obstacles for disabled people. In fact, the Financial Health Network reported in 2023 that fewer than half (48 percent) of people with disabilities have good to excellent credit scores, compared to 73 percent of people without disabilities.
That may be a reason why fewer disabled people have a credit card or loan than non-disabled people.
A 2021 survey by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) showed that fewer than half (48.4 percent) of working-age households with a disability had a credit card or personal loan from a bank, compared to 3 in 4 (75.7 percent) working-age households without a disability.
If you're disabled or have a loved one with disabilities, you can still find ways to build credit — and gain access to financial instruments like credit cards. Keep in mind that reputable lenders shouldn't discriminate against disabilities. As long as a lender is focused on your ability to repay credit, you can take steps to prove your creditworthiness.
Financial health of people with disabilities
Disabled people tend to face more obstacles than the everyday citizen, and personal finances are no exception. The Financial Health Network found that, based on an 8-factor scoring system, people with disabilities are less financially healthy than their non-disabled peers. And that includes their credit health.
"Accessible, affordable credit appears to be a particular area of need for the disability community," the Financial Health Network reports.
In this case, disabilities include people who have trouble hearing; seeing (with glasses); concentrating, remembering or making decisions; walking or climbing stairs; dressing or bathing or doing errands alone.
Credit experiences for Americans with disabilities
According to a 2021 FDIC household survey on banking and financial services, the unbanked rate for people with disabilities was 14.8 percent, while the unbanked rate for working-age households without a disability was just 3.7 percent. Interestingly, however, more disabled adults (age 25 to 64) had applied for a credit card, personal loan or personal line of credit from a bank in the past 12 months than their non-disabled counterparts, according to a 2019 FDIC survey on the topic (the most recent survey from which data is available).