In High School, I experienced bullying in the form of hazing rituals while playing team sports. Older students told us that it was a traditional rite of passage that all freshman rookies participated in and reassured us with the fact that even our coaches knew about it, which baffles me to think about today. Unfortunately, this one tradition set the tone for other persistent, targeted acts of bullying throughout the year. This bullying seemed to result from simple boredom, a culture of violence, and a deviant need for entertainment. There are many reasons why individuals choose to bully. Research has shed some light on many of them, and has focused more on why cyberbullying has been on the rise. As we look to prevent and interrupt, we should seek to understand the reasons behind bullying in order to make informed decisions for creating safer schools.
Social-Emotional & Environmental Factors Can Cause Bullying
Why do people choose to bully? When I ask young people this question, they usually mention that aggressors feel jealous or seek power in their relationships. I’m not surprised that they are able to quickly identify these social-emotional factors. Students usually know best what is driving the behavior of their peers. For young people, bullying behavior is connected to a desire for power, revenge-seeking, aggression, or jealousy. Emotional risk factors for bullying also include anger, depression, and impulsivity. A proactive approach to social-emotional awareness and learning at all grade levels, therefore, has the potential to prevent and interrupt bullying behaviors before they begin. This kind of social-emotional learning should take place in school and at home. Individuals may turn to bullying as a result of stress factors or traumatic experiences at home. A recent annual report by Ditch the Label found that individuals who identified with bullying behavior were more likely to have experienced stressful or traumatic situations in the past five years. This could mean anything from the loss of a family member to experiencing arguments and aggression in their home. The same study reported that one in three young people who identified their behavior as bullying also reported that their parent/guardian did not have enough time to spend with them, and were more likely to view their relationships as insecure in some way. Environmental factors are not limited to the home, the school environment can also influence bullying and cyberbullying behaviors. For example, a negative school climate has been shown to make students more likely to engage in bullying. A simple way to think about it is that those who bully are often reflecting their stress onto others. As educators, we have an opportunity to change the culture of our school but are limited in our ability to influence students’ experiences at home. We can, however, be supportive and listen to students who experience stress at home, and do our best to provide a safe space while they are at school.
Potential Causes of Cyberbullying
Cyberbullying is caused by many of the same factors found in traditional bullying behaviors, however, studies suggest several new risk factors. The social-emotional causes of online bullying are generally the same: anger, depression, and impulsivity. These have been shown to predict a higher likelihood of both bullying and cyberbullying. The same can be said for students who report feeling a lack of empathy for their peers. Recognizing the newly researched risk factors for cyberbullying can help parents and educators plan interventions. Studies suggest that internet addiction predicts the likelihood of cyberbullying aggression. The more time students spend on the internet, the more likely they are to engage in cyberbullying as a target or aggressor. Students who are currently attending virtual classes should be monitoring their time on devices and the internet. Additionally, a lack of control over personal information predicts cyberbullying victimization. Students who share too much personal information or leave themselves vulnerable to privacy attacks are more likely to be targeted by cyberbullying. Another predictor of cyberbullying aggression is anonymity. Acting anonymously online can lead to increased levels of aggression direct toward others within or outside of their community. Much like traditional bullying, a lack of confidence in oneself, a desire for control, and retaliation also serve as risk factors for cyberbullying. Finally, having easy access to social media–and spending too much time using social media– can make individuals more likely to engage in cyberbullying.
The Transition Back to In-Person School
Since virtual learning started there has been a spike in rates of cyberbullying behaviors among students. In some cases, attending class online has posed a new threat to their privacy and left them more vulnerable to online bullying or harassment. We’ve even heard stories of teachers allowing students to leave their cameras off to protect them from harassment. A recent article in Newsday highlighted this idea: …some students may feel inadequate when they are learning virtually and everyone can see their homes. This crisis has shed light on the inequalities in our society, and schools are just one component. For many students, the school offers a safe haven from the home, which can be a stressful place. On the other hand, for students who experienced traditional in-person bullying, virtual learning has made it easier to focus and learn. As a return to in-person schooling approaches in many places, we can recognize that the transition will feel different for every student. Below are some ideas that educators and parents can consider to support students: 1. Set limits for screen-time and social media use. 2. Develop social-emotional learning opportunities in school and at home. 3. Discuss both positive and negative experiences online without judgment. 4. Create opportunities for students to talk about the stress they experience at home and in school. 5. Talk openly about the risk factors for bullying and cyberbullying.