Citation:
Young, S (2015) Policing “uncontrollable banshees”: Factors influencing arrest decision making.
Safer Communities, 14 (4). 183 - 192. ISSN 1757-8043 DOI: https://doi.org/10.1108/SC-05-2015-
0017
Link to Leeds Beckett Repository record:
https://eprints.leedsbeckett.ac.uk/id/eprint/1648/
Document Version:
Article (Updated Version)
The aim of the Leeds Beckett Repository is to provide open access to our research, as required by
funder policies and permitted by publishers and copyright law.
The Leeds Beckett repository holds a wide range of publications, each of which has been
checked for copyright and the relevant embargo period has been applied by the Research Services
team.
We operate on a standard take-down policy.
If you are the author or publisher of an output
and you would like it removed from the repository, please contact us and we will investigate on a
case-by-case basis.
Each thesis in the repository has been cleared where necessary by the author for third party
copyright. If you would like a thesis to be removed from the repository or believe there is an issue
with copyright, please contact us on openaccess@leedsbeckett.ac.uk and we will investigate on a
case-by-case basis.


 
1
Introduction 
 
This paper discusses the influence of gender on police officers’ decision making 
by focusing on police officers’ accounts of dealing with young women 
considered violent. Whilst there are several factors shown to influence arrest 
decisions such as demeanor (Worden and Shepard, 1996), hostility towards 
the police (Klinger, 1994; Smith and Visher, 1981), seriousness of offence (Ho, 
2003) and ethnicity (Smith et al., 1984), little is known about the role of the 
offenders’ gender in police decision making. There is evidence that shows 
traditional patriarchal attitudes are still exercised within policing and towards 
female police officers (see Coffey et al., 1992; Heidensohn, 1992; Holdaway 
and Parker, 1998; Martin, 1996; Westmarland, 2001); however what remains 
unclear is whether these attitudes affect women who offend. Horn and Wincup 
(1995) suggest that traditional stereotypes of femininity do have an impact on 
how the police treat female offenders. In particular, women who come into 
contact with the police for violent behaviour are viewed as the ‘bad’ ones and 
are more likely to be arrested and charged (Horn and Wincup, 1995) on the 
basis that violence is perceived as a masculine offence (Collier and Hall, 2000; 
Miller and White, 2004).  
 
Smart (1981) argues that underlying beliefs about appropriate gender norms 
ultimately impact on the responses and treatment of women who offend, 
particularly those who use violence. For instance, studies undertaken within 
courtrooms demonstrate how the social construction of appropriate gender 
norms can have a negative consequence for women who offend (Carlen, 1983; 
Hedderman and Gelsthorpe, 1997; Heidensohn, 1985; Worrall, 1990), 
particularly women who commit offences deemed masculine, such as violence 
(Hudson, 2002; Stanko and Heidensohn, 1995). Research has shown that 
young women are not in fact becoming more violent but rather they are 
subjected to growing controls on the basis of appropriate femininity and 
increasingly punitive penal policies (Chesney-Lind and Belknap, 2004; 
Chesney-Lind and Irwin, 2008; McIvor and Burman, 2011; Zhan et al., 2008). 
These have been influenced by the public demand to criminalise young women 
evident in the increasing British press coverage of an apparent rise in female 
violence (Alder and Worrall, 2004; Beattie, 2009; Henry and Day, 2004; 
Robertson, 2005). Understanding police practices is thus imperative to explore 
how young women become identified as violent and to determine whether, and, 
if so, to what extent, gender influences these decision-making processes.  
 
Criticisms of police discretion, particularly in their stop and search practices 
(Hearnden and Hough, 2004), handling of rape and domestic abuse  cases 
(Jordan, 2004) and targeting socially deprived neighbourhoods (Scraton, 1987) 
has resulted in a growing field of research examining decision making. This 
‘institutional discrimination’ (see Bowling and Philips, 2003; Narduzzo, 2007; 
Sealock and Simpson, 1998) has been explained by the white machismo of 
‘cop culture’ (Sanders and Young, 2003) whereby the beliefs of the institution 
play a significant role in shaping the values held by police officers within it 
(Waddington, 1999; Westmarland, 2008). However, police discretion cannot be 
removed from the confines of the law and, although culture can influence the 
beliefs of police officers, police decision making has to be understood within 


 
2
the legal boundaries in which police officers operate (see Chan, 1997; Loftus, 
2009). This paper draws on empirical research with police officers to consider 
how gender stereotypes impact on arrest decisions and discusses the 
implication for police practice.  
 
The Study 
 
The data presented in this paper was generated from semi-structured 
interviews with frontline police officers from semi-rural, suburban and urban 
areas of two police forces in Scotland[1]. The sample consisted of twenty nine 
police constables, three police sergeants and one community beat officer. 
There were ten female police officers, which was representative of the number 
of female police officers in Scotland at that time [2] (Scottish Government, 2011). 
The term 'violence' is used to discuss both verbal aggression and physical 
assault, thus focussing on behaviour that is perceived to be ‘violent’ rather than 
‘violent crime’. The police officers’ own understanding of violence supported 
this broad definition, whereby violence was understood in terms of both 
physical injury, the threat of physical injury and aggressive behaviour. The 
interviews discussed police officers’ perceptions and experiences of young 
women they considered violent and it is important to note that whilst all the 
participants had first hand examples to draw on, they all highlighted that 
incidents involving young women using violence were far fewer than episodes 
involving young men. The analysis explored whether there were differences 
between the male and female police officers’ perceptions but no significant 
differences were found on the basis of the officers’ gender, any variations that 
were noticed are discussed in the paper. 
 
Findings 
Policing Gender Roles 
The principal factor in police decision-making according to those interviewed is 
the severity of the offence, if there has been an infliction of injury then the police 
officers stated they would arrest. This is very subjective due to the reliance on 
the police officers’ own judgement on what is classed as serious. Other 
influential factors discussed were whether there was a complainer, the family 
circumstances, and available police resources[3]. Co-operation with the police 
was referred to as an important factor in decision-making, and although the 
police officers’ advised arrest is their last resort, they will detain someone if they 
do not co-operate. Police officers stated that if individuals (using violence) take 
a telling and leave peacefully then there is no need to take the matter any 
further (on the basis that the seriousness of offence does not warrant arrest). 
The police officers also have to consider whether there will be repercussions 
after they leave, if they suspect the individuals will continue acting violently then 
they will detain them. According to the officers men are more inclined to listen 
to police officers and refrain from further violence, whereas women are 
perceived as less co-operative and, as a result, get detained by the police. This 
could therefore have an impact on the arrests of young women, as they may 
be more at risk of being detained as a result of their defiance for something that 
was originally considered minor. To assess the importance of co-operation, the 


 
3
following section examines female violence directed at police officers before 
moving on to explore police responses to women demonstrating violence 
towards others. 
 
The police officers were asked for their experiences of young women using 
violence and over half had encountered young women directing their violence 
at police officers. Examples included resisting arrest whereby the police had 
been trying to arrest women for other offences, mainly breach of the peace and 
shoplifting, and the women became violent. For instance POM19 was arresting 
a young woman for breach of the peace and she responded by spitting at him 
and was arrested for assault. POM28 made it clear that any intentional assault 
when resisting arrest would result in an additional charge. The police officers 
described instances of young women hitting, kicking, spitting and scratching to 
get away from being arrested. On these occasions most of the young women 
described had consumed large quantities of alcohol and were lashing out at the 
police officers. 
 
POF25 stated that if the women were simply struggling then this would be 
classed as resisting arrest rather than assault, but if somebody who is being 
arrested deliberately assaulted (either hitting, kicking or spitting) a police officer 
then they would be arrested for assault. This is an important point because it 
shows that violent behaviour (such as kicking and spitting) can be treated 
differently depending on whether it is resisting arrest or being intentionally 
violent. This raises the issue of the context in which violent behaviour is being 
displayed. Official statistics on violence can be misleading given the ambiguity 
of the situation in which violence is used and it is necessary to highlight that 
some charges for violent behaviour may actually be a result of resisting arrest. 
This is consistent with the research carried out by Loucks et al. (2006) who 
found that a high proportion of the violence offences committed by women were 
police assaults and resisting arrest.   
 
The police officers also experienced women who were drunk being violent 
towards them to protect their boyfriends. On one of these occasions the police 
officer responded to a call regarding two males fighting and while he was asking 
one of the men questions the girlfriend attacked him: The girlfriend comes in 
apparently to protect the boyfriend and starts, like, punched me in the throat 
and punched my colleague in the face (POM4). Similarly, POM11 (who has 
been assaulted by women when trying to arrest men) said the female will 
suddenly decide her boyfriend isn't going to get arrested and suddenly you’ve 
got this clawing banshee jumping on your back! POM28 experienced a young 
woman hitting him with a handbag and kicking him to get him to let go of her 
boyfriend who was being arrested.  
 
It is clear there are several different scenarios where young women have been 
violent toward police officers. This is an important finding because ultimately 
the young women can be arrested for any assault on a police officer, even if 
the initial police presence was for a separate offence. Hostility towards police 
officers has been shown to be an important factor in arrest decision making 
(Klinger, 1994) and it is argued by Visher (1983) that hostility from women is 
deemed even more unacceptable: 


 
4
 
Indeed any chivalrous attitudes that may benefit female suspects 
during arrest decisions are nullified in encounters with antagonistic 
women. [H]ostile female offenders clearly violate appropriate sex-
role behaviour, and police officers respond by arresting them. 
(Visher, 1983: 18) 
 
Horn and Hollin (1997) propose that female offenders may be perceived by 
police officers as more trustworthy than male offenders on the basis of gender 
stereotypes, whereas this current research suggests otherwise. Young women 
are viewed as less trustworthy on the basis of lack of co-operation and this 
perception dismisses that chivalry exits for violent behaviour. Therefore, it is 
plausible that women are viewed as doubly deviant on the basis that they are 
not co-operating with the police officers and they are displaying defiance of their 
gender role by using violence. The hostility displayed by young women could 
go some way to explaining factors associated with arresting young women 
(Loucks et al., 2006; McIvor and Burman, 2011) given that the police officers 
have no option but to arrest if they are on the receiving end of violence.  
 
Responding to “Uncontrollable” Women 
 
The police officers stated that one of the main difficulties they face when dealing 
with violent situations involving young women is that when women are acting 
out violently they are less inclined, than men, to know when to stop. The police 
officers stated that women continue fighting until somebody splits them up, 
whereas, with men, once someone has won the fight (i.e. the opponent does 
not retaliate) that’s usually the end of it (POM9). Police officers suggested a red 
mist descends and women just become intent on fighting. The police officers 
depicted violence as a mutual fight between people, whereby men are inclined 
to defeat an opponent and this would explain why men stop. The depiction of 
the irrational female, whereby violence is impulsive rather than instrumental 
(see Campbell, 1993), continued when police officers discussed their difficulties 
when trying to control the incidents they are called to.  
 
The main difficulty police officers said they came across with young women 
being violent was trying to stop them (verbally and physically) and separate 
them. The police described women as less controlled, hyper and hysterical 
making it a nightmare to deal with them and officers specifically stated they 
prefer to separate men who are fighting. Half of the police officers said that 
women were more difficult to calm down, even if the violent incident has ended. 
In contrast, men were seen to co-operate better with the police by stopping 
fighting when the police arrived and ‘calming down’ quicker. Women were 
described by police officers as continually shouting and trying to fight with 
people even in police presence, all common sense goes out the window and 
they tend to be just in this sort of frenzy were just some of the comments made, 
whereby they do not listen to the police.  
 
These perceptions of women are all related to alcohol induced violence and 
suggest that these women were not in control of their actions due to alcohol. 
This point is made by the police officers who stated that when the women are 


 
5
sober they become fine and are like different women. Excessive alcohol 
consumption goes against what is characterised as appropriate femininity 
(Otto, 1981) and helps to explain why women are perceived as more irrational 
than men. Despite there also being a correlation between alcohol and men’s 
violence, it is still deemed less acceptable for women to be ‘drunk’ due to the 
embedded social construction of femininity within society. 
POM26: Personally I find it easier to communicate with males 
in violent situations because they seem to know the score. 
Experience has told me that when you're speaking to women 
and particularly young women who have…are maybe under the 
influence of alcohol predominantly...there seems to be no 
rationale in their thinking.  It’s very hard to get through to them; 
whether it’s because they tend not to listen, or…they don’t want 
to be told.  But I would find it very hard and I think other 
colleagues of mine find it hard when you're dealing with girls, 
because they appear to be irrational now. 
 
Women were, as the example above demonstrates, depicted as less rational 
than men and harder to communicate with. Whilst the police officers 
interviewed clearly suggested the problem lay with young women’s behavior, 
there is a possibility that the responses given reflect a lack of confidence among 
those interviewed. Police officers come into contact with young men using 
violence under the influence of alcohol on a more regular basis thus their 
experience may enhance their ability to deal with young men. It can be argued 
that whilst young women might react differently to police officers and be 
perceived as uncontrollable, the police officers themselves have difficulties 
knowing the most appropriate methods for effectively communicating with 
young women, which in turn could exacerbate a situation. This finding ties in 
with the previous discussion of hostility where it becomes clear that police 
officers perceive the lack of co-operation as a problem among young women 
with little recognition of the limitations of their own abilities to resolve the 
situation. 
 
Gendered Responses 
A difficulty raised by police officers was that women think nothing of turning on 
the police and are more likely to become violent with the police than men are. 
The main difference emphasised by the police officers was that men who are 
violent are only likely to turn their aggression on male officers, whereas women 
will be aggressive towards any police officer. According to one of the police 
officers drunken females will give abuse to female officers, male officers, it 
doesn’t really matter. Similarly another officer stated that a male will maybe 
think twice about hitting a female police officer; whereas females wouldn’t 
bother if it was a male or a female.  
Female police officers stated that men who are violent towards women are 
perceived as more socially unacceptable than women being violent, thus 
female officers feel less threatened arresting men because there is a smaller 


 
6
risk of them being assaulted. It was mainly female officers that made this 
distinction and this was their reason for preferring to deal with men, whereas 
the male police officers’ preference for dealing with men was more with regards 
to women being perceived as ‘irrational’ and harder to ‘calm down’.  
The police officers were asked whether they noticed any differences in the way 
young women respond to male and female officers. One female police officer 
believed that young women will attempt to manipulate the male officers and will 
sometimes respond better to them, they think that if they flutter their eyelashes 
the men are going to say ‘okay, whatever, I’ll just let you go!’ This view was 
supported by a male colleague who found that women who take a shine to him 
would calm down quicker. However, other male officers believe young women 
perceive them as more chivalrous and therefore think they can get away with 
not fully co-operating. Some male police officers stated that they find it 
beneficial to have a female officer present because young women will be more 
likely to co-operate: 
 
POM28: I think that’s probably something that when you're 
dealing with drunk females in particular they know that [men 
don’t hit females] and they can push it that wee bit further!  
Whereas they won't push it with a female officer because they 
know if she has to step in and has to take it that stage further, 
she will.  
 
Empirical research with door security in the night time economy has shown 
similar results whereby the introduction of female door stewards was partly due 
to a requirement for increasing control over unruly women. It was believed that 
female door stewards would be able to de-fuse violent situations more 
effectively than male door stewards due to their non-aggressive persona, 
however the female stewards perceived their strength to be resolving incidents 
involving men (Hobbs et al., 2007; (O'Brien et al., 2008 ). The female police 
officers stated that the presence of a female police officer can exacerbate 
women’s aggression because the young women don’t want female officers 
telling them what to do when they’re fighting another female. Furthermore, the 
female police officers believed that women view female officers as more of a 
threat and are therefore less likely to listen to them, whereas young women will 
listen to male officers because they do not want the disapproval of men. The 
female police officers believed that they were in some cases better suited to 
resolving violent situations involving men because the men are more likely to 
calm down. The interviews with police officers indicated that female police 
officers believe they are able to de-fuse a violent situation involving men more 
effectively because they are less likely  (than male officers) to aggravate a 
violent situation. Whereas, the female police officers considered their male 
colleagues as more effective with violent incidences involving women.  
Interestingly the results demonstrate that the police officers disliked dealing 
with young women acting aggressively and this resonates with a body of work 
that shows criminal justice practitioners view girls and young women as harder 
to deal with than boys and young men (see Burman and Batchelor, 2009; 


 
7
Gelsthorpe and Worrall, 2009). It is evident that the police officers distinguished 
between gender interactions; the females perceiving themselves as a threat to 
other women and better suited to handling aggressive men, whereas the male 
officers had different experiences of women cooperating with them. The police 
officers did agree that women were more inclined to become violent with the 
police and thus more difficult to deal with. The typology of men’s violence was 
perceived as more severe and as having a greater possibility of serious injury 
and yet the police officers preferred to manage these incidents due to men 
being viewed as more co-operative.  
Concluding Discussion 
Previous research with criminal justice institutions has provided evidence that 
women who exhibit supposed masculine characteristics are depicted as 
unfeminine and at risk of greater formal control from criminal justice agencies 
(i.e. arrest and prosecution) (Horn and Wincup, 1995; Sharpe, 2009). There is 
insufficient evidence from the interviews to suggest that young women 
considered as violent were treated any harsher or leniently by police officers on 
the basis of their (the young women’s) gender alone. However, the evidence 
does demonstrate that gendered norms influence police officers’ perceptions of 
young women who use violence. The police officers’ deemed young women as 
more difficult to deal with, irrational, and unmanageable, reinforcing negative 
gender stereotypes. This is consistent with previous research on criminal 
justice responses to young women who offend which has found that young 
women’s non-conformity to traditional sex roles has resulted in criminal justice 
practitioners perceiving them to be more problematic than young men (see 
Alder, 1998; Gardener et al., 2004; Kersten, 1990).  
 
In Scotland, there is gender diversity training for all police officers to ensure 
female police officers and police staff are not discriminated against, however it 
is unclear what training is provided to officers when handling cases involving 
female offenders, and victims. The very small numbers of young women who 
offend (and even smaller number who commit violent offences) makes it difficult 
to develop effective policies and practices, and policies that are developed 
cannot be practiced efficiently when offending is so rare (Burman and 
Batchelor, 2009). It is therefore unsurprising that police officers would perceive 
young women to be more difficult to deal with given the lack of training and 
experience handling such incidents. The absence of any specific training or 
regular first hand experience could go some way to explaining why the police 
officers had such negative tabloid perceptions of young women. Any lack in 
confidence in handling violent scenarios with young women could have been 
concealed during the interviews by condemning the young women and 
deeming them as uncontrollable. This warrants further research to examine 
what training in equality is provided and whether police officers are being given 
the tools to effectively respond to violent incidents involving women.  
 
The view that young women (and particularly young women under the influence 
of alcohol) are less controllable and more defiant of authority reinforces the 
patriarchal position that women are more irrational and unmanageable than 
men and this can be understood as a mechanism of informal social control 


 
8
(Heidensohn, 2000; Schur, 1983). If young women are more resistant towards 
police authority then they could be at greater risk of being arrested than young 
men, not only for defying feminine gender norms but also challenging the 
authority of police officers. Loftus (2010) highlights the importance police 
officers place on maintaining authority in aggravated situations whereby police 
officers use techniques to encourage members of the public to respect them. 
Therefore young women who do not co-operate are challenging this 
dominance, and the police officers’ inability to control the altercations could put 
young women at greater risk of arrest.  
 
Klinger (1994) and Worden and Shepard (1996) have previously shown that 
hostility towards the police impacts on arrest decision making and this research 
has been able to locate this discretion with particular reference to young women 
and violence. It is apparent that the defiance of traditional gender norms, in 
particular obedient, submissive traits, will work against young women. Young, 
possible drunk, violent women go against all the norms of ‘appropriate 
femininity’ and the consequences of this could put young women at greater risk 
of arrest than young, drunk, violent men, whose behaviour is deemed as 
‘normal’. This is an important finding and would offer a route for further research 
to assess whether what the police have said during the interviews is evident in 
practice. Cultural beliefs within the police are not always direct indicators of 
police action (see Loftus, 2009; Waddington, 1999), thus whilst much of the 
data generated from this study indicates very gender stereotyped attitudes, it 
cannot be deduced that the police will stereotype in practice. An ethnographic 
approach to the topic would offer the opportunity to assess to what degree 
young women are uncooperative (if at all) and which factors influenced police 
officers decisions.  
 
Whilst gender may play a small role in police officers’ decision making, it is 
important to note that police officers need to use situational logic, as described 
by Karl Popper (1963), whereby all the situational factors are weighed up before 
an arrest takes place. If young women continuously use violence then the police 
officers have no other option but to arrest, this is a legal requirement. Ultimately 
police officers must ensure public and police safety and anyone challenging 
this will be issued with an arrest regardless of gender. Practical considerations 
such as whether the young women are known to the police for previous 
offences or if the women pose a threat to either themselves or others, are all 
taken into account. A further dimension to police officers’ discretion is 
prioritising their work with resource limitations (Reiner, 2010) and ensuring 
incidents are dealt with as swiftly as possible (Miller et al., 2006). These are all 
important factors that apply to anybody acting in a violent manner, not just 
young women, thus whilst perceived non-conformity from women may indeed 
contribute to arrests, the other situational factors need to be recognized.  
 
 
This research complements a growing body of work that aims to understand 
police decision making and particularly in relation to young female offenders. 
The overall perception from the police that young women are more difficult to 
deal with than young men, stresses the requirement for more training and policy 
to be developed which recognises gender differences as opposed to gender 


 
9
neutrality. This has been strongly evidenced in the police officers’ preference 
to respond to incidents involving men and their continuing portrayal of women 
as uncontrollable and irrational. The unpredictable nature of women using 
violence appears to stem more from police officers’ inexperience and tabloid 
fuelled headlines than women’s irrationality. However, the perceived erratic 
nature of violence could put these women at greater risk of arrest with the lack 
of police confidence in communicating with often intoxicated young women.  
 
Notes 
1 This research was carried out prior to The Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) 
Act 2012 which came into force in April 2013 whereby the previous eight police 
forces became a single force. 
2 All the participants were allocated a pseudonym PO (police officer) M/F(male 
or female) number (participant number). There were no significant differences 
to report on the basis of location so this variable was not included in the 
pseudonym. 
3 Lack of police resources was mentioned as a determining aspect by members of 
one semi‐rural police division, whereby the distance they have to travel to access 
female police cells can be problematic. If there is a lack of police officers on patrol 
and it is a busy night then they stated that it is sometimes not practical to arrest 
women. The issue of resources does not only apply to females, on busy nights 
alcohol fuelled fights are often just dealt with by issuing a warning or fixed penalty 
notice if no serious injuries are caused. This issue is specific to one division as all 
the other geographical areas are well resourced to make necessary arrests. 
                                                        


 
10
References 
 
Alder, C. and Worrall, A. (2004) Girls' Violence: Myths and Realities. Albany: 
State Univ of New York Pr. 
 
Alder, C.M. (1998) "“Passionate and Willful” Girls." Women & Criminal Justice 
9(4):81-101. 
 
Beattie, J. (2009) "Rise of the Girl Yobs: Assaults by Women Soar 150% in 10 
Years." The Mirror 23 October 2009. 
 
Bowling, B. and Philips, C. (2003) "Policing Ethnic Minority Communities." in 
Newburn, T. (Ed) The Handbook of Policing. Devon: William. 
 
Burman, M. and Batchelor, S. (2009) "Between Two Stools? Responding to 
Young Women Who Offend." Youth Justice 9(3):270-285. 
 
Campbell, A. (1993) Out of Control : Men, Women and Aggression. London: 
Pandora. 
 
Carlen, P. (1983) Women's Imprisonment : A Study in Social Control. London: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
 
Chan, J. (1997) Changing Police Culture: Policing in a Multicultural Society 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
 
Chesney-Lind, M. and Belknap, J. (2004) "Trends in Delinquent Girls’: A 
Review of the Evidence." in Putallaz, M. and Bierman, K. L. (Ed) 
Aggression, Antisocial Behaviour and Violence among Girls. New York: 
Guildford Press. 
 
Chesney-Lind, M. and Irwin, K. (2008) Beyond Bad Girls: Gender, Violence and 
Hype: Routledge. 
 
Coffey, S., Brown, J., and Savage, S. (1992) "Policewomen's Career 
Aspirations: Some Reflections on the Role and Capabilities of Women 
in Policing in Britain." Police Stud.: Int'l Rev.Police Dev. 15(1):13-19. 
 
Collier, R. and Hall, S. (2000) "Masculinities and Violence." Criminal Justice 
Matters 42(1):8-11. 
 
Gardener, E., Rodriguez, N., and Zatz, M.S. (2004) "Criers, Liars, and 
Manipulators: Probation Officers' Views of Girls." Justice Quarterly 
21(3):547-578. 
 
Gelsthorpe, L. and Worrall, A. (2009) "Looking for Trouble: A Recent History of 
Girls, Young Women and Youth Justice." Youth Justice 9(3):209-223. 
 


 
11
Hearnden, J. and Hough, M. (2004) Race and the Criminal Justice System: An 
Overview to the Complete Statistics 2002-2003. The Institute for 
Criminal Policy Research Kings College London,  
 
Hedderman, C. and Gelsthorpe, L. (1997) Understanding the Sentencing of 
Women. Home Office Research Study 170. HMSO London 
 
Heidensohn, F. (1985) Women and Crime. London: Macmillan Education. 
 
—. (1992) Women in Control?: The Role of Women in Law Enforcement: Oxford 
University Press, USA. 
 
—. (2000) Sexual Politics and Social Control. Buckingham: Open University 
Press. 
 
Henry, J. and Day, M. (2004) "Ladettes' Clog Casualty Units after Catfights 
Hospital a & E Departments Struggle to Cope with Women Injured as a 
Result of Drunken Brawls - Including 'Glassings'." Sunday Telegraph 
19/09/2004. 
 
Ho, T.N. (2003) "The Influence of Suspect Gender in Domestic Violence 
Arrests." American Journal of Criminal Justice 27(2):183-195. 
 
Hobbs, D., O'Brien, K., and Westmarland, L. (2007) "Connecting the Gendered 
Door: Women, Violence and Doorwork." British Journal of Sociology 
58(1):21-38. 
 
Holdaway, S. and Parker, S.K. (1998) "Policing Women Police - Uniform Patrol, 
Promotion and Representation in the Cid." British Journal of Criminology 
38(1):40-60. 
 
Horn, R. and Hollin, C.R. (1997) "Police Beliefs About Women Who Offend." 
Legal and Criminological Psychology 2(2):193-204. 
 
Horn, R. and Wincup, E. (1995) "Not Real Criminals: Police Perceptions of 
Women Offenders." Criminal Justice Matters 19(17-19. 
 
Hudson, B. (2002) "Punishment and Control." in Maguire, M., Morgan, R., and 
Reiner, R. (Ed) The Oxford Handbook of Criminology. 
 
Jordan, J. (2004) "Beyong Belief? Police, Rape and Women's Credibility." 
Criminal Justice 4(1):29-59. 
 
Kersten, J. (1990) "A Gender Specific Look at Patterns of Violence in Juvenile 
Institutions - or Are Girls Really More Difficult to Handle." International 
Journal of the Sociology of Law 18(4):473-493. 
 
Klinger, D.A. (1994) "Demeanor or Crime - Why Hostile Citizens Are More 
Likely to Be Arrested." Criminology 32(3):475-493. 
 


 
12
Loftus, B. (2009) Police Culture in a Changing World. Oxford, Oxford University 
Press. 
 
Loftus, B. (2010) 'Police Occupational Culture: Classic Themes, Altered Times. 
Policing and Society 20 (1): 1-20. 
 
Loucks, N., Malloch, M., McIvor, G., and Gelsthorpe, L. (2006) Evaluation of 
the 218 Centre. Scottish Executive Justice Department Edinburgh 
 
Martin, C. (1996) "The Impact of Equal Opportunities Policies on the Day-to-
Day Experiences of Women Police Constables." British Journal of 
Criminology 36(4):510-528. 
 
McIvor, G. and Burman, M. (2011) "Understanding the Drivers of Female 
Imprisonment in Scotland." Journal Article). 
 
Miller, J. and White, N.A. (2004) "Situational Effects of Gender Inequality." in 
Alder, C. and Worrall, A. (Ed) Girls' Violence: Myths and Realities. 
Albany: State University of New York Press. 
 
Miller, S., Blackler, J. and Alexandra, A. (2006) Police Ethics 2nd Edition. 
Winchester, Waterside Press. 
 
Narduzzo, D. (2007) "An Examination of How Changes in Policing Practices 
Have Affected Criminal Justice Discrimination against Minority Ethnic 
Communities." Internet Journal of Criminology 27-02-2009 
 
O'Brien, K., Hobbs, D., and Westmarland, L. (2008) "Negotiating Violence and 
Gender: Security and the Night Time Economy in the Uk." in Gendrot, S. 
and Spierenburgh, P. (Ed) Violence in Europe: Historical and 
Contemporary Perspectives. New York: Springer. 
 
Otto, S. (1981) "Women, Alcohol and Social Control." in Hutter, B. and Williams, 
G. (Ed) Controlling Women: The Normal and the Deviant. London: 
Croom Helm in association with the Oxford University Women’s Studies 
Committee. 
 
Piliavin, I. and Briar, S. (1964) "Police Encounters with Juveniles." American 
Journal of Sociology 70(2):206-214. 
 
Popper, K.R.(1994) 'Models, Instruments and Truth: The Rationality Principle 
in the Social Sciences' in The Myth of The Framework edited by  
Notturno, M.A. London, Routledge.  
 
Reiner, R. (2010) The Politics of The Police 4th Edition. Oxford, Oxford 
University Press. 
 
 
 


 
13
Robertson, A. (2005) "Ladette Drinkers Can Cause Violence in City’." Evening 
Times 01/06/05. 
 
Sanders, A. and Young, R. (2003) "Police Powers." in Newburn, T. (Ed) The 
Handbook of Policing. Devon: William. 
 
Schur, E.M. (1983) Labeling Women Deviant : Gender, Stigma, and Social 
Control. Philadelphia: Temple University Press. 
 
Scottish Government. (2011) The Changing Face of Scotland’s Police. 
Edinburgh 
 
Scraton, P.E. (1987) Law, Order and the Authoritian State : Readings in Critical 
Criminology. Milton Keynes: Open University Press. 
 
Sealock, M.D. and Simpson, S.S. (1998) "Unravelling Bias in Arrest Decisions: 
The Role of Juvenile Offender Type-Scripts." Justice Quarterly 
15(3):427-457. 
 
Sharpe, G. (2009) "The Trouble with Girls Today: Professional Perspectives on 
Young Women’s Offending." Youth Justice 9(3):254-269. 
 
Smart, C. (1981) "Law and the Control of Women’s Sexuality: The Case of the 
1950s." in Hutter, B. and Williams, G. (Ed) Controlling Women: The 
Normal and the Deviant. London: Croom Helm in association with the 
Oxford University Women’s Studies Committee. 
 
Smith, D.A. and Visher, C.A. (1981) "Street-Level Justice: Situational 
Determinants of Police Arrest Decisions." Social Problems 29(2):167-
177. 
 
Smith, D.A., Visher, C.A., and Davidson, L.A. (1984) "Equity and Discretionary 
Justice - the Influence of Race on Police Arrest Decisions." Journal of 
Criminal Law & Criminology 75(1):234-249. 
 
Stanko, E.A. and Heidensohn, F. (1995) "Gender and Crime." Criminal Justice 
Matters 19(3-5. 
 
Visher, C.A. (1983) "Gender, Police Arrest Decisions, and Notions of Chivalry." 
Criminology 21(1):5-28. 
 
Waddington, P.A.J. (1999) "Police (Canteen) Sub-Culture." British Journal of 
Criminology 39(2):287-309. 
 
Worden, R.E. and Shepard, R.L. (1996) "Demeanor, Crime, and Police 
Behavior: A Reexamination of the Police Services Study Data." 
Criminology 34(1):83-105. 
 
Westmarland, L. (2001) Gender and Policing : Sex, Power and Police Culture. 
Devon: Willan. 


 
14
 
—. (2008) "Police Cultures." in Newburn, T. (Ed) Handbook of Policing. Devon 
Willan. 
 
White, J. W., & Kowalski, R. (1994) ‘Deconstructing the Myth of the 
Nonaggressive Female: A Feminist Analysis’ Psychology of Women 
Quarterly, 18 (4): 477-498. 
 
Worden, R.E. and Shepard, R.L. (1996) "Demeanor, Crime, and Police 
Behavior: A Reexamination of the Police Services Study Data." 
Criminology 34(1):83-105. 
 
Worrall, A. (1990) Offending Women : Female Lawbreakers and the Criminal 
Justice Systems. London: Routledge. 
 
Zhan, M.A., Brunbaugh, S., Steffensmeier, D., Feld, B.C., Morash, M., 
Chesney-Lind, M., Miller, J., Payne, A.A., Gottfredson, D.C. and 
Kruttschnitt, D. (2008) ‘Violence by Teenage Girls: Trends and 
Contexts’ Girls Study Group: Understanding and Responding to Girls’ 
Delinquency. Washington, U.S. Department of Justice.