Traditional medical care focuses on improving health by identifying and treating health problems that have already produced symptoms or complications. In contrast, preventive medical care focuses on preventing health problems from occurring. Preventive care also focuses on diagnosing problems before symptoms or complications develop, when the chances of recovery are greatest. When done well, prevention improves overall health and reduces health care costs.
The general goal of prevention is to reduce a person’s likelihood of becoming ill or disabled or of dying prematurely. Preventive medical care is not a case of “one size fits all.” Specific goals are developed by and for each person. Specific goals depend heavily on a person’s risk profile—that is, the person’s risk of developing a disease based on such factors as age, sex, genetic background, lifestyle, and physical and social environment. Factors that increase risk are called risk factors.
Examples of Risk Factors for Health Problems
| Examples of Risk Factors for Health Problems |  | 
|---|---|
| Category | Risk Factors | 
|---|---|
| Diet | Eating an unbalanced, unhealthy diet | 
| Genetic | A genetic makeup that makes a person more likely to develop a specific disease, such as heart disease, colon cancer, breast cancer, cervical cancer, diabetes, mental health conditions, or substance use disorders | 
| Mental health | Stressful situations such as: A new job Difficulty at work Death of a loved one Not getting sufficient sleep Getting married or divorced | 
| Physical activity | Sedentary lifestyle (not getting enough exercise) | 
| Physical environment | Inability to maintain a safe environment, for example, by the following: For all people: Not keeping firearms secured, not using bicycle helmets and seat belts, not having working smoke detectors and fire extinguishers in the home, and not having heating systems and fireplaces inspected and cleaned periodically For children: Not using child safety seats, bicycle helmets, flame-retardant sleepwear, and window and chair guards; not assessing the home for leaded paint and removing if applicable; and not safely storing medications and toxic substances For older adults: Not removing or correcting hazards that can cause falls (such as loose throw rugs and dim lighting) | 
| Social environment | Neighborhood violence Family violence High-risk sexual behavior (such as having several partners or not using condoms) Difficulty getting along with others Structural racism | 
| Substance use | Smoking cigarettes, cigars, or pipes Chewing tobacco Using illicit drugs Misusing alcohol or prescription medications | 
| Vaccinations | Not having received all recommended vaccinations | 
| Weight | Weight that is above what is recommended for height and sex | 
| Work environment | Working with potential toxins (for example, asbestos or ionizing radiation), machinery, power tools, farm equipment, or other possibly dangerous objects | 
Some risk factors are beyond a person’s control, such as age and family history. Other risk factors, such as a person’s lifestyle and physical and social environment, can be altered, potentially decreasing risk of developing disorders. In addition, risk can be reduced through good medical care.
Most of the medical care that infants, older children, and adolescents receive (specifically well-child care) is aimed at recognizing risk factors and preventing problems. For example, doctors' visits are focused on detecting early signs of developing problems. Routine health care also includes a review of the child's immunization record and administration of recommended vaccines. Health care professionals also counsel parents about preventing accidents and injuries in children and adolescents.
More Information
The following English-language resource may be useful. Please note that The Manual is not responsible for the content of this resource.
- U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) Published Recommendations: The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force publishes recommendations about the effectiveness of various screening tests and preventive strategies for specific conditions. These recommendations are based on a systematic review of the evidence.