2007
No. 17
Latino Credit Card Use: Debt Trap or
Ticket to Prosperity?
By Beatriz Ibarra and Eric Rodriguez* 
*
Beatriz Ibarra is the Assets Policy Analyst at NCLR, and Eric Rodriguez is the Director
of the Policy Analysis Center. Jennifer Kadis, Director of Quality Control, and 
Ofelia Ardón-Jones, Production Manager/Senior Design Specialist, prepared the paper
for publication. A special thank-you goes to Jeanne Hogarth,Amberly Hazembuller,
and Britton Lombardi, from the Federal Reserve Board for assisting in data tabulation.
The authors also thank Gail Hillebrand, Consumers Union; Ed Mierzwinski, U.S.
PIRG; and Charles Kamasaki, NCLR, for reviewing an initial draft of the issue brief
and providing valuable feedback.
**
The terms “Hispanic” and “Latino” are used interchangeably by the U.S. Census Bureau
and throughout this document to identify persons of Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban,
Central and South American, Dominican, and Spanish descent; they may be of any race.
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . .1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2
Credit Card Market:
Structural Factors 
and Barriers . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5
Challenges in Policy
and Practice . . . . . . . . . . . . . .8
Policy
Recommendations . . . . . . .14
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . .17
Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . .17
INSIDE
INSIDE
NCLR
NATIONAL COUNCIL OF LA RAZAI S S U E B R I E F
INTRODUCTION
n recent years, select lawmakers, experts, and consumer
and civil rights advocates have been urging Congress to
examine policies and practices in the credit card industry
more carefully. Credit cards are now ubiquitous and used by
most Americans to improve their credit ratings for wealth-
building purposes or to sustain themselves financially. However,
the growth of the credit card market has been accompanied by
mounting public outrage over policies and practices in the
industry and an emerging public policy concern over the
implications of rising household debt. The 110th Congress has
begun with a thematic focus on the economic challenges facing
middle-class American families, and the current policy
environment has given momentum to a renewed focus on the
credit card industry.
With respect to credit cards, Hispanic** families are at an
important intersection. They need to access credit but are in
danger of becoming victimized and, because of their economic
I


standing, rising household debt is a serious
concern. At the same time, a staggering racial
and ethnic wealth gap exists; in 2002 the median
net worth of Hispanic households was $7,932
compared to $88,651 for White non-Hispanic
households.1 Increasing wealth levels for Latinos
will undoubtedly be accompanied by some form
of increased household debt. Good public
policies are needed that promote wealth
accumulation and access to good credit, without
endangering the financial standing of families.
As previous National Council of La Raza
(NCLR) analyses show, disparities in wealth can
be traced to factors that result in limited access
to financial wealth-building products such as
mortgages and savings accounts. Many have
sought to explain the disparity in participation
between Latinos and non-Latinos in financial
markets as related to language or cultural
issues. Accordingly, the remedies have often
been relegated to activities such as translating
promotional materials for financial products,
while few experts have even bothered to
document or study the Hispanic experience in
any depth.
That said, moving Latino families into the ranks
of the American middle class will undoubtedly
entail more Hispanic workers having access to
and using credit cards. It is imperative that
policy-makers and experts have a better
understanding of the Latino experience and
perspective if effective policies are to be
developed and implemented. Accordingly, this
issue brief examines how the structure of the
market and credit card industry policies and
practices impact Hispanic access to affordable
credit and the lack of regulatory oversight in
the market. Finally, the brief will provide
policy recommendations for empowering and
protecting Hispanic consumers.
BACKGROUND
The U.S. credit card market is dynamic and
complex and includes a number of important
players: banks or credit card issuers, payment
facilitators, credit bureaus, merchants, and
consumers.
Many banks and merchants, including utility
companies and other creditors, accept credit
and debit card payment for consumer
purchases. For this reason, card payment
associations that facilitate and process credit
card transactions between these parties are
central players in the market. Associations,
such as Visa and MasterCard, compete with
Discover and American Express, two
proprietary cards with their own payment
networks. These associations have been
instrumental in innovating and expanding the
credit card market, in large part by integrating
technology that helps to connect credit card
issuers with merchants in more advanced ways
(e.g., telephone and online purchasing).
Although credit card issuers set pricing,
associations set credit card processing rules. In
midyear 2006,Visa and MasterCard remained
the largest credit card brands with purchase
volume reaching nearly $600 billion and a
71.2% share of the market.2 Visa and
MasterCard alone reported 584 million credit
cards in circulation and 6.8 trillion transactions.3
The ten credit card issuers with the largest
credit card balances outstanding own 90% of
the total market.4 Top issuers include Citigroup
Inc., Chase Card Services, Bank of America,
which now owns MBNA, and Capital One
Financial Corp. Furthermore, credit cards are a
major part of overall U.S. banking business;
Citigroup’s credit card services reportedly
accounted for approximately 17% of the bank’s
Page 2


$24.59 billion of net income in 2005.5 Credit
card business is attractive to big banks, in large
part because the profits that a bank collects
from credit card lending can be three or more
times the ordinary rate of return on the bank’s
equity for traditional deposits and lending
services.6 In 2004, the credit card industry as a
whole collected $43 billion in profit from interest
and finance charges, annual fees, and punitive fees
charged to customers, such as late payment,
over-the-limit, and balance transfer fees.7
In the marketplace, consumers are broadly
differentiated by factors such as their credit
history and income. They may also be
distinguished by their credit card behavior. For
example, credit card users may be placed into
several general categories, including individuals
who 1) use credit cards but do not carry a
balance; 2) sometimes carry a balance; and 3)
usually or always carry a balance. There are
also American households who do not have
credit cards at all. The figures on Hispanic
household credit card use reveal the following:
◗
The vast majority of American
households use credit cards, but a
substantial share of Latino
households do not. According to the
2004 Survey of Consumer Finances, more
than 80% of all respondents said that they
use credit cards compared to only 56% of
all Hispanic households.8
◗
Credit card use is on the rise in the
Hispanic community. Between 1992
and 2001, the share of Hispanic families
who held credit cards grew from 43% to
53%.9 The average credit card debt among
Hispanics is also on the rise, increasing by
nearly 20% between 1992 and 2001, from
$3,082 to $3,691.10
◗
The majority of American
households who use credit cards do
not carry a balance, but most Latino
households do. According to the 2004
Survey of Consumer Finances, more than
45% of all respondents who use credit
cards reported carrying a balance
compared to about three out of four (77%)
Latino respondents.11
◗
A substantial share of all credit card
users and a proportionately larger
share of Latino credit card users have
difficulty managing their credit card
debt. According to a recent survey,
approximately 19.3% of Hispanics described
their situation as “burdensome and not
enough money to pay down [the balance],”
and 11.4% of Hispanics reported they were
“maxed out and can’t use [their cards].”12
However, 12.7% of all respondents
characterized their debt situation as
“burdensome and not enough money to pay
down [the balance],” while 7.3% were
“maxed out and can’t use [their cards].”13
Credit cards are an important method for
establishing a consistent and verifiable track
record of borrowing and paying back credit,
which is critical for long-term family wealth-
building. Using credit cards and paying the
balance each month may also improve an
individual’s credit score. A recent study showed
that 17.1% of Hispanics say they keep some debt
to build their credit score, compared to 16.7%
of African Americans and 12.9% of Whites.14
Nevertheless, to build a good credit history,
Hispanic consumers need greater access to
mainstream financial institutions where the most
affordable credit products are developed and sold.
Page 3


The disparity in credit card use between
Hispanics and their non-Hispanic peers is
problematic. Without access to mainstream,
affordable, unsecured credit cards, Hispanic
consumers are forced to rely on subprime or
predatory lenders that charge fees which can
effectively add up to 300% interest for short-
term loans. These lenders often prey on
vulnerable, low-income populations to make a
profit. Some loan products are even inherently
designed to put borrowers in a perpetual debt
cycle, such as payday loans.
At the same time, accumulating and revolving
substantial amounts of credit card debt can also
negatively affect a consumer’s financial status.
The amount of revolving credit debt
outstanding among Americans reached $825.2
billion in 2005,15 and there are concerns about
the impact that accumulating debt has on net
worth, particularly for Hispanics. In 2001, the
average Hispanic household with credit card
debt spent 19% of its income on paying down
debt, compared to 24% for White households
and 20% for African Americans.16 These data
reveal that Latino credit card users are
disproportionately within the category of
American households most likely to struggle
with managing credit card debt.
Page 4
Important Court Cases:  In Brief
The first charge card appeared on the market in 1914 to cover the cost of goods and services
bought from a particular merchant.  Banks entered the credit card market in the late 1950s, which
over time enabled the expansion of the open-end, general purpose credit card for use nationwide.  
Not all consumers had access to credit following the development of credit cards.  Lenders began
to market credit cards more aggressively following the 1978 U.S. Supreme Court decision,
Marquette vs. First Omaha Service Corp.* The Court held in Marquette that lenders could charge the
highest interest rate allowed in the state where it is incorporated.  Because companies could
easily relocate to states with higher usury rate ceilings, the case resulted in the liberalization of
state usury ceilings, forcing states to deregulate their credit card laws.  Virtually free from state
usury restrictions, lenders could offer credit to consumers whom they perceived to be high-risk
borrowers and charge high interest rates to cover the risk.  Many credit card issuers incorporated
in states where they would have the most flexibility in the rates and fees that they charged, such
as Delaware and South Dakota.  
In Smiley vs. Citibank (1996), the Court held that fees, like interest rates, could be determined by the
laws of the state where the lender is incorporated.** The decision led to a sharp increase in the
amount that issuers charged for late fees.   
The Marquette and Smiley decisions contributed significantly to the credit card industry’s growth
and profitability.  Today, the weakest state laws govern the industry nationwide, essentially
creating barriers for other states to enact usury rate ceilings. 
*
Marquette Nat’l Bank of Minn. V. First of Omaha Serv. Corp., 439 U.S. 299, 301 (1978).   
** Smiley v. Citibank (S.D.), N.A. 517 U.S. 735, 740-47 (1996).


Page 5
CREDIT CARD MARKET:
STRUCTURAL FACTORS
AND BARRIERS
There is general agreement that the credit card
market currently maintains a level of
competitiveness that should benefit all
consumers. Though several companies
dominate the market and the number of credit
card issuers is shrinking, the proliferation of
offers with “teaser” rates (i.e., low or zero
introductory interest rates) is evidence of
robust competition and suggests that many
consumers may be well served.* Indeed,
individuals who use credit cards but do not
carry a balance can be said to be exerting
considerable pressure on card companies to
improve offers in the market.17 
That said, Latinos are less likely than their non-
Latino peers to have access to mainstream
credit cards. Moreover, for those who use
cards, Hispanics are more likely than Whites to
have credit cards with high interest rates. For
example, a recent study revealed that 12.89%
of Hispanic households have an interest rate
greater than 20% on their credit card with the
highest balance, compared to 7.5% of White
households.18 These disparities in the market 
can be traced, in large part, to the following
factors:
◗
The methods used to evaluate
creditworthiness. Before extending
credit to a consumer, a credit card issuer
will undertake a process to gather and
analyze information on existing or
prospective borrowers regarding their
ability to repay. Under the Fair Credit
Reporting Act (FCRA), credit card issuers
have access to consumer information
collected by the three major credit
bureaus: Experian, Equifax, and
TransUnion.** In addition to relying on
consumer credit scores, issuers take into
account the number of credit cards the
consumer currently holds, combined credit
card balances, credit limits on every credit
card, and any record of past
delinquencies.19 How well a consumer is
rated on these factors will determine
whether the lender extends credit, the
amount of credit extended, and the annual
percentage rate.
The industry’s reliance on these factors
suggests that Latinos are less likely than
their peers to receive offers of credit.
According to a study by the Center for
Community Capitalism, 22% of Hispanic
borrowers had no credit score compared to
*
Notably, the Government Accountability Office (GAO) reports that consumers with access to credit cards with
low or zero introductory interest rates hold on to that rate for an average of eight months.
**
These credit bureaus compile and sell lists of consumer names and credit reports to credit card issuers, which
contain sensitive, personal financial information of these consumers. Under FCRA, issuers may also access
confidential consumer information requested in connection with “firm offers of credit.” The information sold to
issuers may only be used to inform preapproved credit card solicitations and may not be used to target and
market to potential customers. In March 2001, the Federal Trade Commission issued a ruling against TransUnion
for violating FCRA by selling information to target marketers who lack one of the “permissible purposes”
enumerated under the Act. The ruling may be found at: http://www.ftc.gov/opa/2000/03/transunion.htm.


4% of Whites and 3% of African
Americans.20 Latinos’ aversion to debt
arguably makes them more creditworthy
than their peers, but they are penalized for
their lack of a repayment history.
Furthermore, the standard observable
characteristics that credit card issuers rely
on to determine creditworthiness ensure
that Hispanics with credit scores will
receive offers with less favorable terms
than their peers. For instance, Hispanics
who use cards are more likely than their
peers to report making late payments that
exceed 60 days.21 In a recent study, among
the individuals who reported making late
payments, 43.95% were Hispanic.22
◗
Search costs. Consumers expend time
and energy on identifying which cards to
apply for, completing credit card
applications, and waiting for a response
from the credit card issuer. The effort
needed to complete this process may differ
depending on the type of borrower and the
borrower’s resources, including education
and Internet access. In many cases, rather
than consumers seeking credit card issuers,
companies use consumer information to
identify and pursue potential new
customers. Credit card issuers rely on
consumer credit information to determine
whether to tender preapproved credit card
offers. Those with good credit payment
histories may be more likely to receive
multiple credit card offers, effectively
reducing these customers’ search costs.
The number of credit card solicitations
mailed to individuals has significantly
increased, from 1.1 billion in 1990 to 5.23
billion in 2004.23 In some ways, through
prescreening and preapproval offers, credit
card issuers are choosing their potential
customers.* Another source estimates that
the average consumer in the U.S. receives
approximately 40 credit card solicitations a
year.24 Because of overall credit status and
limited experience in the U.S. credit
market, Hispanic consumers are less likely
than their peers to receive multiple credit
Page 6
*
Another important means of identifying and targeting consumers is through the use of affinity credit cards.
Affinity credit cards, which consist of a contract between an issuer and a group or club formed around a common
interest, have proven to be a successful marketing tool for reaching new customers. For example, credit card
issuers have developed affinity cards to target religious groups, university alumni, and minority groups.
Average among
Total 
Hispanic
those who use cards
Households
Households
Number of Cards
3
3
Carry a balance*
45%
77%
Median balance
$2,380
$1,900
Median credit limit
$12,000 
$6,000
for households who 
reported carrying a 
balance
Hispanics carry higher balances as a percentage of
their credit limits.  The median balance for
Hispanics represents 32% of their credit limit,
compared to 19.8% for other households.  
Source: Unpublished data from the 2004 Survey of
Consumer Finances tabulated by the Federal Reserve
on behalf of NCLR.
* NCLR calculation based on data from the 2004
Survey of Consumer Finances.
Credit Limit and Balance of
Total Households and 
Hispanic Households 


card offers and, thus, need to spend
relatively more time and energy searching
for cards with favorable terms.
◗
Shopping. The effort a consumer spends
on “shopping” for credit is influenced by
various factors. The 2004 Survey of
Consumer Finances showed that 52% of
individuals who use credit cards
characterize their shopping for credit as
“moderate” to “substantial.” This may
suggest that individuals are more likely to
comparison shop for rates and fees. Only
7% of Hispanic consumers who carry a
balance report “substantial” shopping for
credit, compared to 12% for similar White
consumers. Low shopping among
individuals with credit card balances serves
to lock in vulnerable consumers. The
research also shows that households with
large credit card balances are more likely to
be rejected or to be granted a lower-than-
desirable credit limit, suggesting that these
households may be discouraged from
shopping.25 The 2004 Survey of Consumer
Finances reports that 25% of Hispanic
consumers who use cards and were denied
a loan did not reapply for fear of rejection.
In other words, negative experiences with
shopping for credit can cause some Latino
consumers, especially those with balances,
to stop shopping altogether.
◗
Economic status. Individuals who are
unable to pay off their credit card balance
every month often depend on credit cards
to make ends meet. A recent household
debt survey showed that, of the individuals
carrying credit card debt, only 12% did not
report any type of safety-net usage.26
When asked what contributed to their
credit card debt, a leading answer from all
respondents was basic living expenses
(33%) and medical expenses (29%).27 For
Latinos, 39% reported basic living
expenses and 30% reported medical
expenses as contributing to household
debt.28 Notably, for many Hispanic
consumers, lending money to family
members is a significant contributor to
their overall household debt.
◗
Industry policies and fees. Credit card
issuers also develop and implement certain
policies in addition to standard fees for
existing customer accounts. Standard fees
that apply evenly to all consumers are
relatively well-known (e.g., balance
transfer fee, late fee). Other credit card
policies, on the other hand, are relatively
more obscure and include monthly minimum
payment requirements, grace periods on
purchases, deadlines for payment receipt, and
standards regarding whether to offer more
than one card to a customer. As with fees,
the application of these policies can vary
widely among credit card issuers and with
different types of credit cards issued by the
same company. Such policies can significantly
influence the likelihood that a consumer is
charged a punitive fee. The impact of a card
issuer’s policies and fees also vary depending
on the financial status of the borrower. For
those who are revolving credit card balances
and accumulating debt, issuer policies and
fees can exacerbate their financial troubles
and firmly ensconce them in long-term and
unmanageable household debt. (See box on
page 11 for other fees and abusive practices.)
◗
Switch costs. Consumers are often
charged a fee to switch or transfer a
balance to another credit card. Frequently
switching or transferring a balance may also
Page 7


Page 8
harm a consumer’s credit score. Still, for
consumers facing interest rates as high as
28% or 30%, transferring a balance to a
credit card with more favorable terms
may be in their best interest. However,
consumers with high balances are more
likely to have their transfer credit card
application denied by the issuer. These
consumers are also more likely to be
offered credit cards with unfavorable
terms. This is significant because high-
balance consumers who accept credit card
offers with inferior terms are more likely
to default.29 Furthermore, those
consumers who have a hard time switching
cards are more likely than others to be held
captive by their credit card issuer.
The 2004 Survey of Consumer Finances
shows that 34% of Hispanic households who
carry a balance reported being rejected for a
loan. Hispanic households are also slightly
more likely than total households to cite
“credit” as a reason for the rejection (23%
compared to 20%, respectively).30 The
opportunity to switch or transfer a balance
to a credit card with more favorable terms is
not available to all credit card customers.
For Hispanics, the inability to switch credit
cards may extend the time it takes to pay
down balances, explaining why some Latinos
disproportionately report that credit debt is
burdensome.
CHALLENGES IN POLICY
AND PRACTICE
As described in the previous section, there are a
variety of structural factors and market forces
that help to explain inadequate participation by
latinos in the mainstream credit card market.
In addition to these factors, many policies and
practices adopted by credit card issuers
adversely affect consumers.
Secured and Unsecured
Credit Cards
Two major types of credit cards dominate
the market: secured and unsecured.
Secured credit cards may be used to pay for
the same goods and services as unsecured
cards, but require consumers to open an
account or purchase a certificate of deposit
as security for the line of credit they receive.
If a borrower misses a payment, the lender
may withdraw money from the borrower’s
account. The issuer tenders credit in
accordance with the terms of a contract, and
the borrower promises to pay. These cards
are typically reserved for those without
easily verifiable payment histories or those
with poor credit ratings. Although many
secured credit card issuers charge an
application and processing fee that may be
burdensome for low-income consumers,
there are conditions under which this type of
card is good for consumers. For those who
lack access to unsecured credit cards,
secured credit cards may be the only method
for building (or rebuilding) a credit history.
Furthermore, some secured credit card
issuers report the card to credit bureaus as
unsecured, which may improve the
borrower’s credit score depending on their
behavior. By contrast, unsecured credit cards
provide a line of credit that is not secured by
personal property.


As the data and analyses reveal, Latinos
who use credit cards are more likely to find
themselves with unmanageable debt and
are highly susceptible to adverse policies
and practices. As a result, many low-
income Hispanic families are trapped in a
cycle of debt. The following issues,
challenges, and policies are of particular
concern for Latinos.
◗
Monthly minimum balance
requirements are deceptive. By making
only the monthly minimum payments,
consumers carry their credit card balances
longer, which means they ultimately pay
more in interest and are at higher risk for
incurring fees. As a result, these
consumers are heavily burdened by their
credit balances. Many consumers do not
recognize the disadvantage of paying only
the monthly minimum payment
requirement. According to a PBS
investigatory report, 35 million Americans
pay only the required minimum,31 and
credit card issuers benefit from this
practice through more finance charges. As
previously mentioned, Latino consumers
report carrying higher balances than their
peers and having trouble managing debt.
Some consumers are unaware of how much
it costs to make only the minimum
payment, and for other consumers the
minimum is all they can afford. Without
the knowledge or necessary funds to pay the
principal, many consumers will be paying
off their debt for many years to come.
◗
Universal default and change-in-
terms provisions are unethical.
Universal default is a policy that enables a
credit card issuer to increase a consumer’s
interest rate based on the consumer’s credit
behavior with other creditors. Events that
may trigger application of the universal
default policy include exceeding credit
limits; making a late payment on a
mortgage, auto, or credit card loan; or
negative changes in a consumer’s credit
score. Depending on the credit card issuer,
the penalty interest rate could exceed 30%.
The Government Accountability Office
(GAO) recently reported that while many
card issuers have ceased applying universal
default, some still do.
The GAO also reported that four of the
largest credit card issuers list unfair
change-in-terms provisions in their credit
card agreements.32 Change-in-terms
provisions enable the issuer to change the
terms of the credit card agreement at any
time as long as the issuer provides written
notice to the consumer 15 days before the
issuer changes the consumer’s rates.
Although written notice is better than
never disclosing the change in rates, studies
show that a majority of consumers do not
read change-in-terms notices, defeating
their purpose.33 Even those who do read
such notices are likely to be confused by
the complex and technical language used.
The ability of an issuer to unilaterally
change a contract whenever it chooses is
exceptional and dangerous for consumers.
This so-called “penalty pricing” is common
in many industries for defaulting on a
promise to pay. However, the penalty
interest rates that credit card issuers apply
to customer accounts far exceed their cost.
This is especially true because many issuers
also collect a fee from consumers for the
triggering event (e.g., over-the-credit-limit
fee or late payment fee) leading to a change
Page 9


in rate. Additionally, the penalty interest
rate, in many cases, does not adequately
represent the customer’s risk. For
example, a customer with a favorable 5%
annual percentage rate (APR) who has
never missed a credit card payment could
be subjected to an interest rate of as much
as 30% APR or more for being one day late
on a payment. Further, the penalty interest
rate may be applied retroactively,
effectively charging consumers more for
products or services that they already
purchased.34 Finally, Hispanics are more
likely than their peers to report making
late payments that exceed 60 days.35 One
study showed that among the individuals
who reported making late payments,
43.95% were Hispanic.36 Consequently,
universal default policies and change-in-
terms provisions disproportionately and
adversely harm Latino customers.
◗
True comparison shopping is next to
impossible. In its review of multiple
credit card agreements, the GAO made the
following statement regarding disclosures:
“[R]equired disclosures often were poorly
organized, burying important information
in text or scattering information about a
single topic in numerous places. The design
of the disclosures often made them hard to
read with large amounts of text in small,
condensed typefaces and poor, ineffective
headings to distinguish important topics
from surrounding text.”37 It is close to
impossible for a consumer to differentiate
between credit cards that are available on
the market. Important pricing information,
such as the change-in-terms provision, is
hidden in the fine print of the credit card
agreement, and it is hard to anticipate the
effect of such a clause until it is invoked.
Consequently, consumers may not be aware
that issuers can change their rate terms
until their rates are changed on existing
debt and they are notified through the mail.
◗
Inflation and application of fees are
out of control. The amount and range of
fees is on the rise.* In the 1980s, a typical
late fee ranged from $5 to $10.38 Today,
the average late fee applied to a consumer
account is $33.39 Notably, the price set for
fees does not appear to be associated with
the cost or additional risk to the lender.
Credit card fees have dramatically increased
while the cost for banks to purchase funds
has not. Credit card issuers claim that they
charge fees to deter consumers from paying
late. However, many credit card issuers
apply penalty fees even if the consumer pays
on the day that payment is due, and some
issuers charge a fee for paying over the
phone.
◗
Double-billing is unfair. The foreign
conversion fee is applied to a customer’s
account to cover the cost of converting
foreign currency into dollars when a
purchase is made outside of the U.S. Firms
that process credit card transactions, such
as Visa or MasterCard, traditionally charge
Page 10
*
The wide range of fees include the annual fee, balance transfer fee, late payment fee, over-the-credit-limit fee,
credit limit increase fee, set-up fee, return item fee, expedited payment fee, expedited delivery fee, replacement
card fee, additional card fee, and the foreign conversion fee, just to name a few. For example, credit card issuers
may charge consumers an annual fee, a participation fee, a program fee, or a monthly maintenance fee. Further,
some fees are one-time fees, some are monthly, and some are charged annually.


Page 11
the fee to the consumer. According to
Consumer Action’s 2004 credit card
survey, theses firms charge 1% of the 
cost of each transaction,40 and American
Express charges 2% of the cost of each
transaction.41 More recently, credit card
issuers have begun charging an additional
fee for purchases made abroad. A recent
study showed that 26 out of 45 issuers
charge a foreign conversion fee in addition
to the fee charged by transaction processing
firms.42 The total average conversion fee
may be as high as 3% of the amount of each
transaction in U.S. dollars.43 Foreign
conversion fees charged by both the
transaction processing firm and the bank
results in double-billing for the consumer
for every purchase they make abroad.
Additional Abusive Credit Card Industry Practices
Double-cycle billing: Double-cycle billing enables credit card issuers to charge interest to a
consumer on a debt that the consumer has already paid.  For example, if a consumer with a zero-
interest rate credit card pays $450 on a $500 balance, the issuer will charge the consumer interest
on the $500 amount plus the $50 amount that the consumer has left to pay. 
Issuing multiple low-limit credit cards to borrowers: According to a recent article in
BusinessWeek magazine, Capital One Financial Corp. (COFC) has adopted the practice of issuing
multiple credit cards with $300 to $500 credit limits to subprime borrowers.* Owning multiple
credit cards with low credit limits increases the likelihood that a consumer will exceed those
limits and make late payments because of the difficulty associated with juggling multiple cards.
For banks and issuers, giving multiple credit cards to subprime borrowers increases their
opportunity to collect penalty fees.  
Late payment cut-off times: Many credit card issuers penalize consumers who pay on the day
that payment is due but not before a certain “cut-off” time.  For example, a payment received on
the day payment is due, but after 2:00 p.m., may be late under some credit card issuer policies,
leading to a late payment charge averaging $34.  Some banks also impose penalty interest rates
for even a single late payment.  
Mandatory arbitration clauses: Mandatory arbitration clauses are prevalent in credit card
agreements, essentially stripping consumers of their day in court.  Moreover, arbitration appears
to disproportionately benefit card issuers over consumers.  Studies show that out of 19,705 cases
decided in arbitration, only 87 consumers prevailed.**
Fees for telephone payments: Some credit card issuers charge a fee to consumers for paying
their bill over the telephone, even if the payment is on time.  Further, disclosing the telephone
payment penalty fee in a credit card solicitation is not required under the Truth in Lending Act.  
Many of the practices listed above are either unfair or unreasonable.  These practices harm
consumers even when they are exhibiting good consumer behavior such as paying their credit
card on the day payment is due.  Some in the industry have clearly adopted these practices for the
sole purpose of maximizing profits.
*
Berner, Robert, “Cap One’s Credit Trap,” BusinessWeek, November 6, 2006.
** Carter, Carolyn, Elizabeth Renauart, Margot Saunders, and Chi Chi Wu, “The Credit Card Market and
Regulation:  In Need of Repair,” North Carolina Banking Institute, Vol. 10, March 2006. 


Page 12
These fees affect all consumers who travel
and especially immigrants who travel from
the U.S. to their home country and use
their credit card to make purchases.
◗
Credit reporting and scoring are
flawed. The current system of credit
reporting has three main flaws. First, there
is no requirement for banks to report
consumer behavior to the three major
credit bureaus. Second, the information
contained in a consumer’s credit report
may vary from one credit bureau to the
next. This particularly impacts Hispanic
consumers with limited credit histories
because lenders may not have all the
information necessary to assess their
creditworthiness. Studies show that 29%
of consumer credit scores differ by 50
points between credit bureaus.44 This may
not matter for a high-scoring consumer,
but could place millions of other
consumers unfairly into subprime ratings.
Furthermore, studies show that 50% to
70% of credit reports contain inaccurate
information regarding a consumer’s general
credit history.45 Third, there is no
requirement for lenders to weigh all three
credit scores to determine the
creditworthiness of potential customers.
Also, most credit scoring models collect
only limited information on other data that
could demonstrate creditworthiness, such
as utility bills. These trends may explain
why many Hispanics remain disconnected
from and underserved by credit markets,
including auto, mortgage, and credit card
lending.
◗
Predators target Latinos for credit 
card-related scams with impunity.
Hispanics are more than twice as likely as 
non-Hispanic Whites to be victims of fraud.
According to a Federal Trade Commission
(FTC) survey, 14.3% of Hispanics are
victims of fraud, compared to 6.4% of non-
Hispanic Whites.46 Common credit-related
scams committed in the Hispanic
community include fraudulent credit repair
services and affinity credit card scams.*
Consumer Rights in the Fair
Credit Reporting Act (FCRA):
In Brief
In sum, FCRA promotes accuracy and fairness in
the credit reporting process and privacy of
information in files of consumer reporting
agencies.  Under the Fair and Accurate Credit
Transaction Act of 2003 within FCRA, consumers
have the right to:
❚Receive notice if their application for credit
has been denied and receive information
about the agency that provided the
information to the creditor
❚Receive a free credit report annually from
each credit bureau 
❚Dispute inaccurate or incomplete information
in their credit report directly with the
furnisher of the information
❚Place a fraud alert in their credit file to
prevent identity theft or fraud
For more information, visit the National Consumer
Law Center website at http://www.nclc.org/action_
agenda/facta/nclc_analysis.shtml.
*
Credit repair service scams involve individuals claiming to repair a consumer’s credit record for a fee. The
consumer pays the fee but receives nothing in return, often spending up to $200 for the service.


Page 13
Although affinity credit cards have been a
successful tool for reaching new
customers, they may also be used to lure
consumers into harmful scams. Affinity
credit card scams involve individuals who
purport to be offering a credit card that is
custom-tailored to meet the needs of
Hispanic consumers. In reality, the
consumer is paying for a fake card that
cannot be used to purchase any goods or
services. Consumers who are victims of
credit repair or affinity credit card scams
may file a complaint with the FTC. When
the FTC observes a trend in consumer
complaints, it may choose to take action.
Because the FTC often does not collect data
by race/ethnicity, it is difficult to
determine if predators are targeting
particular communities or to document
these trends. Despite the FTC’s efforts to
collect consumer complaint information
from the Hispanic community, credit card-
related scams persist, stripping income
from the families who can least afford it.
◗
Regulator is weak. The Office of the
Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) is the
principal regulator and supervisor of
national banks in the U.S.* Part of its
congressionally-mandated mission is to
“ensure fair and equal access to financial
services for all Americans.” This includes
protecting consumers against wrongful
treatment as it relates to credit cards. To
meet its mission, the OCC created the
Customer Assistance Group, a call center
designed to assist consumers with
complaints against national banks, including
those that issue credit cards. Although the
OCC collects thousands of complaints each
year, it faces several conflict of interest
problems that limit its ability to effectively
address the needs of consumers. For
example, the OCC is funded by the same
The Mortgage Lending
Example
Policy-makers have made great strides in the
mortgage lending arena by enacting several
consumer protection laws.  Although these
laws can and should be strengthened, they
serve as an example of the kinds of
protections that are needed in the credit card
lending industry.  Indeed, consumers who use
credit cards and act responsibly and in good
faith should be protected from abusive
policies and practices.   
❚Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA):
Requires HUD to collect data by race and
ethnicity and make data available to the
public.  HMDA made it easier to identify
possible discriminatory lending patterns. 
❚Fair Housing Act (FHA): Prohibits lenders
from discriminating in mortgage loans on
the basis of race, color, religion, national
origin, sex, familial status, or handicap.   
❚Consumer Reinvestment Act (CRA):
Imposes affirmative obligations on banks to
serve low-income minority markets better. 
*
Before filing a complaint, a consumer must determine which agency regulates the bank that issued the credit
card. In addition to the OCC, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System exists to supervise banks
that are chartered by individual states and that elect to become members of the Federal Reserve System, bank
holding companies, and branches of foreign banks. The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation regulates state-
chartered banks that are not members of the Federal Reserve System. The Office of Thrift Supervision supervises
federal savings and loan associations and federal savings banks. Finally, the National Credit Union Association
regulates federally-chartered credit unions.


Page 14
national banks that it regulates. Operational
funds are collected through bank assessments,
examinations, and processing fees. The OCC
does not receive any appropriations from
Congress. Banks may also, in effect, choose
their regulatory agency, enabling them to
choose the least restrictive.
There are other disincentives for regulators
to aggressively and actively scrutinize
abusive credit card practices or prohibit
banks from offering other harmful products.
The OCC’s principal mandate is to promote
“safety and soundness” of banks under its
jurisdiction. Since credit cards are a highly
profitable segment of their members’ bank
business, regulators may be reluctant to
aggressively challenge abusive practices.
Currently, the burden is on the consumer
to know that their issuer is an OCC-
regulated bank and how to contact the
OCC when problems arise. The OCC’s
consumer complaint hotline number does
not appear on any credit card contract or
monthly statement. The OCC has no
obligation to follow up with consumers
whose complaints have not been resolved,
and complaints that cannot be resolved
easily get filed for future reference; the
result is a lack of confidence by consumers
that their efforts will produce results.
◗
Most current financial education
strategies are ineffective. There are a
multitude of financial education programs
targeted to the general public and the
Hispanic community which include a credit
component. Providers include financial
institutions, including credit card issuers,
federal and local government agencies, and
national and community-based organizations
with a consumer protection focus. Financial
education programs include brochures,
workbooks, videos, Internet seminars, and
classes. Although many credit education
programs are now translated or
“transcreated” into Spanish, few materials are
custom-tailored to address the unique needs
of Hispanic consumers in credit markets.
Additionally, effective distribution of these
materials into the hands of consumers who
need it most and funding for active follow-up
have been limited. The effectiveness of even
well-resourced “financial literacy” programs
is questionable.
NCLR’s research shows that one-on-one
financial counseling (not to be confused
with creditor debt counseling) is a more
effective method for increasing financial
literacy and building assets for Hispanic
consumers.47 However, there are few
resources to build the type of
infrastructure that would be necessary to
deliver such financial counseling services to
low-income Hispanic families.
POLICY
RECOMMENDATIONS
Abusive credit card policies and practices have
hampered the ability of many Hispanic
consumers to build a good credit history and
save more of their hard-earned money.
Consequently, the ability to build the assets and
wealth necessary for long-term economic
stability is also hampered. With the enactment
of effective consumer protections, greater
enforcement, and enhanced community
awareness of industry policies and practices,
Hispanic consumers may be better equipped to


improve their economic standing. The
following recommendations are designed to
reach this end:
◗
Enact a mandatory, individualized
minimum payment warning. Policy-
makers should enact the “Credit Card
Minimum Payment Warning Act of 2005”
(S. 393), which would require credit card
issuers to insert standard language in a
consumer’s credit card statement warning
them of the consequences of paying only
the monthly minimum payment
requirement. The Act would also require
credit card issuers to include personalized
payment calculations that reveal how much
consumers will pay, in months and years, if
they pay only the minimum. This
disclosure would both serve as a reminder
for consumers who consciously pay the
minimum every month and educate
consumers who are unaware of the
consequences.
◗
Ban universal default and change-in-
terms policies. Policy-makers should
abolish credit card industry policies that are
fundamentally unfair. The universal default
policy fits this definition because it enables
credit card issuers to apply penalty rates to
a consumer’s account even though the
consumer has not missed payments or
defaulted on their loan. Further, the
charge may be applied retroactively,
essentially charging consumers more for
products or services that they already
purchased.48 According to the National
Consumer Law Center, the credit card
industry is the only industry that has the
ability to apply a penalty interest rate to
past purchases.
Policy-makers should also prohibit
unilateral change-in-terms provisions. At
minimum, application of any change-in-
terms provision should apply to new debt
only. If a consumer does not consent to the
change in credit card terms, this should not
constitute a default and the issuer should
not have the authority to demand that the
consumer immediately repay their balance
in full.
◗
Eliminate binding and mandatory
arbitration clauses. Eliminating
mandatory arbitration clauses would bring
meaning back to many consumer
protections that have been weakened by
such clauses. Additionally, Hispanic
consumers would be empowered to choose
the best method to address their grievances.
◗
Establish uniformity in contract
language. Policy-makers should follow
the GAO’s recommendation to require
credit card issuers to clearly disclose to the
consumer – in languages and formats that
the vast majority of consumers can
understand – all policies and practices that
affect costs. Furthermore, policy-makers
should establish uniformity in credit card
agreements, eliminating the use of creative
terminology to describe common industry
policies and practices. These
recommendations would help to facilitate
comparison shopping, making it easier for
consumers to differentiate between credit
card offers.
◗
Stop double-billing on foreign
conversion fees and highlight the fee
in Spanish-language credit card
offers. Consumers should not be subject
to double-billing on purchases made
Page 15


outside the U.S. or pay more than what it
cost the lender to convert foreign currency
into dollars. Regulators should require
credit card issuers to highlight the foreign
conversion fee in all non-English-language
credit card offers. Regulators should also
encourage financial institutions to develop
and market credit cards with a country-
specific waiver of all foreign conversion fees.
◗
Fix the credit reporting and
collection system. Credit card issuers
should be required to report credit
information to the major credit bureaus.
Additionally, the Federal Reserve should
develop and test a single tri-merge credit
score, which would combine and average
credit scores from the three major credit
bureaus which lenders could use to more
accurately determine a consumer’s
creditworthiness. Finally, a commission
made up of consumer advocates, credit
bureaus, and financial institutions should be
formed to evaluate and improve credit
reporting and accuracy standards, develop
a process for conducting accuracy audits,
and develop reporting requirements.
◗
Create a financial counseling
network. Policy-makers should create a
financial counseling infrastructure at the
community level. Resources would be used
to hire and train community-based financial
counselors, develop software to track client
progress, and build capacity. The goal of
such a program will be to reach Hispanic
consumers before they accumulate
unmanageable debt or develop
characteristics that could harm their credit
score, and educate them on abusive practices
in the credit card industry and how to
identify and avoid credit card-related scams.
◗
Eradicate targeted credit card-
related scams. Federal agencies need to
be more proactive in their efforts to
eradicate credit card-related scams that
strip wealth from Hispanic communities.
This would require funding initiatives that
involve partnering with community-based
organizations, local consumer protection
agencies, and the media to highlight and
address abusive practices in the community.
Many of these community-based agencies
have already built the necessary trust with
consumers to be effective. Furthermore,
agencies need to improve their ability to
address consumer complaints and collect
data by race/ethnicity to detect trends
within segments of the population.
◗
Increase regulatory oversight. The
OCC should work proactively to increase
its efforts to identify and eliminate abusive
practices in the credit card industry. This
would include recognizing harmful trends
more quickly, increasing investigations on
issuers, and applying penalties when issuers
are found to engage in harmful practices.
Additionally, the OCC should develop and
implement a plan to increase awareness in
the Latino community of its Consumer
Assistance Group. The plan should include
developing partnerships with community-
based organizations that have built the trust
of the community. Further, the OCC
should market its consumer complaint 
toll-free hotline in both English and Spanish
on all materials sent by credit card issuers
to consumers. The OCC should also
advertise the hotline on Spanish-language
radio and television.
The OCC should also conduct formative
research of English-speaking and non-
Page 16


Page 17
English-speaking consumers to determine
the types of consumer problems that are not
reflected in the complaints it receives and to
determine why many Hispanic consumers
who have been victimized do not file
complaints against their credit card issuer.
CONCLUSION
Although modest, the recommendations
outlined above would go a long way in
protecting vulnerable consumers. In addition
to these recommendations, big ideas are needed
to reform the credit card industry and shift the
balance of power into the hands of consumers.
With household debt adversely impacting
Americans’ ability to save for their retirement
or education, or simply to make ends meet,
policy-makers must elevate credit card reform
to the top of their agenda and work to find
meaningful solutions.
METHODOLOGY
Our objective was to describe how the
structure of the credit card market and industry
policies and practices impact Hispanic access to
affordable credit and to analyze regulatory
oversight in the market. Before drafting our
analysis, NCLR conducted the following activities:
◗
Reviewed formative qualitative
research (focus groups). In an effort
to inform its 2005 household debt survey,
Demos first conducted focus groups
including several with Hispanic English-
and Spanish-speaking participants. Demos
graciously provided NCLR with the
summary of these focus groups, which
NCLR staff used as a baseline for
developing moderator questions and
organizing a roundtable on the experience
of Latinos with credit cards.
◗
Convened a roundtable discussion.
NCLR staff convened a roundtable, “Latino
Credit Card Use: Documenting the Latino
Experience,” at the 2006 NCLR Annual
Conference in Los Angeles, California. The
purpose of the roundtable was to identify
the most pertinent credit card-related
issues that Hispanic consumers face, share
credit-related consumer complaint
information and knowledge about existing
efforts to protect consumers and to address
grievances, and discuss ways to improve
Hispanic access to affordable credit.
Participants included regulators, credit
counselors, and individuals who collect
Hispanic consumer complaint information.
(A transcript of the roundtable discussion,
A Conversation on Latino Credit Card Use, is
available at www.nclr.org/creditcards)     
◗
Interviewed scholars, experts, and
consumer advocates. NCLR staff
interviewed experts in the field to gather
information and perspectives on the credit
card industry. The following individuals
were among the experts NCLR consulted:
Elizabeth Warren, Leo Gottlieb Professor
of Law at Harvard Law School; U.S. PIRG;
the National Consumer Law Center;
Demos; Consumers Union; and Consumer
Action.
◗
Conducted a site visit. NCLR staff
visited the Office of the Comptroller of the
Currency’s Consumer Assistance Group in
Houston,Texas. The purpose of the visit
was to develop a better understanding of
the consumer complaint process, including
receiving, addressing, and documenting


Page 18
complaints made by Hispanic consumers.
The visit also provided an opportunity to
learn about the Consumer Assistance
Group’s marketing efforts.
◗
Compiled and reviewed the
research. NCLR conducted a thorough
assessment of authoritative research in the
field, including reports published by the
federal government, consumer advocacy
organizations, and academics, and articles
in newspapers, trade journals, and business
magazines.
◗
Conducted data analysis. Staff from
the Federal Reserve Board Consumer
Education and Research Section, Division
of Consumer and Community Affairs
tabulated data for NCLR from the 2004
Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF), the
Survey of Consumers by the Survey
Research Center at the University of
Michigan, and a household survey designed
by Demos and the Center for Responsible
Lending (CRL) for use in NCLR’s report.
These data sets were chosen because they
are generally widely accepted as leading
sources of household financial information
and include data by race and ethnicity. The
race and ethnicity sample sizes varied
considerably between these surveys.
Although the information could have been
useful, NCLR chose not to use data from
the Survey of Consumers because of its
limited Hispanic sample size. Although not
perfect, the SCF and the Demos Hispanic
sample offered the best quality data
available at the moment.
The SCF is a triennial survey conducted by
the Federal Reserve Board with the
cooperation of the Statistics of Income
Division of the Internal Revenue Service.
The survey is designed to provide
information on U.S. household balance
sheets, pensions, income, use of financial
services, and other demographic
characteristics. The 2004 SCF included
4,519 respondents. More information
about SCF content and weighting methods
is available at
www.federalreserve.gov/scf/.
The Demos/CRL survey was conducted
over the telephone between February and
March 2005 and included 1,150
respondents. The purpose of the survey
was to determine how American
households are using credit cards and how
they are managing their debt. Respondents
were low- to middle-income heads of
households who had at least three months
of credit card debt. For more information
on the Demos/CRL survey, please see The
Plastic Safety Net: The Reality Behind Debt
in America, Demos and the Center for
Responsible Lending, October 2005,
available at www.demos.org.
◗
Submitted a draft of the paper for
external peer review. Gail Hillebrand,
Consumers Union, and Ed Mierzwinski,
U.S. PIRG, reviewed a draft of the report
for accuracy and style.


Page 19
ENDNOTES
1.
Kochhar, Rakesh,The Wealth of Hispanic Households:1996 to
2002. Washington, DC: Pew Hispanic Center, 2004.
2.
The Nilson Report, Issue 864, September 2006. NCLR
calculation.
3.
Ibid.
4.
Credit Cards: Increased Complexity in Rates and Fees Heightens
Need for More Effective Disclosures to Consumers, Government
Accountability Office, September 2006. The ten largest
credit card issuers include: Citigroup, Inc. (20.2%), Chase
Card Services (19.5%), MBNA America (14.7%), Bank of
America (8.5%), Capital One Financial Corp. (7%), Discover
Financial Services, Inc. (7%),American Express Centurion
Bank (5.7%), HSBC Credit Card Services (2.8%), Providian
Financial Corp. (2.6), and Wells Fargo (1.9%).
5.
Sidel, Robin, “Credit Card Issuers’ Problem: People Are
Paying Their Bills,”The Wall Street Journal, May 25, 2006.
6.
Ausubel, Lawrence M., Adverse Selection in the Credit Card
Market, University of Maryland, June 17, 1999.
7.
Data from Credit Cards.com, accessed January 2007.
Available at: http://creditcards.com/statistics/statistics.php
8.
NCLR calculation based on unpublished tables from the 2004
Survey of Consumer Finances.
9.
Silva, Javier and Rebecca Epstein, Costly Credit: African
Americans and Latinos in Debt. Demos, May 2005.
10.
Ibid.
11.
Unpublished data from the 2004 Survey of Consumer Finances
tabulated by the Federal Reserve on behalf of NCLR.
12.
Unpublished data from a 2005 Demos telephone survey
tabulated by the Federal Reserve on behalf of NCLR.
13.
The Plastic Safety Net: The Reality Behind Debt in America,Demos
and the Center for Responsible Lending, October 2005.
14.
Ibid.
15.
Statistical Release, Federal Reserve Board, December 7,
2006. Available online at:
http://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/g19/Current/
16.
Costly Credit:African Americans and Latinos in Debt,op.cit.
17.
“Credit Card Issuers’ Problem: People Are Paying Their
Bills,” op.cit.
18.
Vadovic, Radovan and Jing Jian Xiao, The Cost of Deregulating
the Credit Card Industry and Its Implications for Consumers,
University of Arizona,Work in Progress.
19.
Adverse Selection in the Credit Card Market,op.cit.
20.
Stegman, Michael, et al.,“Automated Underwriting: Getting to
‘Yes’ for More Low-Income Applicants,” Presented before the
2001 Conference on Housing Opportunity, Research Institute
for Housing America Center for Community Capitalism,
University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill,April 2001.
21.
The Cost of Deregulating the Credit Card Industry and Its
Implications for Consumers,op.cit.
22.
Ibid.
23.
Credit Cards: Increased Complexity in Rates and Fees Heightens
Need for More Effective Disclosures to Consumers,op.cit.
24.
Data from Credit Cards.com, accessed November 2006.
Available at: http://creditcards.com/statistics/statistics.php
25.
Calem, Paul S., Michael B. Gordy, and Loretta J. Mester,
Switching Costs and Adverse Selection in the Market for Credit
Cards:New Evidence, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia,
Working Paper No. 05-16, July 2005.
26.
The Plastic Safety Net: The Reality Behind Debt in America,op.cit.
27.
Ibid.
28.
Unpublished data from a 2005 Demos telephone survey, op.cit.
29.
Switching Costs and Adverse Selection in the Market for Credit
Cards: New Evidence,op.cit.
30.
Unpublished data from the 2004 Survey of Consumer
Finances, op.cit.
31.
“Eight Things a Credit Card User Should Know.” Available on
the PBS website at:
http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/credit/eight/
32.
Credit Cards: Increased Complexity in Rates and Fees Heightens
Need for More Effective Disclosures to Consumers,op.cit.
33.
Carter, Carolyn, Elizabeth Renauart, Margot Saunders, and
Chi Chi Wu, “The Credit Card Market and Regulation: In
Need of Repair,” North Carolina Banking Institute,Vol. 10,
March 2006. Citing Consumer Federation of America study.
34.
Ibid.
35.
The Cost of Deregulating the Credit Card Industry and Its
Implications for Consumers,op.cit.
36.
Ibid.
37.
Credit Cards: Increased Complexity in Rates and Fees Heightens
Need for More Effective Disclosures to Consumers,op.cit.
38.
Ibid.
39.
Ibid.
40.
2004 Credit Card Survey, Consumer Action, March 21,
2004.
41.
Ibid.
42.
Ibid.
43.
Credit Cards: Increased Complexity in Rates and Fees Heightens
Need for More Effective Disclosures to Consumers,op.cit.
44.
“The Credit Card Market and Regulation:In Need of Repair,” op.cit.
45.
Ibid.
46.
“Consumer Fraud in the United States: An FTC Survey,”
Federal Trade Commission Staff Report,August 2004.
47.
Muñiz, Brenda, Financial Education in Latino Communities: An
Analysis of Programs,Products,and Results/Effects. Washington,
DC: NCLR, 2004.
48.
“The Credit Card Market and Regulation:In Need of Repair,” op.cit.


HISPANIC FAMILIES AND THE EARNED
INCOME TAX CREDIT (EITC)   
ISSUE BRIEF NO. 1
FINANCIAL SERVICES AND HISPANIC
AMERICANS
ISSUE BRIEF NO. 2
WELFARE REFORM, TANF CASELOAD
CHANGES, AND LATINOS: A PRELIMINARY
ASSESSMENT
ISSUE BRIEF NO. 3
THE LATINO VOTE IN THE 90’S
ISSUE BRIEF NO. 4
FINANCIAL INSECURITY AMID GROWING
WEALTH: WHY HEALTHIER SAVINGS IS
ESSENTIAL TO LATINO PROSPERITY
ISSUE BRIEF NO. 5
SAFE ROADS, SAFE COMMUNITIES:
IMMIGRANTS AND STATE DRIVER'S LICENSE
REQUIREMENTS
ISSUE BRIEF NO. 6
INCREASING HISPANIC HOMEOWNERSHIP:
STRATEGIES FOR PROGRAMS AND PUBLIC POLICY
ISSUE BRIEF NO. 7
THE NO CHILD LEFT BEHIND ACT:
IMPLICATIONS FOR LOCAL EDUCATORS AND
ADVOCATES FOR LATINO STUDENTS,
FAMILIES, AND COMMUNITIES
ISSUE BRIEF NO. 8 
IMMIGRATION ENFORCEMENT BY LOCAL
POLICE:  THE IMPACT ON THE CIVIL RIGHTS
OF LATINOS
ISSUE BRIEF NO. 9
COUNTERTERRORISM AND THE LATINO
COMMUNITY SINCE SEPTEMBER 11 
ISSUE BRIEF NO. 10
PENSION COVERAGE: A MISSING STEP
IN THE WEALTH-BUILDING LADDER
FOR LATINOS
ISSUE BRIEF NO. 11
TANF IMPLEMENTATION IN
PUERTO RICO: A SUMMARY OF
DATA ON LEAVERS
ISSUE BRIEF NO. 12
IMMIGRATION REFORM: COMPREHENSIVE
SOLUTIONS FOR COMPLEX PROBLEMS
ISSUE BRIEF NO. 13
ACHIEVING A HIGH-QUALITY PRESCHOOL
TEACHER CORPS: A FOCUS ON CALIFORNIA
ISSUE BRIEF NO. 14
JEOPARDIZING HISPANIC HOMEOWNERSHIP:
PREDATORY PRACTICES IN THE
HOMEBUYING MARKET
ISSUE BRIEF NO. 15
IMPROVING ASSESSMENT AND ACCOUNTABILITY
FOR ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS IN THE NO
CHILD LEFT BEHIND ACT
ISSUE BRIEF NO. 16
NCLR ISSUE BRIEFS
TO ORDER NCLR PUBLICATIONS CONTACT:
The National Council of La Raza (NCLR)
Attention: Office of Publications 
Raul Yzaguirre Building
1126 16th Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20036
Tel:  202.785.1670 ◆Fax:  202.776.1794
There is a cost of $5.00 per Issue Brief, with a minimum
charge of $10.00, plus the cost 
of shipping and handling per order.
All orders should be pre-paid.  Discounts are
available for bulk orders.
w w w . n c l r . o r g