Get informed, get involved. Subscribe to e-news and browse our news page for the latest from OPWDD.
      
                            Supporting People to Live, Work and Take Part in Their Community
The New York State Office for People With Developmental Disabilities (OPWDD) is responsible for coordinating services for New Yorkers with developmental disabilities, including intellectual disabilities, cerebral palsy, Down syndrome, autism spectrum disorders, Prader-Willi syndrome and other neurological impairments. We provide services directly through state operations and through a statewide network of nonprofit service providing agencies.
What's Happening
    												
			Take Part in National Disability Employment Awareness Month 			
		
	
    
        
        	
														
            
                                                                                                                    
                                                    
				                          Dear Friends and Colleagues,A job is about more than a paycheck.  It is about purpose, self-sufficiency, independence, connection, and having the opportunity to contribute...
            
			
			
    												
			Important 2026 State of the State Proposals for People with Disabilities 			
		
	
    
        
        	
														
            
                                                                                                                    
                                                    
				                          Dear Friends and Colleagues,Since taking office, Governor Hochul has kept her promise of a more inclusive New York for people with developmental disabilities by...
            
			
			
OPWDD Data
OPWDD is dedicated to providing high-quality supports and services to New Yorkers with developmental disabilities. Funded largely through Medicaid, these services rely on contributions from federal, state, and local governments. This data page offers insights into the people served by OPWDD, the types of services provided, and our resource stewardship, helping keep you informed of our ongoing commitment to supporting full, meaningful lives based on individual needs and choices.