THE IMPACT OF INEQUALITY FOR 
SAME-SEX PARTNERS IN EMPLOYER-
SPONSORED RETIREMENT PLANS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Naomi G. Goldberg 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Williams Institute, UCLA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
October 2009 
 


 
 
 


 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
This report was made possible through a generous grant from Merrill Lynch.  
 
 
 
The author would like to thank M.V. Lee Badgett for her guidance and thoughtful comments, Michael D. 
Steinberger and Brad Sears for their helpful suggestions, Diane Fuchs for her willingness to share her 
expertise, and Marieka Klawitter for her analysis of the Survey of Consumer Finance data. 
 
 
About the Authors 
 
Naomi G. Goldberg is the Peter J. Cooper Public Policy Fellow at the Williams Institute, UCLA School of 
Law.  She received a Master of Public Policy from the Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy at the 
University of Michigan and graduated magna cum laude from Mount Holyoke College with a degree in 
Critical Social Thought.  Naomi’s research interests focus on policies affecting families. 
 
 
 
 


 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
THE IMPACT OF INEQUALITY FOR SAME-SEX PARTNERS IN 
EMPLOYER-SPONSORED RETIREMENT PLANS 
Executive Summary 
Planning for retirement is a universal concern of American workers, regardless of their ages.  But certain 
groups of workers must plan for the financial challenges of retirement in a context of unequal access to 
the institutions and public programs that help workers save for and manage that phase of their lives.  
Gay, lesbian, and bisexual employees (among other disadvantaged groups) face challenges that reflect 
employer practices and legal institutions that create a context of inequality.  In particular, the lack of 
legal recognition for the same-sex partners of employees results in unequal treatment in employers’ 
retirement plans.   
 
This report analyzes the impact of unequal treatment of same-sex partners in the context of retirement 
plans and estimates the cost for employers of adopting a policy of equal treatment.  The focus of this 
report is retirement income rather than health care provision for retirees and their families.  Our goal is to 
address several key issues for same-sex couples as they plan for retirement. We find that same-sex 
couples face inequalities when it comes to their ability to accumulate wealth, plan for their futures, and 
pass on wealth.   
 
The characteristics of all same-sex couples provide a mixed picture for predicting their 
retirement savings and wealth.  While some of the characteristics indicate that they would 
have less retirement savings and wealth than different-sex married couples,  other indicate 
they would have more. Current research suggests:  
 
Same-sex couples are less likely to own their homes than are different-sex married couples, and 
homes comprise the largest component of wealth for most Americans during retirement.   
 
Individuals in same-sex couples may have longer employment histories which would suggest 
greater retirement income. In particular women in same-sex couples have longer work histories 
than women in different-sex married couples. 
 
Individuals in same-sex couples have high levels of education. Because education is related to 
retirement savings and wealth, this would suggest that same-sex are more likely to save for 
retirement and have higher overall savings.   
 
Women in same-sex couples are disadvantaged in terms of employment that provides 
employer-sponsored pension plans. 
 
Only 50% percent of female same-sex couples have at least one member eligible for an 
employer-sponsored retirement plan compared to 56% of different-sex married couples and 79% 
of male same-sex couples.  
 
Rates of participation in employer-sponsored plans also vary by couple type: only 46% of female 
same-sex couples have at least one member participating in an employer-sponsored plan 
compared to 52% of different-sex married couples and 69% of male same-sex couples. 
 
Female same-sex couples over 65 have almost 20% ($12,000) less income than different-
sex married couples. The gender gap in wages and retirement savings compared to men means that 
female same-sex couples are severely disadvantaged when compared to different-sex couples and male 
same-sex couples.  Using data from the Survey of Consumer Finance and the American Community 


 
 
Survey, we find that female same-sex couples over 65 are disadvantaged in each of the three main 
sources of retirement income for most Americans – social security, retirement plans, and income from 
interest, rentals, and dividends.  
 
Female same-sex couples rely most heavily on social security income as a percent of their 
overall income.  For couples in which both members are ages 65 and older, social security 
comprises 36% of female same-sex couples’ income, 33% of different-sex married couples’ 
income, and 31% of male same-sex couples’ income.   
 
On average, female same-sex couples over 65 receive 15% less ($2,800) in social security 
benefits than different-sex married couples.  
 
They are also 10% less likely than different-sex married couples over 65 to have any income 
from retirement plans or accounts.  On average, their income from these sources is almost 
27% less ($3,575) than different sex-married couples over 65. 
 
They are 21% less likely to have any income from interest, rentals and dividends than 
different-sex married couples over 65. 
 
As a result, elderly female same-sex couples rely more on public benefit programs and 
continuing to work to maintain their household incomes. 
 
Female same-sex couples over 65 are 70 to 80% more likely to have income from SSI and 
public assistance than different-sex married couples. 
 
Female same-sex couples also rely more heavily on wage income than do other couples. 
 
Male same-sex couples have higher income during retirement, but are less likely to have 
income from retirement plans and are more likely to have wage income and interest income.   
 
Male same-sex couples with at least one member age 65 or older are 21% less likely to have 
retirement income than are different-sex married couples. 
 
Male same-sex couples are 60% more likely to have wage income than different-sex married 
couples. 
 
Same-sex couples are unable to access social security spousal and survivor benefits.  Because 
the federal government does not recognize same-sex relationships, same-sex couples are not eligible for 
spousal or survivor benefits from social security. Surviving same-sex partners who have lower benefits 
than their deceased same-sex partner lose out on more than $5,700 each year in survivor benefits that 
different-sex married couples are able to access. 
 
Same-sex couples are treated differently than different-sex married couples in terms of 
employer-sponsored retirement plans.  Because the federal government does not recognize the 
same-sex partners of employees as spouses, employees with same-sex partners are treated like their 
single counterparts.  For those employees with defined benefit plans, employees with same-sex partners 
do not have the option of selecting a Qualified Pre-Retirement Survivor Annuity (QPSA) or a Qualified 
Joint and Survivor Annuity (QJSA) to provide benefits to their partners in the case of their death. 
 
The costs to employers of treating same-sex couples equally in retirement plans are minimal. 
 
For employers offering defined benefit plans, the costs of allowing employees with same-sex 
partners to opt for survivor benefits are small, primarily the administrative costs of amending 
plan and associated documents and of longer payout schedules.   
 
In the case of a defined contribution plan, the only costs associated with treating same-sex 
partners equally is the cost of amending the plan and any associated documents.  
 
The Pension Protection Act (PPA) has moved the treatment of same-sex couples closer to 
the treatment of married couples in the context of the taxation of retirement assets, but 
inequalities still exist.  The PPA permits withdrawals from retirement savings for hardships 
experienced by any designated beneficiary of certain kinds of retirement accounts, including a same-sex 


 
 
 
partner.  It also created a new mechanism for passing eligible retirement plan assets from individuals to 
nonspouses, including same-sex partners.  However, same-sex partners are still disadvantaged: 
 
Spousal beneficiaries are permitted to wait until they reach age 70½ to begin making 
withdrawals from their deceased spouse’s retirement account.  Nonspousal beneficiaries, 
including same-sex partners, on the other hand, must begin taking withdrawals immediately 
upon the death of their partner.   
 
The PPA did not make hardship withdrawals for nonspousal beneficiaries mandatory, so some 
employers may not offer these to their employees. 
 
The inequalities facing same-sex couples are substantial when it comes to their ability to accumulate 
wealth, plan for their futures, and pass on wealth.  These inequalities are particularly significant for 
female same-sex couples.  Existing inequalities in income as well as structural mechanisms that reinforce 
discrimination have long-term implications for same-sex couples and their families.  Until state and 
federal laws, including the Defense of Marriage Act, change to protect same-sex couples from 
discrimination both in the workplace and in the tax system, couples may need to take extra caution when 
planning their financial futures. 


 
1 
THE IMPACT OF INEQUALITY FOR SAME-SEX PARTNERS IN 
EMPLOYER-SPONSORED RETIREMENT PLANS 
 
Introduction 
 
Planning for retirement is a universal concern of 
American workers, regardless of their ages.  But 
certain groups of workers must plan for the 
financial challenges of retirement in a context of 
unequal access to the institutions and public 
programs that help workers save for and 
manage that phase of their lives.  Gay, lesbian, 
and bisexual (GLB) employees (among other 
disadvantaged groups) face challenges that 
reflect employer practices and legal institutions 
that create a context of inequality.  In particular, 
the lack of legal recognition for the same-sex 
partners of employees results in unequal 
treatment in employers’ retirement plans.   
 
This report analyzes the impact of unequal 
treatment of same-sex partners in the context of 
retirement plans and estimates the cost for 
employers of adopting a policy requiring equal 
treatment.  The focus of this report is retirement 
income rather than health care provision for 
retirees and their families.1  Our goal is to 
address several key issues for same-sex couples 
as they plan for retirement. 
 
First, we draw on the 2005 and 2006 American 
Community Survey and the Survey of Consumer 
Finance to analyze the retirement income of 
same-sex couples.  Specifically:  
 
 
What 
characteristics 
of 
same-sex 
couples put them at an advantage or 
disadvantage with respect to retirement 
income? 
 
 
What kind of retirement assets do 
same-sex couples hold pre-retirement? 
 
 
How much retirement income do same-
sex couples earn?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Next we discuss the ways that employers 
typically treat employees with same-sex partners 
differently 
from 
heterosexual 
married 
employees:   
 
 
How are employees with same-sex 
partners 
treated 
differently 
by 
employer-sponsored retirement plans? 
 
 
What proportion of employees with 
same-sex partners face such unequal 
treatment? 
 
 
What would be the cost to employers of 
equal treatment for same-sex partners? 
 
Beyond employer policies, we outline the ways 
in 
which 
same-sex 
couples 
are 
treated 
differently in tax law with respect to retirement 
assets, especially individual retirement accounts 
(IRAs) and 401(k) plans.  Specifically, we focus 
on the ways that employees are limited in their 
ability to pass the wealth in these retirement 
assets to their same-sex partners and the 
impact that these inequalities have on couples’ 
abilities to plan for the future. 
 
Finally, we discuss strategies for same-sex 
couples to work around the inequalities that 
exist in federal law governing employer-
sponsored retirement plans and other retirement 
assets. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


SAME-SEX PARTNERS & EMPLOYER-SPONSORED RETIREMENT PLANS 
 
2 
Key Findings 
 
We find same-sex couples are disadvantaged in 
both retirement assets and savings and in their 
ability to plan for the future.  Female same-sex 
couples have significantly lower retirement 
income when compared to different-sex married 
couples and male same-sex couples.  They are 
much more likely to receive public assistance.  
Male same-sex couples are more likely to have 
wage income during retirement and rely more 
heavily on interest and dividend income than are 
different-sex married couples.  Male same-sex 
couples are 21% less 
likely than different-
sex married couples to 
receive income from 
retirement plans.   
 
Because federal law 
does 
not 
recognize 
same-sex partners as 
spouses, 
same-sex 
couples 
are 
treated 
differently than different-sex married couples 
when it comes to their ability to pass retirement 
wealth to their partners.  As a result, same-sex 
couples are not ensured the same amount of 
financial protection as different-sex married 
couples, leaving same-sex couples with fewer 
options for retirement planning.   
 
While the majority of these inequalities are a 
direct result of the Defense of Marriage Act and 
its provision that prohibits same-sex partners 
from being treated as spouses under federal 
law, some of the inequalities faced by same-sex 
couples may be mitigated both through financial 
planning and as a result of changes to individual 
employer retirement plans.   
A Note About Single GLB and Transgender 
Individuals 
 
This report relies on data from the Survey of 
Consumer Finance and the American Community 
Survey.  These surveys ask respondents to 
complete a household roster.  In doing so, we 
are able to identify individuals who are living 
with an unmarried partner of the same-sex.   
Since most of the disadvantages outlined in this 
report relate to same-sex couples, these 
datasets are very helpful for understanding 
challenges faced by GLB couples. 
 
Few surveys include questions about sexual 
orientation that would allow for analysis of a 
broader range of GLBT people, however.  Of the 
surveys that include questions about sexual 
orientation, none include the specific financial 
data that this report analyzes.  Therefore, this 
report and its conclusions pertain only to same-
sex couples and individuals in same-sex couples.  
Furthermore, there are no nationally or locally 
representative 
data 
about 
transgender 
individuals.  A recent literature review suggests 
that many transgender individuals have low 
income levels.2  These findings suggest that 
transgender individuals may face substantial 
challenges during retirement. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Same-sex couples 
are disadvantaged in 
retirement assets, 
retirement savings, 
and the ability to 
pass on wealth. 


SAME-SEX PARTNERS & EMPLOYER-SPONSORED RETIREMENT PLANS 
 
3 
The Retirement Savings and Income of Same-Sex Couples  
 
 
Characteristics of Same-Sex Couples That 
May 
Affect 
Retirement 
Incomes 
and 
Assets 
 
While much attention has been paid to whether 
Americans are saving enough for retirement, 
especially as the future of Social Security is 
questioned, 
most 
studies 
conclude 
that 
Americans are not planning adequately for 
retirement savings.  For instance, one study 
examining behavior of respondents ages 51-56 
found that 30% had not given any thought to 
retirement.3  Recent data also suggests that 
there are large discrepancies in the amount 
Americans are saving for retirement compared 
with what they will need.4  Studies of retirement 
savings and income have found several key 
indicators of level of savings: homeownership, 
labor force involvement, gender, educational 
attainment, race, and marital status.  These 
indicators provide insight into the ways in which 
same-sex couples may be either advantaged or 
disadvantaged in terms of retirement income 
and assets.    
 
Same-sex couples have lower homeownership 
rates: Same-sex couples are less likely to own 
their homes than their different-sex married 
counterparts.5  In the 2005-2006 American 
Community Survey (ACS), 85.1% of female 
same-sex couples with at least one member age 
65 or older owned their homes, compared to 
89.3% of male same-sex couples, and 90.6% of 
different-sex married couples.  Studies using the 
Health and Retirement Survey (HRS) found that 
home values constitute the single largest 
component of wealth for a majority of U.S. 
households; in the lower four quintiles of 
individuals over age 55, the value of their homes 
is greater than any other single component of 
wealth, including retirement savings.6  One 
would thus expect that same-sex couples would 
have lower overall retirement wealth than their 
different-sex married counterparts. 
 
Women in same-sex couples have longer 
employment histories while men in same-sex 
couples earn less:  While men in same-sex and 
different-sex married couples do not have 
different full-time employment rates, women in 
same-sex couples are more likely than are 
married women to work full-time.7  We might 
expect that female same-sex couples would 
have higher retirement savings and income due 
to longer engagements in the workforce. 
However, there is a well-documented gay male 
“penalty” and lesbian “premium” in terms of 
earnings when compared to different sex-
coupled men and women.8  Men in same-sex 
couples earn less than do men in different-sex 
married couples, while women in same-sex 
couples earn more than women in different-sex 
married couples.9  Both employer-sponsored 
retirement savings and Social Security benefits 
are tied to income as well as time at a company.  
If female same-sex couples work longer, one 
would expect same-sex couples to have higher 
retirement incomes, although men in same-sex 
couples’ lower earnings might reduce retirement 
income.   
 
Female 
same-sex 
couples 
are 
uniquely 
disadvantaged by the gender gap in wages and 
savings:  Women are particularly disadvantaged 
when it comes to current and projected 
retirement savings and income.10  There is 
strong evidence that women generally save less 
for retirement than do men.  In one study, 
unmarried men had 20% more retirement 
wealth than did unmarried women, and both 
groups had less than one-third of average 
married couples’ retirement wealth.  A study 
using HRS data found that 85% of this 
retirement income gap for unmarried women, 
when compared to unmarried men, was due to 
labor force factors.  Commonly cited reasons 
include women’s lower wages, fewer average 
years of work, shorter job tenure, and the lack 
of retirement benefits offered in female-
dominated jobs.11  As a result, women over the 
age of 65 are twice as likely to live in poverty as 
are similarly aged men, as are older lesbians.12  
The gender gap in wages and retirement 
savings means that female same-sex couples 
may be severely disadvantaged when compared 
to different-sex couples and male same-sex 
couples. 
 
Individuals in same-sex couples tend to have 
high levels of education:  Census 2000 and 
other datasets have revealed that same-sex 
couples have higher levels of education than do 


SAME-SEX PARTNERS & EMPLOYER-SPONSORED RETIREMENT PLANS 
 
4 
different-sex couples.13  The 2005-2006 ACS 
data mirrors this trend: 27.4% of married men 
age 65 or older have a college degree or higher 
compared to 37.8% of men in same-sex 
relationships age 65 or older.  Seventeen 
percent of married women age 65 or older have 
a college degree or higher versus 25% of 
women in same-sex relationships.  Several 
studies have linked an individual’s educational 
attainment with retirement savings and wealth.  
One study conducted using the HRS data found 
a strong relationship between wealth and 
education: baby boomers with less than a high 
school diploma have a median net worth of 
$22,000, while those with a high school degree 
have four times that, and boomers with a 
college degree or more have median net wealth 
approximately fourteen times that of boomers 
without a high school degree.14  According to an 
April 2008 Wall Street Journal Online/Harris 
Interactive Personal Finance Poll, 65% of 
individuals with a college degree or higher had 
begun planning for retirement compared to just 
37% of individuals with a high school degree or 
less.15  Given that same-sex couples are more 
likely to have high education, we expect that 
same-sex couples are more likely to save for 
retirement and to have higher overall savings.   
 
Unmarried people have lower retirement savings 
than married couples: The HRS data suggest 
that unmarried couples have less retirement 
savings than married couples.16  Schmidt and 
Sevak found that married couples had twice the 
mean wealth of households headed by single 
females (2005).  Analysis of the HRS data 
indicate that the average household income for 
the middle fifth of unmarried individuals 
between the ages of 65 and 74 was $17,000, as 
compared to $42,000 for married households in 
the same middle quintile.17  An April 2008 Harris 
Poll found that only 39% of single women had 
an investment account for retirement, as 
compared to 60% of married women.18  Another 
Harris Poll found that 47% of individuals 
identifying 
as 
gay, 
lesbian, 
bisexual, 
or 
transgender reported having an investment 
account specifically for retirement, as compared 
to 51% of individuals who identified as 
heterosexual.19  It is not surprising that 
economic well-being during retirement is directly 
linked to marital status, since married couples 
have higher incomes before retirement, as well 
as greater wealth in retirement.20  Since same-
sex couples are only allowed to marry in four 
states, they are by definition usually unmarried, 
although they might share characteristics of 
interdependence with married couples.  Other 
studies have found that households with 
children have, on average, more wealth.21  
Given that same-sex couples are less likely to 
have children than are married couples, this may 
suggest lower wealth levels for same-sex 
couples.22  Whether same-sex couples more 
closely resemble married or cohabiting different-
sex couples is unclear as is the impact on 
retirement savings. 
 
Types of Retirement Assets of Same-Sex 
Couples Before Retirement 
 
We use the Survey of Consumer Finance (SCF) 
to get a sense of what types of retirement 
savings and assets same-sex couples hold 
before reaching retirement age.23  Sponsored by 
the Federal Reserve Board, the SCF collects data 
about Americans and their finances.  The survey 
is conducted every three years.  Households are 
selected randomly and participation is voluntary.  
While the survey does not include questions 
about sexual orientation, participants are asked 
to 
identify 
members 
of 
their 
household, 
including their spouse or partner.  In our 
analysis, we focus on those households in which 
the respondent and his or her partner are of the 
same-sex, and we compare these “same-sex 
couples” to married respondents in which the 
respondent and spouse are of different sexes.  
Data from the 1992, 1995, 1998, 2001, and 
2004 surveys were pooled in order to have 
enough observations to conduct statistical 
analyses. 
 
SCF data show that 52% of different-sex 
married 
couples 
have 
a 
retirement 
plan 
sponsored through an employer compared to 
69% of male same-sex couples and only 46% of 
female same-sex couples.  These differences are 
statistically significant.  Similar, statistically 
significant patterns emerge in eligibility for 
employer-sponsored retirement plans: 56% of 
different-sex married households have at least 
one member eligible for such a plan, while 79% 
of male same-sex households and 50% of 
female same-sex households have at least one 
eligible member.  This disparity in retirement 


SAME-SEX PARTNERS & EMPLOYER-SPONSORED RETIREMENT PLANS 
 
5 
plan participation and eligibility is also a function 
of gender disparities in the types of employment 
for which plans are often offered.  
 
IRAs may be seen as an alternative or substitute 
for employer-sponsored retirement plans.  It is 
not surprising, then, since female same-sex 
couples are much less likely to be eligible or 
have an employer-sponsored retirement plan, 
they participate at higher rates in IRA and 
Keogh plans.  SCF data shows that female 
same-sex couples are more likely to have IRA or 
Keogh plans than different-sex married or male 
same-sex couples.  Fifty-eight percent of female 
same-sex couples surveyed have an IRA or 
Keogh plan, while only 39% of different-sex 
married couples and 23% of male same-sex 
couples have these types of plans.  Female 
same-sex couples also have more money held in 
IRA or Keogh plans.  Female same-sex couples 
have, on average, $41,684 in combined IRA and 
Keogh plans, while male same-sex couples have 
$14,916 and different-sex married couples have 
$29,791. 
 
 
 
 
The results from the SCF mirror general trends 
related 
to 
gender. 
 
Women 
are 
often 
disadvantaged in terms of retirement savings 
because they have been more likely to work for 
employers 
that 
do 
not 
offer 
retirement 
programs.24  This may explain the lower 
participation an eligibility rates for lesbians.  
Given that both men in male same-sex couples 
are more likely to work than are both members 
of a different-sex married couple, it is not 
surprising that male same-sex couples appear to 
be advantaged in terms of retirement savings.  
The overall picture of same-sex couples and 
their financial assets is mixed.  Female same-sex 
couples have greater wealth in IRA and Keogh 
plans, while male same-sex couples are eligible 
and participate in much greater numbers in 
employer-sponsored plans.     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
58%
46%
50%
23%
69%
79%
39%
52%
56%
Female Same-Sex Couples
Male Same-Sex Couples
Married Different-Sex Couples
Has IRA/Keogh
Participates in Employer-Sponsored Plan
Eligible for Employer-Sponsored Plan
Figure 1.  Percent of Couples Participating in and Eligible for Retirement Assets 


SAME-SEX PARTNERS & EMPLOYER-SPONSORED RETIREMENT PLANS 
 
6 
Table 1. Average Couple Income by Source, Households with at Least One Member Age 65 
  
or Older 
Income Type 
 
 
 
Female Same-Sex 
Couples 
 
(n=394) 
 
Male Same-Sex 
Couples 
 
(n=421) 
 
Different-Sex 
Married Couples 
 
(n=137,534) 
Total Income 
53,255* 
81,381*
61,174 
Retirement Income1 
9,267* 
10,905
12,882 
Interest, Dividend, Rental Income 
6,135* 
12,739
10,186 
Social Security Income 
11,764* 
14,116*
17,176 
Wage or Salary Income 
21,349* 
34,798*
15,401 
Supplemental Social Security Income 
519* 
337
279 
Public Assistance Income 
70 
46
33 
Self-Employment Income 
1,880* 
6,237
3,041 
All Other Income2 
2,272 
2,203
2,175 
*Statistically significant at p<0.05 when compared to different-sex married couples 
1  Retirement income includes income from retirement, survivor, or disability pensions. 
2  Other income includes income from any other sources including Veterans’ payments, unemployment compensation, child  
support or alimony. 
Analysis of Retirement Income Among 
Older Same-Sex Couples 
 
The American Community Survey (ACS) allows 
us to measure retirement income for couples 
where one or both members are age 65 or 
older.  The ACS is conducted by the U.S. Census 
Bureau on a yearly basis.  The ACS asks 
respondents to complete a household roster, in 
which respondents must identify all individuals 
living in their home.  In addition to spouse, 
respondents may select an “unmarried partner,” 
who is defined as someone with whom the 
respondent “shares living quarters and has a 
close personal relationship.”  By identifying 
householders and partners of the same or 
different sex, we can compare same-sex couples 
to different-sex married couples.  In this paper, 
we combine data from the 2005 and 2006 
American Community Surveys.  We estimate 
that there are 77,200 individuals in same-sex 
couples who are 65 or older: 38,800 men and 
38,400 women.   
 
Among households where at least one member 
is age 65 or older, the data presented in Table 1 
show 
that 
male 
same-sex 
couples 
have 
significantly higher total incomes than different 
sex married couples and female same-sex 
couples.25  Male same-sex couples have an 
average total income of $81,381 as compared to 
$61,174 for different-sex married couples and 
$53,255 for female same-sex couples.   
 
As previous studies suggest, female same-sex 
couples face a significant disadvantage in overall 
income levels as well as all key forms of 
retirement income.  Female same-sex couples 
have $3,615 less in retirement income, $4,051 
less in interest and dividend income, $5,412 less 
in social security income, and $1,161 less in self-
employment income than different-sex married 
couples.   
 
Male couples have lower levels of social security 
income than married couples, as well as lower 
or comparable levels of income in most other 
categories.  Male same-sex couples are 21% 
less likely to be receiving retirement income 
compared to different-sex married couples. 
 
Both female and male same-sex couples have 
higher wage income than their different-sex 
married counterparts, which may mean that one 
or both partners work longer into older age, 
perhaps to compensate for less expected income 
from social security or other sources.  In 
particular, male same-sex couples have more 
than two times the amount of wage or salary 
income than different-sex married couples, 


SAME-SEX PARTNERS & EMPLOYER-SPONSORED RETIREMENT PLANS 
 
7 
Table 2. Average Couple Income by Source, Households with Both Members Age 65  
  
or Older 
Income Type 
 
 
 
Female Same-Sex 
Couples 
 
(n=134) 
 
Male Same-Sex 
Couples 
 
(n=130) 
 
Different-Sex 
Married Couples 
 
(n=97,377) 
Total Income 
44,583* 
65,912
56,578
Retirement Income1 
9,778* 
12,059
13,353
Interest, Dividend, Rental Income 
8,450 
17,881
10,993
Social Security Income 
16,130* 
20,489
18,909
Wage or Salary Income 
7,496 
9,302
8,518
Supplemental Social Security Income 
382 
310
271
Public Assistance Income 
109 
35
33
Self-Employment Income 
634* 
2649
2,196
All Other Income2 
1,514 
3,187
2,305
*Statistically significant at p<0.05 when compared to different-sex married couples 
1  Retirement income includes income from retirement, survivor, or disability pensions. 
2  Other income includes income from any other sources including Veterans’ payments, unemployment compensation, child  
support or alimony. 
which accounts for most of higher total income 
seen for male couples.  Male same-sex couples 
are 60% more likely to be receiving wage 
income than are different-sex married couples.     
 
Higher wage income for female and male same-
sex couples could also be explained by the 
wages of younger spouses who are still working.  
In couples with both members 65 or older, the 
differences between male same-sex couples and 
different-sex married couples in terms of income 
are less pronounced (Table 2).  While male 
same-sex couples still have the largest total 
couple income, the differences between male 
same-sex couples and different-sex married 
couples are no longer statistically significant.  
Still, male same-sex couples are 16% less likely 
to have retirement income than are different-sex 
married couples.   
 
The types of income that constitute total couple 
income for these older couples are also 
substantially different than for couples with one 
younger spouse or partner.  Social Security 
income, interest, dividend, and rental income, 
and retirement income constitute the largest 
sources of income for all couples with both 
members are 65 or older.  In contrast, wages 
play a much larger role in overall income for 
couple with one younger partner, as indicated 
by a comparison with Table 1 above.  
 
While the differences between male same-sex 
couples and different-sex married couples are 
no longer statistically significant for these older 
couples, female same-sex couples with both 
members age 65 or older continue to be 
disadvantaged.  Female same-sex couples have 
lower overall couple income, as well as lower 
retirement income, lower social security income, 
and lower interest, dividend, and rental income, 
which are the three largest sources of income 
for older couples.  For all of these but interest 
income, the differences between female same-
sex couples and different-sex married couples 
are statistically significant.  These differences 
likely reflect women’s lower lifetime earnings, 
which would reduce retirement savings, other 
forms of wealth, and social security income. This 
gender effect would be more pronounced for a 
lesbian couple.  Female same-sex couples are 
10% less likely to have retirement income than 
are different-sex married couples and 21% less 
likely to have interest or dividend income, and 
they receive approximately 20% less in these 
types of income.  Female same-sex couples, 


SAME-SEX PARTNERS & EMPLOYER-SPONSORED RETIREMENT PLANS 
 
8 
instead, are much more likely to receiving public 
assistance in the form of supplemental social 
security income (72% more likely) or public 
assistance income (84% more likely).   
 
Examining the composition of total income by 
couple type also shows significant differences 
(see Figure 2).  Almost all individuals in older 
couples, regardless of couple type, receive social 
security payments, and those payments are the 
largest source of income for these couples.  
Social security comprises a larger share of total 
income for female same-sex couples (36%) than 
it does for both male same-sex (31%) and 
different-sex married couples (33%).  Female 
same-sex couples also rely more heavily on 
wage income than do other couples: seventeen 
percent of total income is wage income for 
same-sex couples compared to 14% for male 
same-sex couples and 15% for different-sex 
married couples.  Interestingly, retirement 
income comprises a lower share of overall 
income for male same-sex couples (18%) than it 
does for either female same-sex couples (22%) 
or 
different-sex 
married 
couples 
(24%).
 
 
Figure 2.  Composition of Retirement Income, Households with Both Members Ages 65  
 
     or Older 
22%
18%
24%
19%
27%
19%
36%
31%
33%
17%
14%
15%
6%
9%
8%
Female Same-Sex Couples
Male Same-Sex Couples
Married, Different-Sex Couples
Other
Wage or Salary Income
Social Security Income
Interest, Dividend, Rental Income
Retirement Income


SAME-SEX PARTNERS & EMPLOYER-SPONSORED RETIREMENT PLANS 
 
9 
Social Security Income 
 
Under the current Social Security system, 
monthly payment levels are based upon years 
worked and accumulated wages over the course 
of one’s lifetime.  Married different-sex couples 
are entitled to two different types of social 
security benefits: spousal benefits and survivor 
benefits.   
 
A spousal benefit allows a spouse with little or 
no social security earnings to receive a social 
security benefit up to one-half of their spouse’s 
full benefit.  For example, Jane is eligible for 
$250 in social security benefits, and her 
husband’s social security benefit is $800.  As a 
spouse, Jane is eligible for a spousal benefit of 
$400.  As a result, Jane will receive her $250 
based upon her own 
earnings, 
and 
an 
additional 
$150 
in 
spousal benefits to bring 
her total social security 
payment to a total of 
half of her husband’s 
benefit, or $400. 
 
In the case of the death of one spouse, a 
survivor benefit allows the surviving spouse to 
continue receiving a monthly payment that 
reflects the higher of the pair’s earnings.  For 
example, for a different-sex married couple, the 
husband may receive $12,073 each year while 
his wife may receive $6,835 each year.  When 
the wife passes away, the husband continues to 
receive his monthly payment of $12,073.  
However, if the husband dies first, the wife 
would then begin receiving the higher of their 
payments, or $12,073. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Because the federal government does not 
recognize 
same-sex 
relationships 
(whether 
married or not), same-sex couples do not 
benefit from this potential survivor benefit.  
Previous research suggests that individuals in 
same-sex couples are both more likely to work, 
so the potential gap between their monthly 
payments may not be as substantial as in 
different-sex married couples.26  However, 
Census data suggest that same-sex couples are 
likely to lose out on the survivor benefit.  A 2004 
study estimated that the average loss of survivor 
benefits for surviving partners who have lesser 
incomes would be $5,528 each year.27 
 
Using more recent ACS data, we calculate the 
average difference in social security payments 
between the members of a couple.  For couples 
in which both members are ages 65 or older, 
the difference in annual social security income 
between female same-sex couples is $5,700 and 
$5,767 for male same-sex couples.  Because 
same-sex couples are not eligible for social 
security 
survivor 
benefits, 
if 
the 
partner 
receiving higher social security payments dies, 
the surviving same-sex partner will lose this 
amount in monthly benefits.   
 
Lower incomes for women over the age of 65 in 
same-sex couples mirror the overall observation 
that women are disadvantaged in income and 
retirement 
savings. 
 
However, 
structural 
inequalities 
exist 
that 
magnify 
these 
disadvantages.  The following sections turn to 
the structural ways in which same-sex couples 
are treated differently by their employers and 
the tax system in the context of retirement plans 
and savings. 
 
 
 
 
Surviving same-
sex spouses are 
not eligible for 
more than $5,700 
each year in 
survivor benefits. 


SAME-SEX PARTNERS & EMPLOYER-SPONSORED RETIREMENT PLANS 
 
10 
Employer-Sponsored 
Retirement 
Plans 
and 
Employees 
with 
Same-
Sex Partners 
 
Based upon the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ 
Employee Benefits Survey, the number of 
Americans participating in employer-sponsored 
retirement plans is increasing.  In 2006, 60% of 
full-time workers participated in those plans, a 4 
percentage point increase from 1999.   Given 
that the majority of American full-time workers 
are now participating in employer-sponsored 
retirement plans, it is important to understand 
how same-sex couples may be treated unequally 
by their employers and the law as well as how 
much it would cost employers to ensure equal 
treatment.  
 
While 
overall 
participation 
in 
employer-
sponsored retirement plans is increasing, there 
is a marked trend toward participation in defined 
contribution 
plans, 
as 
opposed 
to 
defined 
benefit 
plans. 
 
In 
a 
defined contribution plan, 
the 
employee, 
and 
sometimes the employer, 
contribute to an individual 
employee’s account.  The 
level 
of 
payment 
is 
determined 
by 
the 
amount contributed and it 
may vary based upon the ways that the funds 
are 
invested. 
 
Participation 
by 
full-time 
employees 
in 
defined 
contribution 
plans 
increased from 42% in 1999 to 51% in 2006.  A 
defined benefit plan, on the other hand, 
promises beneficiaries a set level of benefits 
during retirement.  The exact benefit is usually 
calculated 
using 
a 
formula 
taking 
into 
consideration factors such as salary and time of 
service.  Participation in defined benefit plans 
dropped from 25% in 1999 to 23% in 2006.  
 
To apply these recent participation rates to 
figures from the 2005 and 2006 American 
Community Survey, we first estimate that 67% 
of individuals in same-sex couples, more than 
1,036,000 people, work 35 hours or more per 
week.  If we assume that individuals in same-
sex couples are spread evenly among the types 
of plans and that gays and lesbians participate  
 
in employer-sponsored retirement plans at the 
same rates that individuals in different-sex 
couples do, we can estimate the number of 
people in same-sex couples participating in the 
defined benefit and defined contribution plans.  
Applying the BLS statistics about participation 
rates among full-time workers, we estimate that 
60% of individuals in same-sex couples working 
35 hours or more participate in an employer-
sponsored retirement plan, or approximately 
621,000 individuals in same-sex couples.  
 
We estimate that there are approximately 
238,200 individuals in same-sex couples who 
participate in defined benefit plans.  These 
individuals might also participate in other types 
of employer-sponsored retirement plans.  The 
number of Americans overall participating in 
defined benefit plans is decreasing as employers 
shift toward defined contribution plans.   
 
The majority of Americans participating in 
employer-sponsored 
retirement 
plans 
are 
enrolled in a defined contribution plan, such as a 
401(k) plan.  Using BLS statistics showing that 
51% of full-time employees participate in a 
defined contribution plan, we estimate that 
528,200 
individuals 
in 
same-sex 
couples 
participate in defined contribution plans.  Some 
employers offer both a defined contribution and 
defined benefit plan, so these estimates may 
include some individuals who also participate in 
defined benefit plans. 
 
Laws 
Regulating 
Employer-Sponsored 
Retirement 
Plans 
and 
Same-Sex 
Recognition 
 
Federal 
law 
influences 
the 
treatment 
of 
employees with same-sex partners. Same-sex 
couples are also affected by the Employee 
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 
(ERISA), which regulates welfare and pension 
plans provided by employers, including defined 
benefit plans (pensions), defined contribution 
plans (such as 401(k)), and welfare benefit 
plans (health, death, disability).  ERISA was 
enacted as a way to protect employees from 
More than 621,000 
individuals in 
same-sex couples 
participate in an 
employer-
sponsored 
retirement plan. 


SAME-SEX PARTNERS & EMPLOYER-SPONSORED RETIREMENT PLANS 
 
11 
mismanagement of their employer-provided 
pensions and to “promote the interests of 
employees and their beneficiaries in employee 
benefit plans.”28 
 
ERISA does not provide a clear definition for the 
term “spouse.”29  Prior to the passage of the 
Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA), the meaning 
of spouse was based upon state law.30  
However, DOMA explicitly defines spouse as 
only applying to different-sex married couples 
for purposes of interpreting federal law.  Thus, 
while ERISA does not prohibit private employers 
from treating same-sex partners equally, DOMA 
does.  DOMA ensures that even in a state where 
same-sex couples may legally marry, state law 
cannot require employers to recognize same-sex 
married couples for the purposes of benefits 
administered under ERISA.31  In Massachusetts, 
where same-sex couples can legally marry, for 
example, only 35% of 147 private employers 
surveyed indicated that they planned to offer 
retirement benefits to same-sex spouses as of 
December 2004.32 
 
The following analysis of employer-sponsored 
retirement 
plans 
assumes 
that 
same-sex 
partners will not be considered “spouses” due to 
the restrictions of DOMA.  The final section of 
this analysis examines what the financial 
implications may be for employers if DOMA were 
repealed, which impacts federal tax law, and 
ERISA required that employers treat same-sex 
partners as they do different-sex spouses.  
 
Defined Benefit Plans 
 
Details of defined benefit plans vary, but 
generally employers, and sometimes employees, 
contribute funds to a large pool.  When an 
employee retires, a specific level of benefits are 
guaranteed based upon time at the company, 
salary, age, and other factors.  Much like 
defined contribution plans, contributions made 
by employees are tax-deferred and contributions 
by employers are tax deductible to the firm.  
Employees 
pay 
taxes 
upon 
disbursement.  
Defined benefit plans may offer employees the 
option to receive a lump sum if, for example, 
they terminate employment before retirement.  
More often, a retired employee receives benefits 
spread over the course of his or her lifetime 
through what is called a single life annuity.  
Married employees may opt to have benefits 
continue after their deaths for spouses through 
“survivor options” that reduce benefits during 
the retiree’s lifetime but continue past death 
through the survivor’s lifetime. 
 
 
Survivor Options:  If an employee has a spouse, 
benefits may continue to be paid to designated 
individuals after the employee’s death through 
“survivor 
options.” 
 
ERISA 
requires 
that 
employers offering defined benefit plans and 
money purchase plans provide employees with 
such 
survivor 
options. 
 
In 
many 
firms, 
employees with spouses have two options to 
ensure that payments continue after their 
deaths: a Qualified Pre-Retirement Survivor 
Annuity (QPSA) and a Qualified Joint and 
Survivor Annuity (QJSA).  While specific plans 
may offer variations on the QPSA and QJSA, the 
benefits that surviving spouses receive are 
determined, in large part, by the timing of the 
employee’s death.  
 
While these survivor options are just that, 
options, married employees are by default 
signed up for both a QPSA and a QJSA.  For a 
married employee to opt out of these survivor 
benefits in favor of a single life annuity, ERISA 
requires that an employee have formal legal 
spousal consent.  ERISA is highly protective of 
spouses in the context of defined benefit 
plans.33  If an employee who opted for a QPSA 
dies before retirement, the spouse receives 
benefits as defined under the QPSA.  A QPSA 
ensures that a surviving spouse has the option 
to receive a continuous stream of benefits based 
upon what the employee would have received if 
the employee had survived and retired.  The 
level of benefits or the amount of money 
received on a monthly or yearly basis is usually 
calculated based upon the life expectancy of the 
surviving spouse.   
 
When an employee opts for a QJSA, benefits 
that are paid upon retirement are reduced when 
compared to a single employee.  As a result of 
this 
reduction, 
an 
employee’s 
spouse 
is 
guaranteed benefits after the employee’s death.  
Benefit payments are adjusted so that the total 
amount of payment for a single employee and 
an employee whose spouse will receive a 
survivor benefit are expected to be the same 


SAME-SEX PARTNERS & EMPLOYER-SPONSORED RETIREMENT PLANS 
 
12 
given actuarial data.  In essence, monthly 
payments from the defined benefit plan are 
reduced to take into consideration the need for 
the payments to be stretched over the lifetime 
of both the employee and any additional years 
that beneficiary may live after the death of the 
employee.  Thus, when an employee who opted 
for a QJSA dies during retirement, the surviving 
spouse and any qualifying children continue to 
receive benefits as detailed in the QJSA.  
 
Employees who opt out of survivor benefits are 
treated as unmarried employees. For these 
employees, benefits are paid through what is 
often called a single life annuity.  Monthly 
benefit payments in a single life annuity are 
based upon the employee’s life expectancy at 
the time of retirement.  When an employee with 
no spouse or an employee who has elected a 
single life annuity dies, payments end.  Some 
plans provide an option of a lump sum payout to 
any named beneficiary upon death of an 
employee who has opted for a single life 
annuity.  The availability and amount of this 
lump sum may depend on time of death as well 
as the details of plan.  The tax treatment of the 
lump sum also varies based upon whom the 
employee has named as the beneficiary (see 
discussion below).  
 
Because DOMA does not recognize same-sex 
partners as spouses, unless an employer has 
specifically altered their defined benefit plan to 
include provisions for same-sex partners and 
employees are made aware of this option, 
employees cannot opt for a survivor benefit for 
their same-sex partners.  Instead, employees 
with same-sex partners are treated like their 
single counterparts and receive a single life 
annuity that is based solely upon their own life 
expectancy, and upon death, there is no 
provision for a surviving same-sex partner.  
Under plans that provide for lump sum payouts, 
same-sex 
partners 
who 
are 
named 
as 
beneficiaries may receive the payout, but tax 
treatment of this payout differs from that of 
spouses (see discussion below). 
 
Annuities:  For employees with a same-sex 
partner, who do not have the option of selecting 
a QJSA that would include a same-sex partner, 
there is another option – although imperfect – 
to ensure that a surviving spouse receives 
benefits after the employee’s death.  As 
mentioned above, under some defined benefit 
plans, there is an option for a lump sum payout 
either upon separation from the company or 
upon 
retirement. 
 
Additionally, 
unmarried 
employees and married employees, under some 
plans, can opt for a cash payout upon death to a 
designated beneficiary.  Single employees and 
employees with same-sex partners who opt for 
lump sum payouts will receive the same amount 
that any other employee, married or not, would 
receive with the same 
amount of tenure at 
the company.  Any 
beneficiary may be 
named, but the tax 
implications 
for 
naming 
a 
spouse 
versus a nonspousal 
beneficiary 
are 
substantial, and they 
will be discussed later 
in this report.   
 
In the case of a lump sum payout, an individual 
can purchase an annuity on the private market 
that would guarantee a set level of payments 
over the length of both partners’ lives.  In 1983, 
the Supreme Court held that employers could 
not adjust monthly defined benefit payments 
based upon the differences in life expectancy of 
men and women,34 although women live more 
than five years longer than men on average.35  
Prior to the Court’s ruling, employers and 
insurance providers reduced women’s monthly 
payments to take into consideration their longer 
life expectancies. 
 
While employers who 
recognize same-sex 
partners cannot discriminate in benefits provided 
based upon sex, companies that sell annuities 
on the private market can use a sex-specific 
table to calculate annuity payments.  As a result, 
a woman may in fact receive a reduced monthly 
benefit from a private sector annuity when 
compared with a payment from an employer-
provided defined benefit plan.  Female same-sex 
couples may, as a result of a combined longer 
life expectancy, receive an even lower monthly 
benefit payment or pay more for an annuity 
providing an equal payment on the open 
market.  This also means that gay male couples 
who look to purchase annuities may receive a 
Employees with 
same-sex partners  
are treated like their 
single counterparts 
and receive a single 
life annuity with no 
provision for a 
surviving same-sex 
partner. 


SAME-SEX PARTNERS & EMPLOYER-SPONSORED RETIREMENT PLANS 
 
13 
higher monthly payment due to their lower 
combined life expectancy.  
 
Defined Contribution Plans 
 
The majority of Americans participating in 
employer-sponsored 
retirement 
plans 
are 
enrolled in a defined contribution plan, such as a 
401(k).  In these plans, employees and 
sometimes employers contribute to an account 
on a tax-deferred basis.  Upon retirement or by 
the age of 70 ½ years, the balance of the 
account may be withdrawn and taxed as 
ordinary income.  Same-sex partners may be 
designated as the nonspousal beneficiary of 
these defined contribution plans, and upon 
death of the employee the funds may either be 
rolled over to an inherited IRA and distributed 
and taxed accordingly (see discussion below) or 
a lump sum distribution may be taken, 
depending on the options available in the plan.   
 
Impact of Equality on Employers 
 
While employers are not required to provide 
retirement benefits to the same-sex partners of 
their employees so long as DOMA remains in 
place, employers can opt to provide employees 
with survivor options and the possibilities of 
hardship withdrawals.  Because of a bill signed 
in late 2008, employers are required to make 
nonspousal rollovers available to beneficiaries.  
The impact on employers of recognizing same-
sex partners and providing equal treatment in 
terms of retirement benefits varies depending 
on the type of plan, either defined benefit or 
defined contribution.  However, in both cases, 
the potential financial impact is minimal.  
 
Equality in Defined Benefit Plans:  For defined 
benefits plans, employers may bear some small 
additional 
costs 
for 
recognizing 
same-sex 
couples, especially when employees choose 
survivor benefits for their same-sex partners.  
Existing plans would need to be rewritten or 
amended and forms would need to be revised to 
allow employees to include their same-sex 
partners in QPSA and QJSA forms.  Some data 
suggests that a limited number of employers 
may already be providing survivor options to 
employees with same-sex partners.   
 
The 
Human 
Rights 
Campaign’s 
Corporate 
Equality Index surveyed employers with defined 
benefit (pension) plans and found that 43% of 
surveyed employers offer QJSAs for same-sex 
partners and 27% offered QPSAs. 
 
Allowing employees to opt for QPSAs and QJSAs 
for their same-sex partners would lead to a 
slight increase in cost for employers.  For 
employees 
who 
die 
before 
retirement, 
employers 
would 
be 
required 
to 
provide 
payments to same-sex partners under a QPSA.  
Those employers who currently allow for lump 
sum payouts to any 
beneficiary 
for 
employees 
who 
die 
before 
retirement 
would bear no increase 
in costs.  The QPSA 
essentially 
spreads 
lump sum payments 
over the lifetime of the 
spouse.  For employers 
that do not provide for a lump sum payment, if 
any employee dies before retirement, there 
would be an additional cost of allowing 
employees with same-sex partners to opt for 
QPSAs.  For these employers, instead of 
absorbing the unpaid benefits into the broader 
pool, employers would be required to provide 
benefits for same-sex spouses.  
 
Allowing employees with same-sex partners to 
opt for a QJSA would result in minimal costs to 
employers.  Because the payments made to an 
employee under a single life annuity and the 
reduced payments made to an employee and 
spouse via a QJSA are designed to be the same 
over the lifetimes of the employee and spouse, 
employers should experience no significant 
increase in cost aside from the administrative 
cost of making payments over a longer period of 
time.  However, in the case of female same-sex 
couples, it is possible that an employer may 
have slightly higher costs due to the slightly 
longer life expectancy of both the employee and 
her female spouse.  However, these costs may 
be offset by the lower overall costs for male 
same-sex couples due to their lower overall life 
expectancies.   
 
 
 
The potential financial 
impact to employers of 
recognizing same-sex 
partners and providing 
equal treatment in 
retirement benefits are 
minimal. 


SAME-SEX PARTNERS & EMPLOYER-SPONSORED RETIREMENT PLANS 
 
14 
Equality in Defined Contribution Plans:  In the 
case of defined contribution plans, costs of 
treating same-sex partners equally are also 
minimal.  Because the funds of a defined 
contribution plan are distributed upon death to a 
beneficiary regardless of who is designated as 
the beneficiary, there are no additional costs 
associated with recognizing same-sex partners 
as spouses for the purposes of a defined 
contribution plan.  A simple amendment to the 
details of the plan document is necessary to 
allow for nonspousal rollovers, which would 
entitle the partner to special tax advantages, but 
upon death the funds would be allocated to a 
beneficiary in any case. Nonspousal rollovers 
result in no measurable, incremental cost to the 
employer.  Employers might bear some small 
one-time administrative costs to amend existing 
plans.  Employers and plan administrators often 
favor disbursement upon death as opposed to 
keeping funds in a defined contribution plan due 
to the administrative costs associated with a 
long disbursement period.  Nonspousal rollovers 
still allow employers to give lump sum 
disbursements 
to 
survivors, 
so 
the 
administrative 
costs 
of 
long 
disbursement 
periods are avoided.  According to the HRC’s 
2009 Corporate Equality Index, of survey 
companies, 48% of firms that provide domestic 
partner benefits also had provisions allowing for 
nonspousal rollover.36  Twenty-five percent of 
firms with domestic partner benefits allowed for 
hardship withdrawals.  Only 24% of employers 
surveyed gave employees in same-sex couples 
the option of both nonspousal rollover and 
hardship withdrawals. 
  
 
 


SAME-SEX PARTNERS & EMPLOYER-SPONSORED RETIREMENT PLANS 
 
15 
Unequal Tax Treatment of Retirement Assets 
 
Equal treatment of same-sex partners requires 
equality in both employer practices and in public 
policies.  Because the federal government does 
not recognize same-sex couples as married 
couples, even in states where legal marriage is 
an option, there are significant differences in the 
tax treatment of retirement assets for same-sex 
and different-sex couples.  However, the 
Pension 
Protection 
Act 
of 
2006 
(PPA) 
substantially changed the way that gay and 
lesbian couples’ retirement assets may be 
withdrawn and how such assets are passed on 
upon death, moving the treatment of same-sex 
couples closer to the treatment of married 
couples.37  PPA now permits withdrawals from 
retirement savings for hardships experienced by 
any designated beneficiary of certain kinds of 
retirement accounts, including for nonspouses.  
PPA also created a new mechanism for passing 
eligible retirement plan assets38 from individuals 
to nonspouses upon death: the nonspousal 
rollover.39  This provision of PPA has important 
ramifications for gay and lesbian couples, 
different-sex unmarried couples, and single 
people, regardless of sexual orientation because 
of the ways retirement wealth is disbursed and 
taxed.  This section explains how retirement 
wealth was taxed prior to the passage of PPA as 
well as the new tax treatment for such wealth 
under the PPA.  It also examines the remaining 
ways 
in 
which 
gays 
and 
lesbians 
are 
disadvantaged in the passing on of retirement 
wealth under the existing system. 
 
Defined 
Contribution 
Plans 
and 
Nonspousal Rollovers 
 
The passage of the Pension Protection Act did 
not alter the terms by which a spouse inherits 
retirement assets from his or her deceased 
spouse.  Funds in an employee’s retirement 
account may be rolled over to a spouse’s IRA 
upon death.  Spouses named as beneficiaries 
are permitted to roll plan assets into their own 
plans, annuities, or IRAs within sixty days of 
receipt of the inherited funds.  Such inherited 
“rolled over” assets are treated as the spouse’s 
for purposes of taxes and disbursements.40  For 
example, spouses are not required to make any 
withdrawals until reaching the age of 70 ½ 
years, and taxes are assessed on the funds only 
upon withdrawal.  After rolling these assets into 
their own IRAs, surviving spouses also have the 
option of naming a new beneficiary of their IRA.  
 
The Pension Protection 
Act substantially altered 
the tax treatment of 
inherited 
retirement 
accounts 
by 
nonspouses.  Because 
domestic 
partnerships 
and civil  unions are 
not recognized at a 
federal level, for the purposes of tax treatment 
of retirement savings, same-sex partners fall 
into the category of nonspouses.  Prior to the 
PPA’s 
passage, 
the 
disbursement 
of 
the 
decedent’s defined contribution retirement plan 
assets to a nonspousal beneficiary, such as 
partners and children, was treated as a lump 
sum withdrawal regardless of how they were 
used.41  Assets from the decedent’s qualified 
retirement 
account 
were 
required 
to 
be 
withdrawn by the end of the fifth year after the 
decedent’s death.  When such withdrawals were 
made, they were taxed as income at the 
beneficiary’s marginal tax rate. 
 
Since the passage of the PPA, upon the death of 
the employee, the assets in a qualifying 
retirement plan may be rolled over directly into 
an 
inherited 
IRA 
or 
inherited 
individual 
retirement annuity.42  The beneficiary is not 
given a lump sum check to deposit into a new 
account, but instead the funds must be rolled 
over from the employer-managed plan directly 
to the company or plan managing the inherited 
IRA.43  There are no taxes paid on the funds at 
this time, much like during a spousal rollover. 
 
Unlike the case with a spousal rollover, however, 
the new inherited IRA remains uniquely linked to 
the decedent in several ways.  First, the naming 
of the IRA must reference both the decedent 
and the nonspousal beneficiary; for example, 
“IRA for Tom Smith as Beneficiary of John 
Smith.” Second, the disbursement terms after 
the rollover remain tied to the decedent and 
depend in large part on when the decedent dies.  
 
There are significant 
differences in the tax 
treatment of 
retirement assets for 
same-sex and 
different-sex couples. 


SAME-SEX PARTNERS & EMPLOYER-SPONSORED RETIREMENT PLANS 
 
16 
If the employee dies before the required 
minimum distribution period begins (70 ½ years 
of age), there are two distribution options for 
nonspousal beneficiaries: the “five year rule” 
and the “life expectancy rule.”  Under the “five 
year rule,” the funds must be withdrawn in full 
within five years of the death of the employee.  
The beneficiary pays income taxes on the 
amount withdrawn, as with any retirement 
account.  The “life 
expectancy 
rule” 
generally allows for 
a 
longer 
disbursement 
period, 
but 
is 
designed to be an 
exception 
to 
the 
“five year rule.”  If 
the rollover occurs 
prior to the end of 
the tax year following the death of the 
decedent, disbursements must be made at least 
annually 
starting 
the 
year 
following 
the 
employee’s death, with payments calculated 
using 
the 
nonspouse’s 
life 
expectancy.  
Generally, the details of the plan will explain 
which disbursement option is available.  In cases 
where there is no specific method mentioned in 
the plan and there is a designated beneficiary, 
the default method is the life expectancy rule.  
Clearly this difference encourages rapid rollover 
of funds, as the potential deferral of tax 
payments may be substantially lengthened, 
particularly for younger beneficiaries.   
 
Alternatively, if the employee dies after the 
required minimum distribution period has begun 
and had already started making minimum 
withdrawals as required by law, there are two 
options, again depending on the details of the 
employer’s plan.  Just as before the creation of 
the nonspousal rollover, if the plan requires that 
funds be withdrawn in accordance with the “five 
year rule,” then funds must be fully withdrawn 
by the end of the fifth year after death.  
However, some plans allow for alternative 
disbursement schedules.  For example, monthly 
or yearly withdrawals may be made based upon 
the longer of either 
the decedent’s life 
expectancy at age of death or the beneficiary’s 
life expectancy.   
 
Defined Contribution Plans and Hardship 
Withdrawals 
 
Prior to the passage of the PPA, withdrawals 
from qualified retirement accounts prior to 
retirement were permitted only if the funds were 
to assist with a financial hardship suffered by 
either the employee or the employee’s spouse.  
Withdrawals 
were 
permitted 
for 
financial 
hardships, including medical, tuition, and funeral 
expenses.  These early withdrawals were 
allowed only if the plan explicitly permitted 
them.  As a further disincentive to withdraw 
funds early from a retirement account, the funds 
were taxed as ordinary income upon withdrawal.  
Most plans that permit early withdrawals also 
charge an administrative fee and may have rules 
regarding when one may begin contributing to 
the account after making an early withdrawal.  
 
Under the PPA, employees whose plans allow 
hardship withdrawals may now withdraw funds 
for financial hardship suffered by either the 
employee or the primary beneficiary of the plan.  
Because anyone may be designated as a 
beneficiary, this new legislation means that 
funds may be withdrawn early in the case of a 
financial 
hardship 
suffered 
by 
either 
the 
employee or his or her same-sex partner.   
Withdrawn funds are still taxed as ordinary 
income and subject to any penalties outlined in 
the specific plan.  Moreover, plans are not 
required to permit hardship withdrawals.  
 
While it is not often advised that individuals 
withdraw funds from their retirement savings 
prior to retirement, this extension of the 
hardship withdrawal policy allows same-sex 
couples to access saved money in cases of 
emergency or unforeseen expenses.  Recent 
data indicates that the number of hardship 
withdrawals has been steadily increasing over 
the past two years.  For example, in December 
2007, Vanguard reported a 22% increase in 
hardship withdrawals from the previous year, 
with the average withdrawal in 2007 being 
$6,194.44 
 
 
 
 
 
Funds may now be 
withdrawn from a 
retirement account in 
the case of a financial 
hardship suffered by 
either the employee or 
his or her same-sex 
partner. 


SAME-SEX PARTNERS & EMPLOYER-SPONSORED RETIREMENT PLANS 
 
17 
Continuing 
Inequalities 
for 
Same-Sex 
Couples in Retirement Assets 
 
The ability of nonspouses to rollover retirement 
funds allows for a longer disbursement period 
and hence deferred tax payments.  These longer 
disbursement periods can allow for longer, 
compounded 
growth 
and 
appreciation 
of 
invested assets. This is an important change in 
the treatment of retirement funds and a step 
forward for gay and lesbian couples.  However, 
this treatment does not entirely remove the 
inequalities that gay and lesbian couples 
experience in terms of retirement savings and 
the passing of those savings upon death.  In 
several key ways, nonspousal rollovers are not 
identical to spousal rollovers, putting same-sex 
couples at a disadvantage with respect to their 
retirement savings.  
 
First, because PPA did not mandate that 
employers offer nonspousal rollovers, it is 
plausible that few employers have included it in 
their retirement plans.  According to the Human 
Rights Campaign, which conducts an annual 
survey of Fortune 1000 corporations and AmLaw 
200 law firms, 47% of business surveyed offer 
rollover options to same-sex partners.  Twenty-
four percent reported that they provide the 
option for hardship withdrawals for same-sex 
couples.  However, in late 2008, the Worker, 
Retiree, and Employer Recovery Act of 2008 was 
passed, which requires that employers make 
nonspousal 
rollovers 
available. 
 
Although 
rollovers are now mandatory, existing plans will 
still need to be amended.  Nonspousal rollovers 
allow survivors to have more flexibility in 
choosing how to manage the lump sum 
payments.  
 
Employers are 
now required to offer a 
nonspousal rollover option to beneficiaries.  But 
this change in the law has not removed all 
disadvantages faced by same-sex couples in 
terms of employer-sponsored retirement plans.  
The term “nonspousal rollover” indicates a far 
greater level of equivalence with spousal 
rollovers than exists in practice.  When an 
employee dies, her different-sex spouse, as 
recognized by the federal government, can roll 
the funds remaining in her retirement account 
into his own IRA, annuity, or retirement plan.  
These new assets are then treated as though 
they have been the survivor’s all along.  
Nonspousal rollovers, on the other hand, must 
be deposited into a new rollover account on 
which the decedent’s name must remain.  The 
processes through which funds are rolled over 
from the decedent’s account to the spouse or 
nonspousal beneficiary also differ.  A federally 
recognized spouse receives a check for the 
amount in the retirement account and then has 
sixty days to deposit it into her own rollover IRA.  
In nonspousal rollovers, the funds are rolled 
over directly from one trustee to the new 
trustee.  More advance planning by the 
nonspousal beneficiary may be needed to 
coordinate the rollover of funds as opposed to 
receiving a check and having sixty days with 
which to plan for deposit.   
 
Perhaps the largest 
inequality 
in 
the 
existing nonspousal 
rollover treatment is 
the requirement for 
withdrawals.  
Spousal beneficiaries 
are 
permitted 
to 
wait until they reach 
age 70½ years to 
begin 
making 
withdrawals from their rollover IRA account.  
Meanwhile, in the case of the nonspousal 
rollover, the disbursement schedule is more 
regimented.   
 
There are two possible disbursement schedules, 
which depend upon the language contained in 
the specific plan.  In one case, all the funds in a 
plan must be withdrawn within five years of the 
employee’s death.  The other disbursement 
schedule requires that incremental withdrawals 
begin immediately and occur annually either for 
the duration of the decedent’s life expectancy or 
for nonspouse’s life expectancy.  The duration of 
payments is dictated by the specific language of 
the plan.  This difference means that the same-
sex partner of a deceased employee may have 
to begin receiving payments from the inherited 
IRA immediately upon the employee’s death, 
even if disbursements are not needed.  One 
could imagine a 50 year old partner who is still 
working, receiving payments upon his or her 
same-sex spouse’s death, while a different-sex 
partner whose spouse also dies could wait until 
Being able to wait until 
withdrawals are 
needed means that 
different-sex spouses 
are advantaged in 
terms of retirement 
planning and the net 
total of savings. 


SAME-SEX PARTNERS & EMPLOYER-SPONSORED RETIREMENT PLANS 
 
18 
age 70½ to make withdrawals and reap the 
benefits of 20 additional years of tax deferred 
growth of their invested assets.  They may also 
be in a lower tax bracket by the time they reach 
age 70½.   
 
Being able to wait until withdrawals are needed, 
as well as having more time for funds to grow in 
an account, means that different-sex spouses 
are still advantaged in terms of retirement 
planning and ultimately the net total of savings.  
This difference in disbursement schedules is 
attributed to the fact that a spousal rollover 
essentially rolls over the funds into the survivor’s 
account and treats it as the survivor’s funds 
moving forward in time.  The 70½ age 
requirement is associated with any standard 
IRA.  Meanwhile, the “inherited IRA” with the 
nonspousal rollover is treated differently and 
provides fewer distribution options as it remains 
tied to the decedent.    
 
Allowing 
employees 
to 
make 
hardship 
withdrawals 
from 
retirement 
accounts 
for 
circumstances 
involving 
nonspouses 
is 
an 
important step toward equality for same-sex 
couples.  While financial hardships affecting 
nonspouses are now considered reasonable for 
withdrawals, there are still limitations for same-
sex couples.  Plans are not required to permit 
hardship 
withdrawals 
for 
nonspousal 
beneficiaries.  In some states, same-sex 
partners are not permitted to adopt their 
partners’ children, which has implications for 
hardship 
withdrawals. 
 
In 
the 
case 
of 
withdrawals from a retirement account, financial 
hardships pertaining to the employee’s children 
are considered permissible.  If a same-sex 
employee could not be the legal parent of his or 
her partner’s child, a withdrawal related to that 
child would not be allowed.   
 
Legislation has been effective in addressing 
some of the inequalities facing same-sex couples 
in terms of employer-sponsored retirement 
plans. The Pension Protection Act and the 2008 
clarifications 
give 
same-sex 
couples 
more 
options to plan for a secure retirement.  Yet, 
same-sex couples still face some disadvantages 
and inequalities emanating from DOMA and the 
inability of the federal government to recognize 
same-sex partners as spouses. 
 
  


SAME-SEX PARTNERS & EMPLOYER-SPONSORED RETIREMENT PLANS 
 
19 
CONCLUSION 
 
The provisions in the Pension Protection Act that 
allow employers to amend their plans to give 
employees with same-sex partners more options 
in terms of retirement assets are a step toward 
greater equality for employees and their same-
sex partners.  The recently passed Worker, 
Retiree, and Employer Recovery Act of 2008 
makes nonspousal rollovers mandatory.   
 
Employees with same-sex couples should still 
engage in conversations with their employers 
and 
advocate 
for 
amendments 
to 
their 
retirement plans.  Employees should inform their 
employers 
that 
rollovers 
and 
hardship 
withdrawals are now possible for nonspousal 
beneficiaries and that an amendment to include 
these in retirement plans would not lead to a 
cost increase for employers.  
 
Employers will not be required to treat same-sex 
partners and spouses as they treat different-sex 
spouses until DOMA is repealed.  However, 
recent testimony for the New Jersey Civil Union 
Review 
Commission 
indicates 
that 
when 
individual states make marriage available to 
same-sex couples, employers are much more 
likely 
to 
provide 
identical 
benefits 
to 
employees.45    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The inequalities facing same-sex couples are 
substantial when it comes to their ability to 
accumulate wealth, plan for their futures, and 
pass on wealth.   These inequalities are 
particularly 
poignant 
for 
female 
same-sex 
couples.  Existing inequalities in income as well 
as 
structural 
mechanisms 
that 
reinforce 
discrimination have long-term implications for 
same-sex couples and their families.  Until state 
and federal laws change to protect same-sex 
couples 
from 
discrimination 
both 
in 
the 
workplace and in the tax system, couples may 
need to take extra caution when planning their 
financial futures. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


SAME-SEX PARTNERS & EMPLOYER-SPONSORED RETIREMENT PLANS 
 
20 
ENDNOTES 
 
 
1 See Ash and Badgett, 2006. 
2 Badgett, M.V. Lee, Holning Lau, Brad Sears, and Deborah Ho. 2007. Bias in the Workplace: Consistent 
evidence of sexual orientation and gender identity discrimination. Los Angeles: The Williams Institute, 
June. http://www.law.ucla.edu/williamsinstitute/publications/Bias%20in%20the%20Workplace.pdf. 
3 Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2007.  “Baby Boomer Retirement Security: The Roles of 
Planning, Financial Literacy, and Housing Wealth,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(1): 205-224. 
4 Bell, Elizabeth, Adam Carasso, and C. Eugene Steuerle.  2005.  “Strengthening Private Sources of 
Retirement Savings for Low-Income Families,” The Urban Institute, No. 5. 
5 Leppel, Karen.  2007.  “Married and Unmarried, Opposite- and Same-Sex Couples: A  
Decomposition of Homeownership Differences,” Journal of Housing Research 16(1):61-81; Chin Phua, 
Voon and Gayle Kaufman.  1999.  “Using the Census to Profile Same-Sex Cohabitation: A Research 
Notes,” Population Research and Policy Review 18:373-86. 
6 National Institutes of Health.  2007.  “Growing Older in America: The Health and Retirement Study.” 
Pub. No. 07-5757, 63. 
7 Ash and Badgett, 2006. 
8 Black, Dan A., Seth G. Sanders, and Lowell J. Taylor.  2007.  “The Economics of Lesbian and Gay 
Families,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 21(2):53-70; Black, Dan, Gary Gates, Seth Sanders, and 
Lowell Taylor.  2000.  “Demographics of the Gay and Lesbian Population in the United States: Evidence 
From Available Systematic Data Sources,” Demography 37(2):139-154; Antecol, Heather, Anneke Jong, 
Michael D. Steinberger.  2007.  “Sexual Orientation Wage Gay: The role of occupational sorting and 
human capital,” Industrial & Labor Relations Review 61(5):5.  
9 Black et. al, 2000. 
10 Levine, Phillip B., Olivia S. Mitchell, and John W. Phillips.  2000.  “A Benefit of One’s Own: Older 
Women’s Retirement Entitlements Under Social Security,” Social Security Bulletin 63(3):47-54. 
11 Hardy, Melissa A. and Kim Shuey.  2000.  “Pension Decisions in a Changing Economy: Gender, 
Structure, and Choice,” Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences 55B(5):S271-77 
12 Levine, Phillip B., Olivia S. Mitchell, and John W. Phillips.  1999.  “Worklife Determinants of Retirement 
Income Differentials Between Men and Women,” NBER Working Paper No. W7243; Albelda, Randy, M.V. 
Lee Badgett, Gary Gates, and Alyssa Schneebaum.  2009.  “Poverty in the Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual 
Community,” The Williams Institute, http://www.law.ucla.edu/williamsinstitute/pdf/LGBPovertyReport.pdf 
13 Black et. al, 2007; Antecol et. al, 2007. 
14 Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2006.  “Financial Literacy and Planning: Implications for 
Retirement Well-Being,” Pension Research Council Working Paper 2006-01. 
15 The Wall Street Journal Online/Harris Interactive Personal Finance Poll, April 24, 2008.  
http://www.harrisinteractive.com/news/allnewsbydate.asp?NewsID=1302  
16 National Institutes of Health, 2007, 68. 
17 National Institutes of Health, 2007, 57. 
18 The Wall Street Journal Online/Harris Interactive Personal Finance Poll, April 24, 2008. 
19 Harris Poll Online, June 2008, #J34158 (obtained from Harris Interactive). 
20 National Institutes of Health, 2007, 67. 
21 Lusardi and Mitchell, 2006. 
22 Romero, Adam P., Amanda K. Baumle, M.V. Lee Badgett, and Gary J. Gates.  2007.  “Census Snapshot: 
United States.”  The Williams Institute, 
http://www.law.ucla.edu/williamsinstitute/publications/USCensusSnapshot.pdf  
23 The author wishes to thank Marieka Klawitter for her analysis of the Survey of Consumer Finance data. 
24 William E. Even and David A. Macpherson.  2004. “When will the gender gap in 
retirement income narrow?”, Southern Economic Journal 71(1):182-200. 


SAME-SEX PARTNERS & EMPLOYER-SPONSORED RETIREMENT PLANS 
 
 
21 
 
25 Total income is a sum of the householder’s and spouse’s individual income sources over that last 12 
months.  Self-reported incomes are subject to the interpretation of the individual respondent, however, 
definitions are provided in the survey instrument.   
26 Romero et. al, 2007. 
27 Bennett, Lisa and Gary J. Gates.  2004.  “The Cost of Marriage Inequality to Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual 
Seniors,” Human Rights Campaign Foundation Report, January 21, 
http://www.hrc.org/about_us/7055.htm 
28  29 U.S.C. §1001(b)-(c).   
29 29 USCS § 1002. 
30 McClendon, Janice Kay.  2006.  “A Small Step Forward in the Last Civil Rights Battle: Extending 
Benefits Under Federally Regulated Employee Benefit Plans to Same-Sex Couples,” N.M.L. Rev. 36:99.  
31 Haltzel, Laura and Patrick Purcell.  2008.  “The Effect of State-Legalized Same-Sex Marriage on Social 
Security Benefits and Pensions,” CRS Report for Congress, Jan. 3. 
32 Blanton, Kimberly.  2004.  “Same-Sex Retirement Benefits Lag Only 35% of Mass. Firms Say They’ll 
Extend Offerings,” The Boston Globe, Sect: Business, Dec. 29. 
33 Schelbuerg, Neal S.  and Carrie L. Mitnick.  2004.  “Same-Sex Marriage: The Evolving Landscape for 
Employee Benefits,” Hofstra Lab. & Emp. L.J. 22:65-80. 
34 Arizona Governing Committee for Tax Deferred Annuity and Deferred Compensation Plans, etc. v. 
Norris (1983). 
35 Table 6.  Expectation of life by age, race, and sex: United States, final 2004 and preliminary 2005.  
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics.   
36 Estimates were calculated using data provided by the Human Rights Campaign from the 2009 
Corporate Equality Index. 
37 Pension Protection Act of 2006, Pub. L. No. 109-280, 120 Stat. 780 (2006) (hereafter “PPA”). 
38 402(c)(8)(B) defines eligible retirement plans as: an individual retirement account, an individual 
retirement annuity, a qualified trust, an annuity plan, an eligible deferred compensation plan, or an 
annuity contract.   
39 Fed. Tax Coordinator ¶ H-11438.1 (2d.) 
40 402(c)(9) 
41 Fed. Tax Coordinator ¶ H-11437 (2d.) 
42 Fed. Tax Coordinator ¶ H-11438.1 (2d.) 
43 Fed. Tax Coordinator ¶ H-11438.1 (2d.) 
44 Nessmith, William E. and Stephen P. Utkus.  2008.  “Research Note: Hardship Withdrawals and the 
Mortgage Crisis,” Vanguard. 
45 Tom Barbera, Transcript 9/26/07, pg 37-40, First Interim Report of the New Jersey Civil Union Review 
Commission, www.NJCivilRights.org/curc