European Journal of Education Studies 
ISSN: 2501 - 1111 
ISSN-L: 2501 - 1111 
Available online at: www.oapub.org/edu 
 
Copyright © The Author(s). All Rights Reserved.                                                                                                                   408 
DOI: 10.46827/ejes.v12i9.6220 
Volume 12│ Issue 9│2025 
 
FACTORS AFFECTING THE EDUCATIONAL  
GROWTH OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES IN  
SPECIAL SCHOOLS IN OYO STATE, NIGERIA  
 
Famayo, Moses Ojoi 
Department of Kinesiology, Health Education and Recreation, 
Obafemi Awolowo University, 
 Ile Ife, Nigeria 
 
Abstract: 
This study investigated factors affecting the educational growth of persons with 
disabilities in special schools in Oyo State, Nigeria. It aimed to identify the educational 
challenges faced by persons with disabilities, explore their socio-economic factors, and 
assess the institutional support structures available in special schools. A total of 50 
students were randomly selected from two special schools: Durbar Grammar School, Oyo 
and Federal College of Special Education, Oyo. A descriptive statistical technique was 
employed to analyze the data, with emphasis on peculiar features like their frequency, 
percentage, mean and standard deviation. Results of the study revealed that 76% 
respondents were denied access to learning materials and 74% had no access to assistive 
technology like screen readers that could improve their educational growth; family 
background and transportation impacted their educational growth, while 78% 
respondents affirmed great support from their teachers and the staff of the schools. Based 
on these results, it was recommended that there is an urgent need to increase the 
availability and accessibility of learning materials and assistive technologies to support 
students with diverse needs. Similarly, parents and guardians of persons with special 
needs should be encouraged to release their children and wards for enrolment in the 
special school to aid their learning experience.  
 
Keywords: disabilities, schools, educational growth, accessibility, technology, family 
background  
 
1. Introduction  
 
Education is a fundamental right for all individuals, including those with disabilities. 
Individuals with disabilities exist in every society globally. Both within and beyond 
various educational institutions, there are learners who possess unique needs that 
demand tailored educational approaches (Soto & Lynch, 2022). These children, falling 
 
iCorrespondence: email mfamayo@oauife.edu.ng 


Famayo, Moses Ojo 
FACTORS AFFECTING THE EDUCATIONAL GROWTH OF PERSONS  
WITH DISABILITIES IN SPECIAL SCHOOLS IN OYO STATE, NIGERIA  
 
European Journal of Education Studies - Volume 12│ Issue 9│2025                                                                                   409 
into the category of special needs, cannot thrive in traditional classroom settings; instead, 
they require specialized education and support services to reach their fullest potential 
(Babatunde et al., 2020). In Nigeria, like many other countries, efforts have been made to 
ensure access to education for children with disabilities through the establishment of 
special schools. Despite these efforts, there are still challenges that hinder the educational 
growth of handicapped students in special schools. These individuals may face 
challenges such as learning or attention issues, intellectual disabilities, behavioral 
disorders, physical or health impairments, communication disorders, hearing 
impairments, and visual impairments (Gerber, 2017). The education of handicapped 
children has long been a topic of concern and study. Physically challenged students often 
have problems accessing educational opportunities, from physical barriers to social 
stigma (Famayo, 2010). From the record, approximately 20% of students at the school 
period stand for special needs (Limaye, 2016). According to Garuba (2003), knowledge of 
“disability” has already moved from a medical model to a social model, concentrating on 
human rights and the challenges orchestrated by nature, societal behaviour, cultural 
prejudice, myths and mistreatment. 
 
The integration of students with severe handicaps into regular classrooms with 
their non-disabled peers has been a growing trend, driven by philosophical, legal, and 
empirical support (Nkechi, 2013). Integrating these students can provide advantages for 
both those with and without handicaps, as the resources and instructional technology 
needed may help a lot of students who are struggling in the current educational system. 
However, students with disabilities, learning difficulties, and disadvantages remain one 
of the most segregated groups in public schools that must be brought to a minimal level 
so that improvement for learning may be provided (Famayo, 2022). Factors repeatedly 
identified as facilitating or hindering equity and inclusion include legal frameworks, 
funding models, assessment arrangements, school structure, class size, the use of 
individual teaching programs, the involvement of additional teachers and aides, teacher 
training Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (2006) prohibit any sort of 
exclusion from educational opportunities on the basis of sex, ethnic origin, language, 
religion, nationality, socio-economic conditions, abilities, etc. Therefore, there is a need 
for every government to ensure that persons with disabilities are blended and integrated 
into society to avoid issues of discrimination and apathy (Famayo, 2024).  
 
However, the educational experiences of children with disabilities in special 
schools often face unique challenges that require targeted interventions and support 
mechanisms to foster their holistic development. Research indicates that several factors 
influence the educational growth of students with disabilities in special schools. One 
critical factor is the availability and adequacy of educational resources and facilities 
tailored to meet the diverse needs of students with disabilities (Adebisi et al., 2014). These 
resources include specialized teaching materials, assistive technologies, and trained 
personnel such as special education teachers and therapists. Societal attitudes and 
perceptions towards disability also play a significant role in shaping the educational 
experiences of persons with disabilities. Negative attitudes, stigma, and discrimination 


Famayo, Moses Ojo 
FACTORS AFFECTING THE EDUCATIONAL GROWTH OF PERSONS  
WITH DISABILITIES IN SPECIAL SCHOOLS IN OYO STATE, NIGERIA  
 
European Journal of Education Studies - Volume 12│ Issue 9│2025                                                                                   410 
can create barriers to inclusion and participation in educational settings (Adigun, 2018). 
Studies show that parental involvement positively correlates with academic achievement 
and socio-emotional well-being among students with disabilities (Babatunde et al., 2013). 
 
Other factors linked to the academic growth of children with disabilities are: the 
availability and utilization of assistive technologies, the impact of teacher-student 
interactions, parental involvement, and the overall support infrastructure within special 
schools. The labeling of students as “handicapped” has been replaced by broader 
descriptions of their learning needs. Garuba (2003) noted that students with disability are 
children who differ significantly from the average to such an extent that provision of 
special services becomes mandatory for effective learning, social participation and 
adjustment. In the same vein, Limaye (2016) observed that the visually impaired students 
cannot effectively benefit from the regular classroom arrangements without provision for 
Braille, typewriter, recorded tapes and other intervention programmes. Also, the hearing-
impaired need supportive services through sign language, hearing aids and those with 
mobility problems equally need prosthetic materials, modern wheelchairs, walkers and 
other mobility devices (Famayo, 2024). The same is applicable to other categories of 
students with disability. Gerber (2017) emphasized that special education is tailored to 
the unique needs of the learners. 
 
Persons with disabilities have been defined legally as those who have long-term 
physical, mental, intellectual or sensory impairments which, in conjunction with 
attitudinal and environmental barriers, may prevent them from fully and effectively 
participating in society on an equal basis to other people (Article 1, Convention on the 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities [CRPD]). Disability is a complex and multifaceted 
concept, encompassing biological, psychological, social and cultural factors that often 
give human beings a great concern for this creature as they are entirely different. Special 
education, according to FRN (2014), describes special education as a customized 
educational programme designed to meet the unique needs of persons with special needs 
that the general education programme cannot cater for. 
 
Special education is of great importance for children with learning disabilities, 
because it gives them the opportunity to get quality education in line with their unique 
needs. Special education enables every student to gain a high level of independence and 
reach their full potential. Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) provide 
students with disabilities access to educational services that allow them to enjoy the same 
rights as students without disabilities, setting forth a framework describing that 
instruction should be provided in a regular classroom, a classroom specially modified to 
meet the special needs of students, or under special conditions (individualized education 
or instruction in small groups in a special-needs classroom). It is also important to note 
that public schools are obligated to provide special educational conditions at no 
additional cost. To address the unique needs of students with learning disabilities, an 
Individualized Educational Plan (IEP) is developed for each child. This collaborative 
approach involves a team of teachers, specialists, and family members, with parents 
playing a vital role in sharing their in-depth knowledge of their child. Together, they 


Famayo, Moses Ojo 
FACTORS AFFECTING THE EDUCATIONAL GROWTH OF PERSONS  
WITH DISABILITIES IN SPECIAL SCHOOLS IN OYO STATE, NIGERIA  
 
European Journal of Education Studies - Volume 12│ Issue 9│2025                                                                                   411 
design a personalized educational plan tailored to the child's specific disability, ensuring 
the school provides the necessary support for the child to succeed and receive a quality 
education. The IEP team works together to identify the child's strengths, challenges, and 
goals, creating a comprehensive plan that addresses their academic, social, and emotional 
needs. By working together, parents, teachers, and specialists can help children with 
learning disabilities reach their full potential. 
 
The significance of this research stems from the fundamental principle that every 
child, regardless of physical or cognitive ability, deserves equal access to education and 
opportunities for academic growth. Ultimately, the findings of this research endeavor to 
contribute to the ongoing efforts towards creating a more inclusive and supportive 
educational environment where every child, including those with disabilities, can thrive 
and reach their full potential. By identifying and analyzing the factors influencing their 
educational growth, this study seeks to inform policy-makers, educators, and 
stakeholders about the specific needs and barriers faced by children with disabilities in 
Oyo State's special school settings.  
 
2. Statement of the Problem 
 
Despite the presence of special schools in Oyo State aimed at providing educational 
support for persons with disabilities, there exists a significant gap in achieving optimal 
educational growth among these students. Several factors contribute to this disparity, 
including but not limited to inadequate resources, socio-economic barriers, and lack of 
specialized training for teachers, limited access to assistive technology, societal stigma, 
and administrative challenges. However, a comprehensive understanding of the specific 
factors influencing the educational growth of handicapped students in Oyo State special 
schools is lacking. 
 
Disability is part of being human and is integral to the human experience. It results 
from the interaction between health conditions such as dementia, blindness or spinal cord 
injury, and a range of environmental and personal factors. An estimated 1.3 billion people 
or 16% of the global population experience a significant disability today, with 1177 special 
schools in Nigeria, which is not even enough to cater for the number of disabled persons 
in the country as significant number of these children are still with their parents and 
guardians at home perplexing of what to do with them, either to poison or wishing them 
quick death to remove problems and social stigma and embarrassment from their 
neighbours and the society at large. 
 
In order to determine the factors responsible for the educational growth of persons 
with disabilities, the study will set out to examine and explore the specific educational 
challenges faced by persons with disabilities, the socio- economic factors that impact their 
educational growth and also to examine the teaching strategies and methodologies 
employed in special schools and evaluate their efficacy in facilitating the educational 
progress of persons with disabilities in special schools. 
 


Famayo, Moses Ojo 
FACTORS AFFECTING THE EDUCATIONAL GROWTH OF PERSONS  
WITH DISABILITIES IN SPECIAL SCHOOLS IN OYO STATE, NIGERIA  
 
European Journal of Education Studies - Volume 12│ Issue 9│2025                                                                                   412 
2.1 Objectives 
The objectives were set to: 
1) Identify the specific educational challenges faced by persons with disabilities in 
special schools in Oyo State. 
2) Explore the socioeconomic factors, including economic status, family support, and 
access to resources, that may impact the educational growth of persons with 
disabilities in Oyo State. 
3) Assess the adequacy and effectiveness of institutional support structures and 
resources available in special schools to address the unique needs of persons with 
disabilities. 
 
2.2 Research Questions 
1) What are the specific educational challenges encountered by children with 
disabilities attending special schools in Oyo State? 
2) How do socio-economic factors, such as economic status and family support, 
influence the educational growth of persons with disabilities in special schools? 
3) What is the adequacy and effectiveness of institutional support structures and 
resources available in special schools to address the educational needs of persons 
with disabilities?  
 
3. Methodology 
 
This study adopted the descriptive survey research design. The targeted population for 
the study comprised persons with disabilities in the junior secondary school in special 
schools in Oyo state, Nigeria. The sample for this study comprised 50 respondents who 
were randomly selected from two special schools in Oyo state which formed 25 
respondents each. 
 
A specially designed questionnaire that contained the biodata of the respondents 
and questions related to educational challenges, socioeconomic factors, using a modified 
Likert scale, rating scale and a nominal scale of yes or no was employed to collect data 
for this study.  
 
The instrument was validated through experts in the field of adapted physical 
education, who finally formed the distributed questionnaire to the respondents. 
 
The internal consistency reliability of the questionnaire was assessed using the 
test-retest reliability by administering the questionnaire to a pilot group of 20 participants 
on two separate occasions, with a two-week interval, and a correlation coefficient of r of 
0.67 was obtained using Pearson Product-Moment Correlation (PPMC). 
 
The administration of the questionnaire was done by the researcher with the aid 
of 4 research assistants. The descriptive statistics were employed, such as frequency, 
percentage, mean, and standard deviation. 
 
 


Famayo, Moses Ojo 
FACTORS AFFECTING THE EDUCATIONAL GROWTH OF PERSONS  
WITH DISABILITIES IN SPECIAL SCHOOLS IN OYO STATE, NIGERIA  
 
European Journal of Education Studies - Volume 12│ Issue 9│2025                                                                                   413 
4. Results  
 
Table 1a: Demographic data of the respondents on sex 
Items 
Frequency 
Percentage (%) 
Male 
26 
52.0 
Female 
24 
48.0 
Total 
50 
100.0 
 
The above table shows that 52.0% of the respondents were males, while 48.0% were 
females. This indicates a higher prevalence of males than females in the surveyed area. 
 
Table 1b: Demographic data of the respondents' age 
Items 
Frequency 
Percentage (%) 
15 – 20 
24 
48.0 
20 – 25 
26 
52.0 
Total 
50 
100 
 
The above table shows that ages 20 - 25 formed 52% of the respondents, and ages 15 -20 
formed 48% of the respondents.  
 
Table 1c: Demographic data on types of disability 
Items 
Frequency 
Percentage (%) 
Visual impairment 
14 
28.0 
Hearing impairment 
13 
26.0 
Physical impairment 
19 
38.0 
Mental retardation 
4 
8.0 
Total 
50 
100 
 
The above table reveals that 38% of the respondents had physical impairment, 28% had 
visual impairment, 26% had hearing impairment and 8% intellectual disability. 
 
Research question 1: What are the specific educational challenges encountered by 
handicapped children attending special schools in Oyo state? 
 
Table 2: Educational challenges faced by persons with disabilities 
Educational challenges faced by 
persons with disabilities 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Mean 
(𝒙̅) 
Standard 
deviation 
(𝝈) 
There is no easy access to 
learning materials  
11(22) 
27(54) 
9(18) 
3(6) 
2.08 
0.804 
There is no form of bullying or 
discrimination in your school  
5(10) 
28(56) 
13(26) 
4(8) 
2.32 
0.768 
There is no easy access to 
assistive technology like screen 
readers, speech-to-text software 
etc. to aid learning  
11(22) 
26(52) 
12(24) 
1(2) 
2.06 
0.740 


Famayo, Moses Ojo 
FACTORS AFFECTING THE EDUCATIONAL GROWTH OF PERSONS  
WITH DISABILITIES IN SPECIAL SCHOOLS IN OYO STATE, NIGERIA  
 
European Journal of Education Studies - Volume 12│ Issue 9│2025                                                                                   414 
You find it easy to take notes 
while the teacher is teaching  
7(14) 
26(52) 
13(26) 
4(8) 
2.28 
0.809 
Note: The values in brackets ( ) represent the percentage of each frequency. 
 
The table above showed that 76% of the respondents agreed that there is no easy access 
to learning materials, 24% respondents disagreed. The mean score of 2.08 reflects a 
positive response, while the standard deviation of 0.804 indicates some level of variability 
in responses. 
 
The study also revealed that 66% of the respondents confirmed there was no form 
of bullying or discrimination in their school, and 34% disagreed. The mean of the 
respondents was 2.32, and the standard deviation was 0.768, reflecting the results of the 
findings clustering around their mean value. 
 
On access to assistive technology, 74% of the respondents declined it; while 26% 
consented they had easy access to assistive technology like screen readers, speech 
readers, speech-to-text software, and others, to aid learning. This represents a mean of 
2.06 and a standard deviation of 0.740, suggesting a closer value of responses to the 
average. 
 
On whether teachers make teaching and writing less difficult for the respondents, 
76% agreed, while 24% of the respondents disagreed, resulting in a mean of 2.06 and a 
standard deviation of 0.740, which implies that the mean is a relatively good 
representative of the responses in the question. 
 
Also, this section asked if respondents found it easy to take notes while the teacher 
is teaching, 66% of them agreed, while 34% of the respondents disagreed. This recorded 
a mean of 2.28 and a standard deviation of 0.809, indicating a relatively large increase in 
the dispersion of their responses compared to the responses of other questions. 
 
 
Research question 2: What are the socio-economic factors that impact the educational 
growth of persons with disabilities? 
 
Table 3: Socio-economic factors impacting the educational growth of persons with disabilities 
Socio-economic 
Factors 
Always 
Frequently 
Occasionally 
Rarely 
Never 
Mean 
(𝒙̅) 
Standard 
deviation 
(𝝈) 
Family  
background 
6(12) 
17(34) 
15(30) 
9(18) 
3(6) 
2.72 
1.089 
Transportation to 
school 
1(2) 
23(46) 
18(36) 
8(16) 
0(0) 
2.66 
0.772 
Access to healthcare 
services 
2(4) 
11(22) 
24(48) 
12(24) 
1(2) 
2.98 
0.845 
Access to smart 
technology for 
learning 
2(4) 
14(28) 
13(26) 
18(36) 
2(4) 
3.08 
0.997 
Access to financial 
support 
0(0) 
16(32) 
25(50) 
9(18) 
0(0) 
2.86 
0.700 
Social  
1(2) 
17(34) 
24(48) 
8(16) 
0(0) 
2.78 
0.737 


Famayo, Moses Ojo 
FACTORS AFFECTING THE EDUCATIONAL GROWTH OF PERSONS  
WITH DISABILITIES IN SPECIAL SCHOOLS IN OYO STATE, NIGERIA  
 
European Journal of Education Studies - Volume 12│ Issue 9│2025                                                                                   415 
inclusion  
Note: The values in brackets ( ) represent the percentage of each frequency. 
 
The table above shows that 34% of the respondents agreed family background frequently 
affects educational growth, while 30% went for occasionally and 18% for rarely, 
indicating a mean of 2.72 and a standard deviation of 1.089, which indicates a significant 
variability in the extent to which family background affects educational growth.  
 
Also, the table measures the frequency at which transportation as a socioeconomic 
factor affects respondents’ educational growth., 46% believed it frequently affects their 
educational growth, 36% selected occasionally, and 16% revealed that it rarely affects 
their educational growth. This shows a mean of 2.66 and a standard deviation of 0.772, 
which indicates that the responses cluster relatively around the mean. 
 
On access to health care services and their educational growth, 22% said it 
frequently affects them, 48% believed that it occasionally affects their educational growth, 
and 24% said that it rarely affects their educational growth. The overall response has a 
mean of 2.98 and a standard deviation of 0.845, showing some increased level of 
variability in their responses. 
 
Similarly, this subsection of the study also provided insight into respondents’ 
access to smart technology for learning. It can be seen from the table above that 28% 
frequently have access to smart technology to aid learning, 26% occasionally gain access 
to this smart technology, and 36% rarely have access to it. This response has a mean of 
2.86 and a standard deviation of 0.70, which indicates a low variability in the responses 
of students compared to the value of the mean. 
 
As regards access to financial support, 32% believed they frequently have access 
to financial support, 50% agreed that they occasionally have access to financial support, 
and 18% selected that they rarely have access to financial support to aid their educational 
growth. This response has a mean of 3.08 and a high standard deviation of 0.997, 
indicating a significant increase in the variability of the responses far away from the value 
of the mean. 
 
Finally, this study argued that social inclusion is one of the socioeconomic factors 
affecting the educational growth of disabled people; as a result, it also provided insight 
into the social inclusion of respondents based on their responses. 2% believed that they 
are always affected by social inclusion, 34% are frequently affected, 48% are occasionally 
affected, and 16% of respondents are rarely affected. This response has a mean of 2.78 
and a standard deviation of 0.737, which shows that the responses cluster significantly 
around the mean. 
 
Research question 3: What are the institutional support structures available in special 
schools? 
 
 
 


Famayo, Moses Ojo 
FACTORS AFFECTING THE EDUCATIONAL GROWTH OF PERSONS  
WITH DISABILITIES IN SPECIAL SCHOOLS IN OYO STATE, NIGERIA  
 
European Journal of Education Studies - Volume 12│ Issue 9│2025                                                                                   416 
Table 4: Institutional support structure available in special schools 
Questions 
Yes 
No 
Mean 
(𝒙̅) 
Standard deviation 
(𝝈) 
Are there adequate resources and facilities  
in your school to support your learning needs? 
28(56) 
22(44) 
1.44 
0.501 
Are the counseling services available in your  
school? 
29(58) 
21(42) 
1.42 
0.499 
Do you receive support from teachers and staff  
in your school? 
39(78) 
11(22) 
1.22 
0.418 
Is there a provision for accommodation in your  
school? 
31(62) 
19(38) 
1.38 
0.490 
Does your school have accessible classrooms for  
all types of disabilities? 
27(54) 
23(46) 
1.46 
0.503 
Is the curriculum adapted for different types  
of disabilities? 
29(58) 
21(42) 
1.42 
0.499 
Note: The values in brackets ( ) represent the percentage of each frequency. 
 
This shows that 56% of the respondents confirmed adequacy of resources and facilities 
in the school to support their learning needs, while 44% respondents declined it with a 
mean of 1.44 and a standard deviation of 0.501, which implies a relative clustering of 
these dual responses around the mean.  
 
On whether counseling services are available in their school, 58% confirmed it, 
while 42% declined it, with a mean of 1.42 and a standard deviation of 0.499, which 
revealed a further clustering of the values around the mean. 
 
Furthermore, on whether respondents receive support from teachers and staff in 
their school. Interestingly, 78% affirmed this while 22% refuted it, which implies a 
significant percentage of respondents have access to relevant support from the teachers 
and staff in their school. These responses are backed with a mean of 1.22 and a standard 
deviation of 0.418, which reveals that the responses are very close to the mean of the 
responses. 
 
Similarly, this subsection also asked respondents if there is a provision for 
accommodation in their school. 62% confirmed this, while 38% declined it, which 
provides further need for support to these special schools in Oyo state, either from 
government institutions or private institutions, to increase the availability of 
accommodation in these special schools. These responses have a mean of 1.38 and a 
standard deviation of 0.490, which implies a slight increase in the standard deviation 
compared to other standard deviations so far, but still shows that the responses cluster 
around the mean.  
 
Also, the subsection asked if respondents have accessible classrooms for all types 
of disabilities in their schools. 54% agreed that they have access, while 46% disagreed that 
they do not have access. The response has a mean of 1.46, and its standard deviation 
increased to 0.503. 
 
Finally, on the question of whether the curriculum is adapted for different types 
of disabilities, 58% affirmed it, while 42% disagreed. Meanwhile, their responses have a 


Famayo, Moses Ojo 
FACTORS AFFECTING THE EDUCATIONAL GROWTH OF PERSONS  
WITH DISABILITIES IN SPECIAL SCHOOLS IN OYO STATE, NIGERIA  
 
European Journal of Education Studies - Volume 12│ Issue 9│2025                                                                                   417 
mean of 1.42 and a standard deviation of 0.499, which shows that most of the responses 
cluster significantly around the value of the mean. 
 
5. Discussion  
 
In response to research question 1, the finding from the table shows that 66% of the 
respondents agreed that there is no form of bullying or discrimination in their school. 
This is in line with the findings of Allam & Martin (2021) that inclusive education 
eliminates all forms of separation and discrimination that persons with disabilities might 
be experiencing in society. Furthermore, on access to assistive technology, 74% of the 
respondents declined that there is no easy access to assistive technology which aligns 
with the submission of Aruldas et al., (2023) & Paulley & Augustus (2023) that a large 
number of students enrolled in Nigerian colleges and universities expressed 
dissatisfaction with their programmes or performed poorly as a result of lack of support 
services which affect their educational growth. As regards easy access to learning 
materials, 76% of the respondents disagreed that there is no easy access to learning 
materials. In the work of Salau et al., (2024), there were insufficient facilities for the 
necessary physical accessibility features, assistive technologies, and specialized 
equipment required to accommodate students with disabilities or special needs, and 
therefore stated that government should invest in assistive technology (communication 
devices, software), learning materials to help children with special needs engage more 
effectively in their learning. 
 
Under the socio-economic factors that impact the educational growth of persons 
with disabilities, the findings show that 50% of the respondents agreed they occasionally 
have access to financial support, which implies that they only get it once in a while. This 
corroborates the result of Adigun (2018) & Osaat (2023) that there is a very low concern 
for special needs education even by state governments and thus special needs education 
programmes have consistently been underfunded which has thereby contributed to the 
challenges faced by persons with disabilities, therefore there is a need for financial aid to 
support educational growth to enable students to have access to necessary resources. 
 
As regards the institutional support structure available in special schools, the 
findings show a similar pattern as seen in adequacy of resources, where 56% of the 
respondents confirmed adequacy of resources and facilities in the school to support their 
learning needs, which means the support structures are present but not sufficient. 
However, extant studies of Kauffman & Hornby (2020) and Allam & Martin (2021) 
opined that there are no necessary resources to aid these students' learning, which might 
lead to them not being able to utilize well in either special or conventional schools across 
the nation. In the work of Ayub & Abubakar (2022), it was discovered that many victims 
of disabilities face institutional challenges. These challenges range from discrimination, 
exploitation, violence, stigma, inadequate housing, and education to health care. 
 
In conclusion, the findings revealed that though there are some areas of strength, 
such as the presence of support from teachers and absence of bullying, significant 


Famayo, Moses Ojo 
FACTORS AFFECTING THE EDUCATIONAL GROWTH OF PERSONS  
WITH DISABILITIES IN SPECIAL SCHOOLS IN OYO STATE, NIGERIA  
 
European Journal of Education Studies - Volume 12│ Issue 9│2025                                                                                   418 
challenges remain regarding access to learning materials, assistive technology and socio-
economic barriers. Institutional support structures are present, but they must be 
consistently applied and made uniformly available; therefore, these challenges require a 
comprehensive approach that includes increased funding, better resource allocation and 
more robust support systems to ensure that all children with disabilities receive a quality 
education that meets their needs.  
 
6. Conclusion 
 
The study revealed that while there are some positive aspects in the education of persons 
with disabilities, such as support from teachers and a general lack of bullying, significant 
challenges persist. These include inadequate access to learning materials and assistive 
technologies, socio-economic barriers affecting educational growth, and inconsistencies 
in institutional support structures and may not fully address the diverse needs of these 
students. Socio-economic factors, including family background and financial support, 
play a crucial role in shaping educational outcomes. The demographic data suggest a 
well-represented but diverse group of students, indicating the need for tailored 
educational approaches.  
 
7. Recommendations 
 
Based on the conclusion of this study, the following recommendations were offered: 
• There should be an increase in the availability and accessibility of learning 
materials and assistive technologies to support students with diverse needs. 
• Governments, private organizations and individuals as philanthropists should 
rise to the financial needs and support of the students with special needs. 
• Parents and guardians of the persons with special needs should be encouraged to 
release their children and wards for enrolment in the special school. 
• The students with special needs should be allowed access to community resources 
like food banks or housing assistance that can address their basic needs to reduce 
variability in educational experiences. 
 
Conflict of Interest Statement 
The author declares no conflicts of interest. 
 
About the Author 
Famayo, Moses Ojo, Lecturer 1, B.A. (`Physical & Health Education, 1990), M.A. 
(Adapted Physical Education, 2003), PhD (Adapted Physical Education, 2024). Research 
interests: recreation education programmes for the disabled, exercises for the deaf 
population, inclusive education programmes, and wellness of the physically challenged. 
Participation: my research ID: H6V682 IJAS International conference held between 23rd & 
27th May, 2016, Harvard Medical School, 77 Avenue Louis Pasteur, Boston, 


Famayo, Moses Ojo 
FACTORS AFFECTING THE EDUCATIONAL GROWTH OF PERSONS  
WITH DISABILITIES IN SPECIAL SCHOOLS IN OYO STATE, NIGERIA  
 
European Journal of Education Studies - Volume 12│ Issue 9│2025                                                                                   419 
Massachusetts. Paper presented “Perceived Influence of Selected Physical Activities on 
the Wellness of the Physically Challenged in Special Schools in Oyo State, Nigeria”. 
ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0004-7013-2874  
Email: famayoojo8@gmail.com.  
 
 
References 
 
Adebisi, R. O., Jerry, J. E., Rasaki, S. A., & Igwe, E. N. (2014). Barriers to special needs 
education in Nigeria. International Journal of Education and Research, 2(11), 451-462. 
Retrieved from https://www.ijern.com/journal/2014/November-2014/36.pdf 
Adigun, O. T. (2018). Basic education in Nigeria: Any concern for Special needs 
education. The Journal of Advocacy and Rehabilitation, 17(1), 27-37. Retrieved from 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/334108488_Basic_education_in_Nigeri
a_Any_concern_for_Special_needs_education 
Allam, F. C., & Martin, M. M. (2021). Issues and Challenges in Special Education: A 
Qualitative Analysis from Teachers' Perspective. Southeast Asia Early Childhood, 
10(1), 37-49. Retrieved from https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ1296259.pdf 
Aruldas, K., Banks, L. M., Nagarajan, G., Roshan, R., Johnson, J., Musendo, D., ... 
&Ajjampur, S. S. (2023). “If he has education, there will not be any problem”: 
Factors affecting access to education for children with disabilities in Tamil Nadu, 
India. PloS one, 18(8). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0290016 
Ayub, A. O., & Abubakar, U. (2022). Institutional Challenges Faced by Persons with 
Disabilities in Nigeria. Ife Social Sciences Review, 30(2), 124-135. Retrieved from 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/375384903_Ife_Social_Sciences_Revie
w_Institutional_Challenges_Faced_by_Persons_with_Disabilities_in_Nigeria 
 Babatunde, A. E., Chukwuemeka, E. J., Yusuf, F. A., & Ajani, A. H. (2020). Assistive 
technology for instruction: special education preservice teachers’ self-assessment 
in Federal College of Education (Special), Oyo. Disadvantaged Groups/Persons 
and Participation in Educational Systems in Africa: Ensuring Inclusive and 
Equitable Education for All. Annual International Conference of the College of 
Education, Osun State University, Osogbo, Nigeria. 24th-27th February. 
Famayo, M. O. (2010). Improving the conditions of deaf athletes through selected 
activities. Nigerian Journal of Research in Primary Education, 2 (1), 89-96 
Famayo, M. O. (2022). Improving the wellness of the physically challenged through 
sports. African Journal of Curriculum and Instructional Technology, 6(1) June, 100-107. 
Famayo, M. O. (2024). Effect of circuit training on selected physical fitness parameters of 
students with auditory impairment in Ibadan metropolis, Oyo State, Nigeria: 
unpublished doctoral dissertation, Obafemi Awolowo University, Ile-Ife. 
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2014). National Policy on Education. Abuja: National 
Printing Press. 


Famayo, Moses Ojo 
FACTORS AFFECTING THE EDUCATIONAL GROWTH OF PERSONS  
WITH DISABILITIES IN SPECIAL SCHOOLS IN OYO STATE, NIGERIA  
 
European Journal of Education Studies - Volume 12│ Issue 9│2025                                                                                   420 
Garuba, A. (2003). Inclusive education in the 21st century: Challenges and opportunities 
for Nigeria. Asia Pacific Disability Rehabilitation Journal, 14(2), 191-200. Retrieved 
from 
https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/document?repid=rep1&type=pdf&doi=ca4aa7ca5df5f
e8b3e400d24734b2376b4d64f08 
Gerber, M. M. (2017). A history of special education. In Handbook of special education (pp. 
3-15). 
Routledge. 
Retrieved 
from 
https://www.taylorfrancis.com/chapters/edit/10.4324/9781315517698-2/history-
special-education-michael-gerber 
Kauffman, J. M., & Hornby, G. (2020). Inclusive vision versus special education reality. 
Education 
sciences, 
10(9), 
258. 
Retrieved 
from 
https://doi.org/10.3390/educsci10090258 
 Limaye, S. (2016). Factors Influencing the Accessibility of Education for Children with 
Disabilities in India. Global Education Review, 3(3), 43-56. Retrieved from 
https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ1115090.pdf 
Nkechi, C. M. (2013). Education of the disabled in Nigeria: Access and Perception. Journal 
Plus Education/Educația Plus, 9(1). 
Osaat, S. D. (2023). Evaluation of National Policy on Education on Special Needs 
Education (1977 to Date). Special Needs Education from The Lens of Interdisciplinary 
Dialogue: A Festschrift in Honour of Prof. Emeka D. Ozoji, 1(1). Retrieved from 
https://journals.ezenwaohaetorc.org/index.php/AFHOPEO/article/view/2420/247
1 
Paulley, F. G., & Augustus, A. (2023). History of Special Needs Education in 
Nigeria. Special Needs Education from the Lens of Interdisciplinary Dialogue: A 
Festschrift 
in 
Honour 
of 
Prof. 
Emeka 
D. 
Ozoji, 1(2). 
Retrieved 
from 
https://journals.ezenwaohaetorc.org/index.php/AFHOPEO/article/view/2449 
Salau, R. F., said, T. M., & Usman, T. (2024). Impact of Public Expenditure as a Social 
Security Measure on the Teaching and Learning Performance of Children with 
Special Needs in Nigeria. International Journal of Library Science and Educational 
Research 
vol. 
4., 
Retrieved 
from 
https://cambridgeresearchpub.com/ijlser/article/view/281 
Soto, M., & Lynch, P. (2022). A Review of the Factors Affecting Children with Disabilities' 
Successful Transition to Early Childhood Care and Primary Education in Sub-
Saharan 
Africa. 
Journal 
of 
Early 
Childhood 
Research, 
20(1), 
59-
79.https://doi.org/10.1177/1476718X211035428 
UNESCO. (2006). UNESCO Convention Against Discrimination in Education (1960) and 
Articles 13 and 14 (right to Education) of the International Covenant on Economic, 
Social and Cultural Rights: A Comparative Analysis. 
 
 
 
 


Famayo, Moses Ojo 
FACTORS AFFECTING THE EDUCATIONAL GROWTH OF PERSONS  
WITH DISABILITIES IN SPECIAL SCHOOLS IN OYO STATE, NIGERIA  
 
European Journal of Education Studies - Volume 12│ Issue 9│2025                                                                                   421 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Creative Commons licensing terms 
Author(s) will retain the copyright of their published articles agreeing that a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0) terms 
will be applied to their work. Under the terms of this license, no permission is required from the author(s) or publisher for members of the community 
to copy, distribute, transmit or adapt the article content, providing a proper, prominent and unambiguous attribution to the authors in a manner that 
makes clear that the materials are being reused under permission of a Creative Commons License. Views, opinions and conclusions expressed in this 
research article are views, opinions and conclusions of the author(s). Open Access Publishing Group and European Journal of Education Studies shall not 
be responsible or answerable for any loss, damage or liability caused in relation to/arising out of conflicts of interest, copyright violations and inappropriate 
or inaccurate use of any kind content related or integrated into the research work. All the published works are meeting the Open Access Publishing 
requirements and can be freely accessed, shared, modified, distributed and used in educational, commercial and non-commercial purposes under a 
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0).