1 
 
Sexual Identity, Poverty, and Utilization of Government Services* 
 
Cameron Deal1 
Shea Greenberg2 
Gilbert Gonzales3 
 
This version: September 2022 
Abstract 
Previous literature has established that lesbian, gay, and bisexual (LGB) people are at least as likely to be 
poor as heterosexual people, standing in contrast to myths of “gay affluence.” These findings have used 
datasets limited by either sample size or using partnership status to infer sexual orientation. Using data from 
the Household Pulse Survey, which allows us to identify large samples of individuals who self-identify as 
lesbian, gay, or bisexual, we find that bisexuals have lower incomes, are more likely to experience poverty, 
and bisexual individuals, gay men, and lesbian women are more likely to report financial hardship. 
Additionally, we find that LGB people utilize government assistance at higher rates than heterosexual 
people, even when controlling for economic status and restricting to those experiencing poverty. We 
propose several explanations for these differentials, drawing on the program non-participation literature. 
 
JEL Codes: I32, I38, J1 
Key Words: poverty; social safety net; economic status; sexual minority; LGBTQ; child tax credit 
 
Conflict of interest: The authors declare they have no conflict of interest. No funds, grants, or 
other support was received.  
 
Data Availability Statement: The datasets analyzed during the current study are available on 
the U.S. Census Bureau website, https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/household-pulse-
survey/datasets.html.  
 
 
 
*We thank the editor and three anonymous reviewers, as well as Laura Nettuno, Santiago Deambrosi, Samuel Mann, 
Tara McKay, and M. V. Lee Badgett for their helpful comments. All errors are our own. 
 
1  (Corresponding Author) Vanderbilt University, Program for Public Policy Studies, Nashville, TN, US. E-mail: 
cameron.h.deal@vanderbilt.edu  
2  Vanderbilt University. E-mail: shea.b.greenberg@vanderbilt.edu 
3  Vanderbilt University. Department of Medicine, Health, and Society; Program for Public Policy Studies; Nashville, 
TN, US. E-mail: gilbert.gonzales@vanderbilt.edu  


2 
 
1. Introduction 
A large body of research has documented that sexual minorities (e.g. lesbian women, gay men, 
and bisexual populations—henceforth referred to as LGB individuals) have worse economic 
outcomes than heterosexuals, with lower incomes, higher rates of poverty, lower rates of health 
insurance coverage, and lower rates of homeownership (Albelda et al., 2009; Badgett et al., 2021; 
Elton & Gonzales, 2022; Gonzales & Blewett, 2014; Leppel, 2007; Uhrig, 2015). Additionally, 
some literature has examined access to government services by sexual orientation, typically used 
as a proxy for economic distress (Brown et al., 2016; Everett & Mollborn, 2014; Schneebaum & 
Badgett, 2019). These health and socioeconomic disparities have been identified and targeted for 
elimination by the National Academies of Science Engineering and Medicine (National Academies 
of Science Engineering and Medicine, 2020).  
Additionally, there is a large literature in public economics examining the delivery, take-up, 
receipt, and utilization of public assistance programs (e.g., SNAP, Unemployment Insurance, etc.). 
Nearly all public assistance programs do not have perfect take-up among eligible recipients, and 
these rates can be crucial for projecting the aggregate costs and impacts of government assistance 
programs, as well as evaluating the welfare implications of policies that have already been 
implemented (Currie, 2004; Finkelstein & Hendren, 2020; van Oorschot, 1991). Several possible 
explanations have been proposed for the drivers of imperfect take-up, including low monetary 
gains, stigma of receipt, costs of program participation, imperfect information, administrative 
barriers, and mismeasurement (Ko & Moffitt, 2022). Additionally, it is possible that differences in 
access and take-up to government assistance programs can drive or amplify economic disparities 
experienced by marginalized populations. We add novel evidence to the large body of public 
economic literature by identifying differential take-up of public assistance programs between LGB 
and heterosexual adults and proposing several explanations for the drivers of these differences 
among the LGB population. 
Understanding the economic position and receipt of government assistance among sexual 
minorities is also important for several reasons. First, sexual minorities comprise a large and 
increasing share of the American population, and sexual minorities have gained much-needed 
recognition in public policy. Yet, there are substantial and ongoing policy implications that can be 
informed by LGB differentials in government assistance take-up, given the magnitude of economic 
costs that could occur. Badgett et al., 2021 report several estimates in the United States, finding 
that 2.7-4.6 percent of the American adult population identifies as non-heterosexual. Recent 
analyses have found that 15-20 percent of high school students identify as non-heterosexual 
(Gonzales & Deal, 2022; B. Wilson & Meyer, 2021). These estimates imply that there may be 
large policy implications that proceed from LGB differentials in government assistance take-up, 
given the magnitude of costs that could occur. Second, some public assistance programs are 
designed to benefit certain demographic characteristics and family structures (Hoffman, 2008; 
Hussey, 2011). LGB people may differentially receive or utilize public assistance programs, given 
that their demographic characteristics differ dramatically from heterosexuals (Brewster et al., 


3 
 
2014). In this respect, our analysis points towards a growing literature on population-targeted 
policies—such as the Affordable Care Act—and their differential effects on LGB individuals (C. 
S. Carpenter et al., 2021; C. S. Carpenter & Sansone, 2021; Marcén & Morales, 2022).4  
Prior research on LGB poverty and government assistance receipt has been limited by small 
sample sizes and the necessity of using same-sex couple status to infer sexual orientation (which 
excludes single sexual minorities and bisexual individuals and may lead to unrepresentative 
estimates) (Albelda et al., 2009; Badgett et al., 2013; Badgett, 2018; DiBennardo & Gates, 2014; 
Schneebaum & Badgett, 2019; Uhrig, 2015). We leverage the large sample sizes of self-identified 
sexual minorities in the U.S. Census Bureau’s Household Pulse Survey (HPS) to evaluate the 
economic outcomes and government assistance receipt of sexual minorities relative to their 
heterosexual counterparts. We are among the first, to the best of our knowledge, to examine 
differences by sexual orientation across subjective measures of economic status. Additionally, we 
evaluate several government assistance programs that have not previously been examined in the 
context of differences by sexual orientation: the child tax credit, unemployment insurance, rental 
assistance, and stimulus payments. We also examine whether government assistance differentials 
for sexual minorities are homogeneous for bisexual and lesbian/gay individuals, identifying 
disparities that may face a subset of sexual minorities but be obscured in overall figures. Finally, 
we use data collected during the COVID-19 pandemic, a period of heightened economic distress 
when government assistance programs were increasingly utilized across the population. 
Evaluating the receipt and utilization of public assistance programs by sexual orientation is crucial 
for policymakers that must consider the potential for heterogeneous effects of policy on different 
communities, especially those with a history of worse economic outcomes. 
We report several key results. We find that bisexuals have lower incomes and are more likely to 
report household incomes below the federal poverty level (FPL) than heterosexuals. Similarly, gay 
men, lesbian women, and bisexual individuals self-report higher economic insecurity than 
heterosexuals. Additionally, we find that sexual minorities are more likely to receive and utilize 
government services than heterosexuals. Differences in receiving government assistance persist 
when controlling for FPL status, and we find evidence of higher utilization among gay and bisexual 
men compared to heterosexual men when restricting to a subsample of individuals who report 
household incomes below the FPL. We explore several potential reasons for this differential in our 
discussion, including social network effects, stigma differences surrounding the use of public 
assistance, and education differences. Finally, we evaluate receipt of the child tax credit by sexual 
orientation and find that gay men and lesbian women are less likely to receive the child tax credit 
than their heterosexual peers, even after adjusting for the presence of a child in the household and 
 
4 Irrespective of these reasons, it is important to study the outcomes and economic wellbeing of marginalized 
populations regardless of group size or demographic characteristics, as LGB populations have historically been 
neglected in the economics literature (though the quantity of research has grown significantly) (Badgett, 1995; 
Badgett et al., 2021). 


4 
 
the total number of children in the household. This difference holds even for the subsample of 
individuals who report household incomes below the FPL. 
The remainder of the paper takes the following form. Section 2 reviews previous literature on 
sexual minority economic status, as well as access to and utilization of government assistance 
programs. Section 3 develops a conceptual framework for LGB differentials in public assistance 
take-up and access. Section 4 describes our data and empirical approach. Section 5 presents the 
results, and Section 6 concludes. 
2. Literature Review 
Poverty 
The U.S. Census Bureau measures poverty by comparing a person or family’s household income 
to a threshold dependent on family size (Brady, 2005). One avenue through which the U.S. 
government addresses poverty is public assistance programs, including cash support, provision of 
necessities (e.g., health insurance and funding to subsidize food or housing), and employment 
programs.  
Due to discrimination, structural racism, and historical inequities, minority groups are often 
disproportionally affected by poverty and have reduced access to public resources (Horsfall, 2012). 
For example, people with disabilities and Hispanic people are less likely to participate in programs 
like SNAP (Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program), often because they do not know about 
benefits or are unable to navigate the enrollment process (Alvira-Hammond & Gennetian, 2015; 
Keith-Jennings et al., 2019).  
The theoretical impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on poverty is unclear. While the pandemic 
certainly interrupted the economy, causing widespread unemployment and economic distress for 
families, the federal government responded with historic public assistance efforts like the advance 
CTC, Paycheck Protection Program, and pausing Medicaid disenrollment. Thus, the question on 
which of these shifts dominated the other remains to be answered. 
LGB Economic & Poverty Status 
Several economic studies have documented income differentials and penalties for sexual 
minorities. Gay and bisexual men have lower average incomes than do heterosexuals, whereas 
differentials for lesbian and bisexual women vary by study (Badgett et al., 2021; Drydakis, 2022; 
Plug & Berkhout, 2004). Earnings may be as much as 16% lower for gay men and 15% higher for 
lesbian women compared to their heterosexual counterparts (Ahmed & Hammarstedt, 2010; 
Klawitter, 2015); it is likely that the disparities observed for gay and bisexual men are due to taste-
based discrimination, a finding that has been reinforced by audit studies (Badgett, 1995; Patacchini 
et al., 2015; Tilcsik, 2011). Additionally, prior literature has indicated that certain subpopulations 
of the LGB community, especially bisexuals, are more likely to experience poverty than 
heterosexuals (Badgett, 2018). The same pattern does not hold, however, for lesbian women and 


5 
 
gay men, who are less likely to experience poverty than heterosexuals (Badgett, 2018; Uhrig, 
2015). This bisexual poverty differential may proceed from compositional differences, as bisexual 
men and women tend to be younger, have lower educational attainment, and are more likely to be 
never married and unpartnered compared to both their heterosexual and gay/lesbian counterparts, 
all characteristics associated with higher relative risk of poverty (Badgett, 2018). Additionally, we 
find that bisexual men and women are more likely to have children, increasing their relative risk 
of poverty. However, there is also a growing literature examining bisexual health that proposes a 
role for “double discrimination,” whereby bisexual individuals experience stigma and minority 
stress from both within and beyond the LGBTQ community (Colledge et al., 2015; Feinstein & 
Dyar, 2017). It is possible that this stressor may contribute to the unique disparities in economic 
outcomes that bisexual individuals experience. 
Several factors may exacerbate these disparities. Gay and bisexual men without children 
experience higher poverty rates than heterosexuals without children and the children of same-sex 
couples are twice as likely to be poor than children of different-sex married couples (Albelda et 
al., 2009). Comparing across race and location yields discrepancies in poverty rates as well. 
African American same-sex couples are much more likely to experience poverty than white same-
sex couples. LGB African Americans experience poverty at least twice as much as their 
heterosexual counterparts (Badgett et al., 2013). Finally, same-sex couples in rural areas have a 
poverty rate that is twice that of those in metropolitan areas (Albelda et al., 2009). We use 
nationally representative data to estimate more precise poverty rates and other economic outcomes 
for LGB individuals and subgroups. 
LGB Financial Hardship 
Beyond labor market outcomes, other factors can influence an individual’s wellbeing. Perceived 
financial insecurity and risk are alternative measures of economic health that may offer a more 
comprehensive account (Western et al., 2012). Negative labor market outcomes tend to spillover 
to overall wellbeing, suggesting that we may expect negative financial wellbeing differentials for 
LGB populations compared to heterosexuals. For example, American LGB populations are also 
disproportionally food insecure (Brown et al., 2016). Previous research has also found elevated 
levels of economic insecurity among sexual minority men (Chai & Maroto, 2020; Mann et al., 
2019).  We extend these analyses to examine differentials for women, and using a more direct 
measure of security: whether the respondent had difficulty covering household expenses  
LGB Government Assistance 
Less data is available on LGB access to government assistance due to the lack of questions 
regarding sexual orientation and gender identity in past surveys. One analysis suggests that same-
sex couples—especially men in same-sex couples—access public health insurance at a higher rate 
(Badgett et al., 2006). Additionally, other analyses have found higher rates of cash assistance 
receipt among sexual minorities (Badgett et al., 2013; Uhrig, 2015). Prior studies typically use 
receipt of public assistance as a proxy for poverty status and economic well-being. We examine 


6 
 
whether LGB individuals access government assistance at different rates than heterosexuals of 
similar economic status and explore several reasons for this differential.  
3. Conceptual Framework 
Economic modelling of non-participation in public assistance programs generally ascribes the 
behavior to some combination of stigma, imperfect information, access costs outweighing 
participation benefits, and social networks (Currie, 2004). Stigma was introduced first as a general 
disutility associated with program participation, and then this model was expanded to include a 
broader cost/benefit framework (Moffitt, 1983). A large empirical and theoretical literature has 
documented and modelled social network effects in program participation (Aizer & Currie, 2004; 
Bertrand et al., 2000; Borjas & Hilton, 1996; Manski, 1993). Additionally, lack of information can 
keep eligible potential recipients from discovering their eligibility (Ko & Moffitt, 2022).  
There are several possible reasons we might expect a receipt and utilization differential of public 
assistance programs for LGB individuals; the most obvious is that LGB individuals are more likely 
to be in poverty than heterosexual individuals. As a result, they are more likely to qualify, receive, 
and utilize government assistance to support their economic conditions. In fact, some previous 
studies have used receipt of government assistance as a proxy for poverty and economic distress 
(Badgett, 2018; Badgett et al., 2006; Uhrig, 2015). Another possibility is that LGB individuals are 
more likely to work in industries that are sensitive to the disruptions caused by the COVID-19 
pandemic and so may be more likely to be unemployed and require government assistance as a 
result. Gonzales & Loret de Mola (2021) found that sexual minorities were more likely to be 
working in COVID-sensitive industries, which would support the hypothesis that they are more 
vulnerable to employment disruptions (and subsequently need more assistance) caused by the 
COVID-19 pandemic than otherwise similar heterosexuals.  
However, we might also find differentially larger take-up of government assistance programs by 
LGB individuals compared to similarly situated heterosexual individuals. Why might this be the 
case? There are several possibilities which map onto previous theoretical and empirical work, 
though we do not have the data to decide which best explains the observed differentials. 
First, sexual minority adults are more likely to have college and advanced degrees compared to 
heterosexuals (Black et al., 2007; C. Carpenter & Gates, 2008; Gonzales & Blewett, 2014), and 
this is true even among lower-income LGB individuals. More educated individuals may be more 
likely to be aware of and navigate bureaucratic hurdles to government assistance programs, thus 
enabling them to take up the programs at higher rates by reducing information barriers and access 
costs. Now, we turn to two other possibilities: stigma and a lack of other support networks. 
Another factor that influences participation in government assistance programs is stigma 
surrounding the receipt and utilization of public assistance programs (Allen et al., 2014; Fothergill, 
2003; Stuber & Schlesinger, 2006). Some individuals who qualify for benefits may not choose to 
use them due to political views or principles surrounding whether the government should provide 


7 
 
such benefits (Morin et al., 2012). Ample political science research has found that sexual 
minorities tend to align with left-leaning parties and support liberal policy positions, suggesting 
that they may not share this stigma to the same degree as heterosexual populations (Edelman, 1992; 
Jones, 2021; Lewis et al., 2011; Smith & Haider-Markel, 2002; Turnbull-Dugarte & Townsley, 
2020). This mechanism of higher support for and willingness to use government assistance 
programs may explain a differential between LGB and heterosexual adults.  
The availability (or lack thereof) of alternative familial and community-based networks may differ 
for low-income LGB people, and they may have to rely on government assistance more than 
similarly situated heterosexuals as a result (a case of participation benefits). Previous research has 
established that LGB people are less likely to be religious, which is one pathway through which 
individuals can acquire social and economic supports (Herek et al., 2010; Sherkat et al., 2010). 
Additionally, the family strains involved in the coming out process or a lack of family acceptance 
may lead to decreased social or economic support from immediate and extended families, though 
some work has found higher financial transfers from parents to LGB children than heterosexual 
children (Dempsey et al., 2020; Perales & Huang, 2020). Government assistance may be filling in 
gaps for low-income LGB people where they lack support structures that low-income 
heterosexuals have, though qualitative research has found barriers to accessing social services for 
low-income LGB individuals (B. D. M. Wilson et al., 2020). 
Finally, it is possible that differentials are due to social network effects. Sociologists have 
established that individuals’ choices can be influenced by their peers, and that these “social 
networks” can shape behavior both consciously and unconsciously (DiMaggio & Garip, 2012). 
Additionally, some literature has found that subgroups of the LGB community have denser (non-
familial) social networks than heterosexuals (Breder & Bockting, 2022). It is possible that LGB 
individuals in poverty may be referring each other to social service access differentially, or (for 
gay and bisexual men especially) have access to social service providers and assistance through 
networks like sexual health clinics, which frequently offer comprehensive services alongside 
sexual health treatments and materials (AIDS Project LA, 2022). Additionally, individuals with 
HIV may qualify for SSI and Medicaid if their health deteriorates to disabling levels. 
Using the frameworks outlined above and the contextual details of the LGB community, we expect 
that LGB adults will take-up public assistance programs at higher rates than similarly eligible 
heterosexual adults. Additionally, we hypothesize that this effect will be amplified for gay men, 
who may have larger social network effects and lower information barriers given their educational 
attainment. 
4. Data/Methods 
4.1 The Household Pulse Survey 
Data for our study are drawn from waves 3.2-3.4 (weeks 34-43) of the Household Pulse Survey 
(HPS), a nationally representative and repeated cross-section of approximately 70,000 households 


8 
 
in the 50 U.S. states and the District of Columbia. Respondents are surveyed in short waves that 
the US Census Bureau calls “weeks,” usually spanning 12-15 days and surveying approximately 
70,000 households. We combine these weeks to improve statistical power and, after applying 
sample restrictions (outlined further below), we have a primary analytic sample of 523,796 
respondents, including 19,007 gay or lesbian individuals, as well as 19,290 bisexual individuals. 
The HPS was designed to measure rapid responses to the COVID-19 pandemic; thus, the HPS is 
a rich source of information on how the pandemic affected health, finances, income security, and 
utilization of public assistance programs. These data were collected and made publicly available 
through the U.S. Census Bureau and contain demographic, economic, social, and housing 
information. As a large household survey administered by the U.S. Census Bureau in conjunction 
with other agencies, the large sample sizes of the HPS make it particularly germane to studying 
subpopulations like low-income individuals and/or the LGB population. Other researchers have 
used these data to examine the social safety net (Bitler et al., 2020), education supply (Bansak & 
Starr, 2021), and consumer behavior (Garner et al., 2020a). 
The HPS is one of the only large national surveys that directly asks respondents about their sexual 
orientation. Respondents are given the prompt: “Which of the following best represents how you 
think of yourself?” and they can answer (1) Gay or lesbian; (2) Straight, that is not gay or lesbian; 
(3) Bisexual; (4) Something else; and (5) I don’t know. This question was added to the 
questionnaire in week 34, so we used data from weeks 34-43, which were fielded in August 2021 
through March 2022. We focus on those respondents who indicated that they were (1) Gay or 
lesbian or (2) Bisexual, which we designate as sexual minorities for our analysis. This direct 
question ascertaining sexual orientation identity is preferred to inferring sexual orientation through 
same-sex couple status due to issues of representativeness and capture (C. S. Carpenter et al., 2021; 
Martell, 2021). The HPS also asks individuals about their gender identity using a two-step process. 
We use this information to control for gender identity but focus our analysis on differences by 
sexual orientation.5 For more information on gender minority economic outcomes in the 
Household Pulse Survey, see (C. S. Carpenter et al., 2022). 
Regarding economic outcomes, participants self-report their employment status and household 
income in ranges. Specifically, all individuals report whether they worked for pay or profit in the 
last seven days and their 2020 household income in ranges (Less than $25,000; $25,000 - $34,999; 
$35,000 - $49,999; $50,000 - $74,999; $75,000 - $99,999; $100,000 - $149,999; $150,000 - 
$199,999; $200,000 and above). We examine household income directly, as well as poverty status, 
which is based on household income and household size (individuals are asked to state the number 
of adults and the number of children in the household; further information about the construction 
of this variable can be found in Appendix Table 2). The income-based thresholds used to determine 
the federal poverty level status of an individual come directly from the U.S. Census Bureau, where 
these thresholds were used to estimate the official poverty rate in the US (US Census Bureau, 
2021). However, eligibility for programs administered by the Department of Health and Human 
 
5 We exclude respondents whose sex assigned at birth was allocated by the HPS hot-decking procedure.  


9 
 
Services, including Medicare, Medicaid, CHIP, SNAP, and TANF, is determined using the federal 
poverty guidelines (FPG), a slightly different definition of poverty (Office of the Assistant 
Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, 2022). Both calculations consider the household 
composition and income, but the FPL also considers elderly status in determining poverty. As a 
result, our estimates of FPL status do not perfectly capture the factors that determine eligibility for 
some government assistance programs. Additionally, because we are using the midpoint of the 
income category that respondents report to determine poverty status, there is potential for 
mismeasurement as respondents whose exact income (which is unobserved) falls above the 
midpoint of an income category might be miscoded as below the FPL if their exact income falls 
above the FPL threshold (and vice versa for respondents with incomes below the midpoint of their 
income category). Because income is generally monotonically decreasing over the income ranges 
we observe, it is likely that there are more individuals whose income lies below the midpoint of 
the income category we use (and may thus be miscoded as above the FPL) (Congressional 
Research Service, 2021). Therefore, it is likely that this measurement bias means we are 
underestimating the prevalence of poverty in our sample, though the magnitude of this bias is not 
observable. We also use an indicator variable for financial hardship, where respondents are asked 
whether it has been difficult for their household to pay for usual expenses in the past 7 days. 
Regarding public assistance receipt, participants in the HPS are also asked whether they or anyone 
in the household receives or has received food assistance benefits through the Supplemental 
Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) or a child tax credit in the past four weeks. Respondents are 
also asked about the source of their health insurance coverage, including Medicaid coverage for 
low-income families and individuals. Additionally, respondents were asked which of the following 
sources they and their household members used to meet their spending needs. They could choose 
multiple options including: unemployment insurance (UI), stimulus payments, SNAP, school meal 
cards, and governmental rental assistance. This distinction between receipt and utilization of 
government services, both self-reported, is necessary to understand why discrepancies between the 
two can emerge. 
4.2 Data Quality and Limitations 
There are several limitations to the data from the HPS. First, about 18.8 percent of respondents did 
not provide a response to the household income question, which we use to determine poverty and 
FPL status.6 This is common in surveys where participants are asked to provide information on 
their income (Bhat, 1994). This study only uses complete cases and information for all analyses to 
avoid imputations for missing data. We report the distribution of educational attainment for 
respondents who reported their income and for those who did not in Appendix Figure 1, which 
shows that our analytic sample (those who reported income) is positively selected on educational 
attainment relative to the non-respondents. This limits our ability to study these non-respondents, 
 
6 This rate is lower among gay men and lesbian women (14.2 percent) and bisexuals (17.4 percent) than 
heterosexuals (19.1 percent). This may suggest that our estimates are an upper bound of economic disparities, as 
respondents missing income data likely had worse economic outcomes. 


10 
 
who may be accessing government services at higher rates than the rest of our sample, given their 
educational attainment. Several analyses have examined potential determinants of item non-
response on population-based surveys and found that demographic and geographic characteristics 
like age, race, and region of residence are significantly associated with nonresponse to income and 
wealth questions while survey-specific characteristics like interviewer-interviewee concordance 
on socioeconomic status play a smaller role (Riphahn & Serfling, 2005; Schenker et al., 2006). 
For employment and other socioeconomic outcomes, missingness rates were very low. 
Additionally, respondents to the income question report answers in ranges rather than exact 
amounts. We used the midpoint of each increment to measure individual-level household incomes. 
Another limitation of the data is that sexual identity is self-reported, raising the potential for 
response bias. Approximately 2% of adults in the Household Pulse Survey said that they did not 
know how to respond to the sexual orientation question. Nonresponse to self-identified sexual 
orientation questions is associated with race and ethnicity, so this feature of the data may indicate 
that we do not fully capture sexual minorities, especially people of color (H.-J. Kim & Fredriksen-
Goldsen, 2013). Moreover, very little research has been able to measure misreported data. Our 
findings are likely biased towards the null since economically disadvantaged populations are most 
likely to misreport or skip the sexual orientation question. 
In terms of limitations, other researchers have raised concerns about the representativeness of the 
HPS data, especially for estimating vaccine take-up and other COVID-19-related outcomes 
(Bradley et al., 2021). However, numerous analyses have used HPS data for timely health and 
socioeconomic research (Berkowitz & Basu, 2021; C. S. Carpenter et al., 2022; Donnelly & Farina, 
2021). Moreover, we utilize survey weights provided by the U.S. Census Bureau to estimate 
nationally representative results. Finally, the core of our analysis examines relative receipt of 
government assistance programs, comparing gay men, lesbian women, and bisexual individuals to 
their heterosexual counterparts during the COVID-19 pandemic, rather than establishing pre-
COVID baseline estimates for economic status and government assistance utilization. 
Our data are all self-reported, and thus, there may be selection effects associated with disclosing 
sexual orientation in an online survey. Secondly, our sample of respondents only includes non-
institutionalized adults randomly selected for participation in an email survey among US 
households. This means that we are missing homeless adults; adults residing in institutionalized 
medical and incarceration facilities; and individuals without email addresses. Some sexual 
minority research has suggested that these exclusions may disproportionately affect LGB 
individuals since they report higher rates of homelessness (Corliss et al., 2011; Durso & Gates, 
2012; Rosario et al., 2012), suggesting that our estimates on economic outcomes are likely a lower 
bound for the disparities experienced by sexual minorities. Finally, for most of the programs 
assessed, we can only measure public assistance take-up through utilization rather than both receipt 
and utilization, limiting the scope of our analysis. Some sexual minorities may receive community-
based and charitable assistance through health, housing, and other service-based centers. More 
broadly, it is difficult to determine how much of our results can be attributed to the economic 


11 
 
shocks of COVID-19 and their disproportionate impacts on sexual minorities or to preexisting 
economic disparities between heterosexual and sexual minority populations. We do control for 
recent job loss in Appendix Table 3 to proxy for pandemic-related economic disruptions and find 
that our main results stand (higher take-up of public assistance), suggesting that our results are not 
entirely driven by pandemic-related economic phenomena. 
4.3 Methods 
We begin our analysis with estimating descriptive statistics. Then, to estimate the relative 
economic status of sexual minorities compared to their heterosexual peers, we utilize a regression 
approach with multiple specifications, following other literature on LGBTQ economic position 
and access to public assistance (Badgett et al., 2013; Badgett, 2018; C. S. Carpenter et al., 2022). 
We specify estimation equation (1) in the following way: 
𝑦𝑖= 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝑋𝑖+ 𝛽2(𝐺𝐴𝑌)𝑖+ 𝛽3(𝐵𝐼𝑆𝐸𝑋𝑈𝐴𝐿)𝑖 + 𝛽4𝛾𝑠 + 𝛽5𝛿𝑡+ 𝜀𝑖   (1)
 
Where our outcome variables 𝑦𝑖 are various economic outcomes for individual i and 𝑋𝑖 is a vector 
of individual characteristics. For all analyses, we stratify the sample by sex assigned at birth and 
control for indicator variables for gay men and lesbian women and bisexual individuals 
respectively. Due to this sex split, gay men and bisexual men are compared to heterosexual men 
while lesbian women and bisexual women are compared to heterosexual women. The coefficients 
of interest 𝛽2 and 𝛽3 represent the disparity in an economic outcome between gay/lesbian 
respondents and bisexual respondents, respectively, compared with heterosexual respondents. 
Our preferred specification includes controls for the state of residence (𝛾𝑠) and survey week (𝛿𝑡) 
to adjust for any state-specific or week-specific effects. Individual-level controls include age, age 
squared, race, ethnicity, relationship status, the presence of a child in the household, sex assigned 
at birth, gender minority status, the total number of children in the household, urban-rural status, 
and education (four categories).  
To estimate public assistance receipt and utilization, we estimate a similar equation: 
𝑦𝑖= 𝛽0 + 𝛽1𝑋𝑖+ 𝛽2(𝐺𝐴𝑌)𝑖+ 𝛽3(𝐵𝐼𝑆𝐸𝑋𝑈𝐴𝐿)𝑖+ 𝛽4𝛾𝑠 + 𝛽5𝛿𝑡 + 𝛽6(𝐹𝑃𝐿)𝑖+ 𝜀𝑖   (2)
 
where our outcome variables 𝑦𝑖 are various government assistance receipt and utilization outcomes 
for individual i and 𝑋𝑖 is a vector of individual characteristics. We use the same individual level 
controls, also adding an indicator variable for being below the federal poverty level, (𝐹𝑃𝐿)𝑖.  
Finally, we restrict our sample to those below the federal poverty level and estimate equation (2), 
omitting the FPL indicator variable among this sample. In all regressions, we restrict our sample 
to complete cases. All regressions and descriptive statistics are weighted using HPS person weights 
computed by the U.S. Census Bureau in Stata version 16 (StataCorp, 2019). 
4.4 Descriptive Statistics 


12 
 
Table 1a presents descriptive statistics for the full sample by sexual orientation and sex. Table 1a 
shows that gay men and lesbian women are younger, have fewer children, and are more likely to 
be employed than their heterosexual peers. Table 1a also shows that bisexual women are younger 
than gay men, lesbian women and heterosexuals but are about as likely to have children as 
heterosexuals. Bisexual men also have lower incomes and lower likelihood of having children than 
heterosexuals. Additionally, bisexuals are more likely to have household incomes below the FPL 
than heterosexuals and gay/lesbian adults, especially bisexual women. These descriptive statistics 
display qualitatively similar patterns to those identified in other large population-based samples of 
LGB adults in the United States (Badgett et al., 2021). 
Table 1b presents a demographic profile of self-identified LGB people with household incomes 
under the federal poverty level. In Panel A, we estimate that approximately 90.0% of men below 
the FPL identified as heterosexual, 5.7% identified as gay, and 4.4% identified as bisexual. Among 
this subsample, heterosexual respondents were the oldest (46.1 years), followed by gay men (42.4 
years), and bisexual men (34.9 years). In Panel B, we estimate that approximately 88.7% of women 
below the FPL identified as heterosexual, 2.6% identified as gay or lesbian, and 8.7% identified 
as bisexual. Among women below the FPL, heterosexual respondents were the oldest (47.8 years), 
followed by lesbian women (37.3 years), and bisexual women (30.1 years). Heterosexual 
individuals experiencing poverty were more likely to be female than male (0.59 vs. 0.41). This 
pattern was even stronger among bisexual females and bisexual males (0.74 vs. 0.26). However, 
this sex breakdown is reversed for gay/lesbian adults experiencing poverty—they are more likely 
to be male than female (0.60 vs. 0.40). Motivated in part by this descriptive finding and prior 
literature that finds heterogenous economic outcomes for men and women among sexual 
orientation identity groups, we stratify our analyses by sex.  
Gay/lesbian adults experiencing poverty were also less likely to be Black, non-Hispanic than 
heterosexuals (0.14 vs. 0.19). Bisexuals experiencing poverty were less likely to be Black, non-
Hispanic (0.11 vs. 0.19), and more likely to be non-Hispanic white (0.58 vs. 0.49) than 
heterosexuals. Marriage rates among those experiencing poverty were much lower for gay men 
and lesbian women (0.15) and bisexuals (0.17) than for heterosexuals (0.32). Additionally, even 
among those with incomes below the federal poverty level, educational attainment was higher for 
gay men, lesbian women, and bisexuals than for heterosexual participants.  
5. Results 
Below, we present a collage of evidence on the economic status and government assistance 
utilization of self-identified LGB people. We began above by examining the demographic and 
socioeconomic characteristics of LGB and heterosexual people of all household incomes and then 
restricted to those who are below the FPL. Next, we use multivariable regression to examine the 
relative economic status of LGB adults compared to heterosexual adults, while controlling for 
demographic characteristics. Our regression models compare the receipt and utilization of 
government assistance for LGB respondents with heterosexual respondents in a full sample 


13 
 
controlling for demographic characteristics and a restricted sample of respondents who are below 
the FPL. We conclude the section by examining the receipt and utilization of the expanded child 
tax credit for LGB people compared to heterosexual people. 
5.1 Economic Status of LGB Individuals 
Table 2 presents our regression estimates of equation (1) for four economic outcomes. It asks the 
question of whether gay men, lesbian women, and bisexuals adults experience different outcomes 
from heterosexual adults after controlling for observable characteristics. The format of Table 2 is 
as follows: each column is a different outcome with the same regression model with indicators for 
sexual orientation, individual-level controls, as well as controls for state and survey week. Column 
(1) reports logged household income, calculated using interval regression; all other regressions 
were linear probability models. Column (2) reports employment; column (3) reports FPL status; 
and column (4) reports difficulty paying for expenses in the past week. We also provide the mean 
of each outcome below to contextualize the differences. The top panel estimates equation (1) for 
men, and the bottom panel displays the corresponding results for women. 
The results in Table 2 indicate that bisexual men (women) report 8.1 (8.9) percent lower household 
incomes than otherwise comparable heterosexual respondents. We also find suggestive evidence 
that lesbian women earn 3.2 percent less than otherwise comparable heterosexual women. In terms 
of poverty (column 3), we find that bisexual men are 2.2 percentage points more likely to report 
household incomes below the federal poverty level than heterosexual men. Relative to the mean 
of this outcome, poverty rates are 16 percent higher for bisexual men. Bisexual women are 2.9 
percentage points more likely to report household income beneath the poverty line than 
heterosexual women (15 percent from the mean). Additionally, we find that bisexual men were 
approximately 6.1 percentage points more likely to report difficulty meeting expenses in the past 
week than otherwise comparable heterosexual respondents (24 percent relative to the mean); this 
differential was 6.0 percentage points for bisexual women (20 percent relative to mean). We also 
find a significant difference in self-reported financial hardship for gay men and lesbian women, 
despite not recording significant differences in other outcomes. Lesbian women were 4.6 
percentage points more likely to report difficulty meeting expenses in the past week (15 percent 
relative to mean), while gay men were 3.4 percentage points more likely to do so (14 percent 
relative to mean). These results are broadly similar to what Chai & Maroto, 2020 find, although 
we find statistically significant differences for gay men, as well as lesbian and bisexual women.   
5.2 Receipt and Utilization of Government Assistance 
We next describe the results of estimating equation (2), presented in Table 3. We estimate a similar 
regression to that of Table 2, but the outcomes are receipt and utilization of public assistance 
programs. Additionally, we add a control for FPL status. This analysis examines whether gay men, 
lesbian women, and bisexual adults receive and use funds from public assistance programs at rates 
higher than those of otherwise comparable heterosexuals; all regressions were linear probability 
models. The format of Table 2 is as follows: column (1) reports unemployment insurance 


14 
 
utilization; column (2) reports stimulus check utilization; column (3) reports SNAP receipt; 
column (4) reports SNAP utilization; column (5) reports rental assistance utilization; and column 
(6) reports Medicaid coverage. We also provide the mean of each outcome below to contextualize 
the differences. The top panel estimates equation (2) for men, and the bottom panel displays the 
corresponding results for women. 
The results in Table 3 indicate that bisexual men are 1.6 percentage points more likely to use 
unemployment insurance than otherwise comparable heterosexual men. This represents a 42 
percent higher utilization rate relative to the mean of the outcome. Additionally, we find that 
bisexual men (women) are 2.1 (1.8) percentage points more likely to use stimulus checks than 
otherwise comparable heterosexual men (women). This represents an 18 (14) percent higher 
utilization rate relative to the mean of the outcome. Additionally, lesbian women are 2.1 percentage 
points more likely to use stimulus checks than otherwise similar heterosexual women (18 percent 
relative to mean). For SNAP receipt, we find that bisexual men (3.9 pp), bisexual women (2.4 pp), 
gay men (2.7 pp) and lesbian women (3.8 pp) are more likely to receive SNAP benefits than their 
comparable heterosexual peers. Similar results are found for SNAP utilization. We also find that 
gay men are 0.6 percentage points (80 percent relative to mean) and bisexual men are 1.4 
percentage points (197 percent relative to mean) more likely to utilize rental assistance than 
otherwise comparable heterosexuals. Finally, we find that gay men (3.4 pp), bisexual men (3.4 
pp), and bisexual women (3.7 pp) are all more likely to be insured by Medicaid than otherwise 
comparable heterosexual adults.  
In Table 4, we examine similar regressions but restrict our sample to only those respondents who 
reported household incomes below the federal poverty level. We are estimating equation (1) using 
linear probability models. We find that gay men are 7.4 percentage points (22 percent relative to 
mean), and bisexuals are 7.2 percentage points (21 percent relative to mean) more likely to utilize 
SNAP than their heterosexual counterparts under the federal poverty line. Similar results are found 
for SNAP utilization, rental assistance, and Medicaid. We do not see comparable results for female 
sexual minorities below the federal poverty line—most estimates of differential utilization/receipt 
are close to zero and they are neither consistently positive nor negative. 
5.3 Receipt and Utilization of the Child Tax Credit 
Table 5 displays the results of estimating equation (2) for those programs that involve children in 
the household or at school. It is important to note that we control for both the presence of children 
in the household using an indicator variable and the number of children in the household (a 
continuous variable), though our results are statistically similar and larger in magnitude when 
dropping these controls. The format of Table 5 is as follows: the left panel estimates equation (2) 
for the full sample, while the right panel estimates equation (1) for the sample restricted to those 
below the FPL. Columns (1) and (3) report receipt of the child tax credit as the outcome, while 
columns (2) and (4) display the utilization of a school lunch card as the outcome.  


15 
 
The results in Table 5 indicate that gay men are 1.6 percentage points less likely to receive the 
child tax credit (10 percent relative to the mean) than otherwise comparable heterosexual men, 
even while controlling for the presence of children and number of children in the household. A 
similar difference is not reported for bisexual men. We also find that lesbian women (bisexual 
women) are 3.7 (2.1) percentage points less likely to receive the child tax credit. This result holds 
when restricting to the below FPL sample; we find lesbian women experiencing poverty are 8.3 
percentage points less likely to receive the child tax credit (27 percent relative to the mean) than 
otherwise comparable heterosexual women. Additionally, we find that bisexual women 
experiencing poverty are 3.5 percentage points more likely to receive the child tax credit (12 
percent relative to the mean) than otherwise comparable heterosexual women. In Appendix Table 
1, we present results that are robust to restricting our sample to individuals who have a child present 
in the household; even among only adults with children in the household, gay men, lesbian women, 
and bisexual women are significantly less likely to receive the child tax credit than their 
heterosexual counterparts.  
6. Discussion 
We used newly available data from a large, nationally representative sample of adults in the United 
States from the 2021-2022 U.S. Census Bureau’s Household Pulse Survey to study the economic 
outcomes and government assistance receipt and utilization of sexual minorities. Our regression 
models for economic outcomes, controlling for observable demographic characteristics, find that 
bisexual individuals have significantly lower household incomes, a higher likelihood of being 
below the federal poverty level, and higher self-reported financial hardship compared with 
otherwise similar heterosexual individuals. These results confirm previous literature that has found 
that bisexuals have worse economic outcomes than their heterosexual peers (Badgett et al., 2013, 
2021).  
Additionally, we find higher self-reported financial hardship for gay men and lesbian women, 
showing that the large literature on income differentials and economic status for gay/lesbian adults 
in the US also translates into higher levels of subjective economic distress (C. S. Carpenter, 2005; 
Chai & Maroto, 2020; Klawitter, 2015). We also report higher poverty rates for bisexuals, 
supporting prior research in this area (Schneebaum & Badgett, 2019; Uhrig, 2015). Our results 
improve on the economic status of sexual minorities literature by using large samples of self-
identified LGB individuals (rather than using partnership status to infer sexual orientation), 
including a subjective measure of economic status (i.e., self-reported financial hardship and 
receipt/utilization of public assistance programs), and leveraging new and recent data collected 
during the COVID-19 pandemic. 
We find that lesbian women earn approximately 3.2 percentage points less than otherwise 
observationally similar heterosexual women (though marginally significant), contradicting most 
research pre-2015, which had found wage premia for lesbian women (Drydakis, 2022; Klawitter, 
2015). However, several more recent studies have found significant lesbian wage penalties 


16 
 
(Bryson, 2017; Martell, 2019). Several others have highlighted this puzzling case of a disappearing 
or waning lesbian wage premium during a time of improving social acceptance and propose that 
reduced family support as a result of intolerance of their sexual identity may be hurting lesbian 
women (Drydakis & Zimmermann, 2020; Martell, 2019). Additionally, it is possible that earlier 
studies, which often relied on using same-sex couple status or cohabitation as a proxy for sexual 
orientation, may have suffered from selection problems if same-sex couples are positively selected 
on income relative to the broader LGB population, including single LGB adults (Martell, 2021). 
Because we use self-reported sexual identity, our results are less susceptible to this potential bias. 
Our findings confirm the empirical pattern of a lesbian wage penalty in a large, nationally 
representative survey of US adults during the COVID-19 pandemic and suggest that the emerging 
lesbian wage penalty may last.  
Additionally, we find that LGB individuals utilize a range of government assistance programs at a 
higher rate than their heterosexual counterparts, even when adjusting for socioeconomic 
characteristics. These include unemployment insurance and stimulus payments for bisexuals, as 
well as SNAP and rental assistance for gay men, lesbian women, and bisexual individuals. This 
accords with prior work examining receipt of government assistance programs by sexual 
minorities, which has found higher rates of take-up for SNAP, TANF, and Medicaid (Badgett et 
al., 2013; Badgett, 2018; Brown et al., 2016). We add to the literature by evaluating several 
programs that have not, to our knowledge, been examined in the context of differential take-up for 
sexual minorities, including unemployment insurance, stimulus payments, and rental assistance. 
Finally, we show that these differences are robust to controlling for FPL status. Additionally, we 
demonstrate that when restricting to a low-income subsample, we continue to see differentials for 
gay and bisexual men, but not for lesbian and bisexual women. We find the largest differentials in 
rental assistance programs and unemployment insurance.  
These generally higher rates of participation and utilization of government assistance programs 
among LGB people accord with the qualitative predictions we generate from the take-up literature. 
That the effects are more robust for gay and bisexual men suggests that social networks may play 
a significant role. As to which of the explanations we propose may explain the differentials, we 
cannot fully adjudicate, but there are several signs that some explanations are less plausible than 
others. For example, the take-up differentials are robust to controlling for educational attainment, 
suggesting that higher educational attainment is not the only mechanism that explains differential 
take-up of public assistance programs. Additionally, they are robust to controlling for recent job 
loss (see Appendix Table 3), suggesting that differential exposure to employment shocks from the 
COVID-19 pandemic do not fully explain the differentials we observe. This suggests that some 
combination of lessened stigma, fewer alternatives for financial support (low substitutability), and 
social network effects may be responsible for higher take-up of public assistance among sexual 
minorities.  
We also find that gay men, lesbian women, and bisexual women are less likely to receive the 
advance child tax credit, an enhanced policy that has been promoted during the pandemic for its 


17 
 
major impact on child poverty reduction (Corinth et al., 2021; Goldin & Michelmore, 2022). We 
found statistically significant disparities between sexual minorities and their heterosexual peers 
even when controlling for the presence of a child in the household, the total number of children in 
the household, or restricting to only households with children present. Additionally, the difference 
appears even among the subsample below the FPL. One potential explanation would be an 
asymmetry between how LGB individuals report a child in the household for the Household Pulse 
Survey and whether the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) recognizes that child for the eligibility 
determination used to establish recipients of the child tax credit. For example, if an LGB individual 
(or couple) was supporting an adolescent whose parents did not accept their sexual orientation or 
gender identity, they might report that child as “in their household” for the HPS, but the IRS would 
not recognize that relationship unless the child was legally adopted. These instances of informal 
family networks and “found family” are much more common among LGB individuals than among 
straight individuals (Jackson Levin et al., 2020; McConnell et al., 2015; Snapp et al., 2015). 
Unfortunately, we are unable to pinpoint specific mechanisms, but we encourage future studies to 
explore these important issues.   
We also derive several findings that may be of interest to policymakers. Estimating the take-up of 
public assistance programs is vital for modelling their microeconomic and macroeconomic 
impacts, as nearly all will have some degree of nonparticipation. Our analysis shows that one 
demographic group, LGB individuals, take up public assistance programs at higher rates than 
economically similar heterosexual individuals, and that this disparity is likely due to a combination 
of social network effects, lessened stigma, and increased reliance on public programs. 
Policymakers should consider how these factors were differentially established by the LGB 
community and whether there are policy or community actions (like utilizing social and peer 
networks to target public assistance) that may streamline public program participation for 
populations in greatest need. Additionally, policymakers may consider public policies that directly 
target LGB people (e.g., same-sex marriage) may consider our estimates of higher public program 
take-up; private benefits (e.g., health insurance) may crowd out public benefits when sexual 
minorities enjoy protections in employment, housing, and education. Finally, the disparities in 
receipt of the child tax credit for LGB people who have children point to an area where 
policymakers must examine whether current targeting and disbursement methods are not fully 
reaching LGB individuals who may be eligible for the program. 
7. Conclusion 
Our findings confirm that bisexuals experience poorer economic outcomes and that gay men, 
lesbian women, and bisexuals take up government assistance programs at higher rates than their 
heterosexual counterparts. Additionally, we find evidence that this pattern of higher take-up among 
gay and bisexual men is maintained in a low-income subsample. Finally, we find that gay men, 
lesbian women, and bisexual women are less likely to receive the recently enhanced child tax credit 
than similarly situated heterosexuals. In so doing, our study adds to a growing literature on the 


18 
 
experiences of LGB people in poverty. Our results further the call for more social science and 
policy research on the inequality and poverty experienced in sexual minority communities. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


19 
 
References 
 
Ahmed, A. M., & Hammarstedt, M. (2010). Sexual orientation and earnings: a register data-based 
approach to identify homosexuals. Journal of Population Economics, 23(3), 835–849. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00148-009-0265-4 
AIDS Project LA. (2022). Mission & Strategic Plan. https://aplahealth.org/about/mission-strategic-plan/ 
Aizer, A., & Currie, J. (2004). Networks or neighborhoods? Correlations in the use of publicly-funded 
maternity care in California. Journal of Public Economics, 88(12), 2573–2585. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2003.09.003 
Albelda, R., Schneebaum, A., Badgett, M. V. L., & Gates, G. (2009). California Center for Population 
Research On-Line Working Paper Series Poverty in the Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual Community. In 
UCLA CCPR Population Working Papers. 
Allen, H., Wright, B. J., Harding, K., & Broffman, L. (2014). The Role of Stigma in Access to Health 
Care for the Poor. Milbank Quarterly, 92(2), 289–318. https://doi.org/10.1111/1468-0009.12059 
Alvira-Hammond, M., & Gennetian, L. A. (2015). How Hispanic Parents Perceive Their Need and 
Eligibility for Public Assistance. National Research Center on Hispanic Children & Families. 
Badgett, M. . V. L., Durso, L. E., & Schneebaum, A. (2013). New Patterns of Poverty in the Lesbian, 
Gay, and Bisexual Community. June, 45. http://williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/wp-
content/uploads/LGB-Poverty-Update-Jun-2013.pdf 
Badgett, M. V. L. (1995). The Wage Effects of Sexual Orientation Discrimination. ILR Review, 48(4), 
726–739. https://doi.org/10.1177/001979399504800408 
Badgett, M. V. L. (2018). Left Out? Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual Poverty in the U.S. Population Research 
and Policy Review, 37(5), 667–702. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11113-018-9457-5 
Badgett, M. V. L., Carpenter, C. S., & Sansone, D. (2021). LGBTQ Economics. Journal of Economic 
Perspectives, 35(2), 141–170. https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.35.2.141 
Badgett, M. V. L., Sears, R. B., & Ho, D. (2006). Supporting Families, Saving Funds: An Economic 
Analysis Of Equality For Same-Sex Couples In New Jersey. Rutgers Journal of Law & Public 
Policy, 4:1(Fall 2006). 
Bansak, C., & Starr, M. (2021). Covid-19 shocks to education supply: how 200,000 U.S. households dealt 
with the sudden shift to distance learning. Review of Economics of the Household, 19(1), 63–90. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11150-020-09540-9 
Berkowitz, S. A., & Basu, S. (2021). Unmet Social Needs And Worse Mental Health After Expiration Of 
COVID-19 Federal Pandemic Unemployment Compensation. Health Affairs, 40(3), 426–434. 
https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2020.01990 
Bertrand, M., Luttmer, E. F. P., & Mullainathan, S. (2000). Network Effects and Welfare Cultures*. 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(3), 1019–1055. https://doi.org/10.1162/003355300554971 
Bhat, C. R. (1994). Imputing a continuous income variable from grouped and missing income 
observations. Economics Letters, 46(4), 311–319. https://doi.org/10.1016/0165-1765(94)90151-1 


20 
 
Bitler, M., Hoynes, H., & Schanzenbach, D. W. (2020). The Social Safety Net in the Wake of COVID-19. 
https://doi.org/10.3386/w27796 
Black, D. A., Sanders, S. G., & Taylor, L. J. (2007). The economics of lesbian and gay families. Journal 
of Economic Perspectives, 21(2), 53–70. 
Borjas, G. J., & Hilton, L. (1996). Immigration and the Welfare State: Immigrant Participation in Means-
Tested Entitlement Programs. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2), 575–604. 
https://doi.org/10.2307/2946688 
Bradley, V. C., Kuriwaki, S., Isakov, M., Sejdinovic, D., Meng, X.-L., & Flaxman, S. (2021). 
Unrepresentative big surveys significantly overestimated US vaccine uptake. Nature, 600(7890), 
695–700. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-04198-4 
Brady, D. (2005). The Welfare State and Relative Poverty in Rich Western Democracies, 1967-1997. 
Social Forces, 83(4), 1329–1364. https://doi.org/10.1353/sof.2005.0056 
Breder, K., & Bockting, W. (2022). Social networks of LGBT older adults: An integrative review. 
Psychology of Sexual Orientation and Gender Diversity. https://doi.org/10.1037/sgd0000552 
Brewster, K. L., Tillman, K. H., & Jokinen-Gordon, H. (2014). Demographic Characteristics of Lesbian 
Parents in the United States. Population Research and Policy Review, 33(4), 503–526. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11113-013-9296-3 
Brown, T. N. T., Romero, A. P., & Gates, G. J. (2016). Food Insecurity and SNAP Participation in the 
LGBT Community. The Williams Institute, July(July), 1–28. 
Bryson, A. (2017). Pay equity after the Equality Act 2010: does sexual orientation still matter? Work, 
Employment and Society, 31(3), 483–500. https://doi.org/10.1177/0950017016664678 
Carpenter, C., & Gates, G. J. (2008). Gay and lesbian partnership: Evidence from California. 
Demography, 45(3), 573–590. https://doi.org/10.1353/dem.0.0014 
Carpenter, C. S. (2005). Self-reported sexual orientation and earnings: Evidence from California. 
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 58(2), 258–273. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/001979390505800205 
Carpenter, C. S., Gonzales, G., McKay, T., & Sansone, D. (2021). Effects of the Affordable Care Act 
Dependent Coverage Mandate on Health Insurance Coverage for Individuals in Same-Sex Couples. 
Demography, 58(5), 1897–1929. https://doi.org/10.1215/00703370-9429469 
Carpenter, C. S., Lee, M. J., & Nettuno, L. (2022). Economic outcomes for transgender people and other 
gender minorities in the United States: First estimates from a nationally representative sample. 
Southern Economic Journal. https://doi.org/10.1002/soej.12594 
Carpenter, C. S., & Sansone, D. (2021). Cigarette taxes and smoking among sexual minority adults. 
Journal of Health Economics, 79(26692), 1–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2021.102492 
Chai, L., & Maroto, M. (2020). Economic Insecurity among Gay and Bisexual Men: Evidence from the 
1991–2016 U.S. General Social Survey. Sociological Perspectives, 63(1), 50–68. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0731121419849100 


21 
 
Colledge, L., Hickson, F., Reid, D., & Weatherburn, P. (2015). Poorer mental health in UK bisexual 
women than lesbians: evidence from the UK 2007 Stonewall Women’s Health Survey. Journal of 
Public Health, 37(3), 427–437. https://doi.org/10.1093/pubmed/fdu105 
Congressional Research Service. (2021). The U.S. Income Distribution: Trends and Issues. 
https://crsreports.congress.gov 
Corinth, K., Meyer, B., Stadnicki, M., & Wu, D. (2021). The Anti-Poverty, Targeting, and Labor Supply 
Effects of the Proposed Child Tax Credit Expansion. https://doi.org/10.3386/w29366 
Corliss, H. L., Goodenow, C. S., Nichols, L., & Bryn Austin, S. (2011). High burden of homelessness 
among sexual-minority adolescents: Findings from a representative massachusetts high school 
sample. American Journal of Public Health, 101(9), 1683–1689. 
https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2011.300155 
Currie, J. (2004). The Take Up of Social Benefits. https://doi.org/10.3386/W10488 
Dempsey, D., Parkinson, S., Andrews, C., & McNair, R. (2020). Family relationships and LGB first 
homelessness in Australia: What do we know and where should we go? Journal of Sociology, 56(4), 
516–534. https://doi.org/10.1177/1440783320927087 
DiBennardo, R., & Gates, G. J. (2014). Research Note: US Census Same-Sex Couple Data: Adjustments 
to Reduce Measurement Error and Empirical Implications. Population Research and Policy Review, 
33(4), 603–614. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11113-013-9289-2 
DiMaggio, P., & Garip, F. (2012). Network Effects and Social Inequality. Annual Review of Sociology, 
38(1), 93–118. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.soc.012809.102545 
Donnelly, R., & Farina, M. P. (2021). How do state policies shape experiences of household income 
shocks and mental health during the COVID-19 pandemic? Social Science & Medicine, 269, 
113557. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2020.113557 
Drydakis, N. (2022). Sexual orientation and earnings: a meta-analysis 2012–2020. Journal of Population 
Economics, 35(2), 409–440. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00148-021-00862-1 
Drydakis, N., & Zimmermann, K. F. (2020). Guest editorial. International Journal of Manpower, 41(6), 
621–628. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJM-03-2020-481 
Durso, L. E., & Gates, G. J. (2012). Serving Our Youth: Findings from a National Survey of Services 
Providers Working with Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender Youth Who are Homeless or At 
Risk of Becoming Homeless. 
Edelman, M. (1992). Understanding the gay and lesbian vote in ’92. Public Perspective, 4, 32–33. 
Elton, E., & Gonzales, G. (2022). Health Insurance Coverage and Access to Care by Sexual Orientation 
and Marital/Cohabitation Status: New Evidence from the 2015–2018 National Health Interview 
Survey. Population Research and Policy Review, 41(2), 479–493. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11113-
021-09670-7 
Everett, B. G., & Mollborn, S. (2014). Examining Sexual Orientation Disparities in Unmet Medical 
Needs Among Men and Women. Population Research and Policy Review, 33(4), 553–577. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11113-013-9282-9 


22 
 
Feinstein, B. A., & Dyar, C. (2017). Bisexuality, Minority Stress, and Health. Current Sexual Health 
Reports, 9(1), 42–49. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11930-017-0096-3 
Finkelstein, A., & Hendren, N. (2020). Welfare Analysis Meets Causal Inference. Journal of Economic 
Perspectives, 34(4), 146–167. https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.34.4.146 
Fothergill, A. (2003). The Stigma of Charity: Gender, Class, and Disaster Assistance. The Sociological 
Quarterly, 44(4), 659–680. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1533-8525.2003.tb00530.x 
Garner, T. I., Safir, A., & Schild, J. (2020a). Changes in Consumer Behaviors and Financial Well-Being 
during the Coronavirus Pandemic: Results from the U.S. Household Pulse Survey. Monthly Labor 
Review, 143. 
Garner, T. I., Safir, A., & Schild, J. (2020b). Changes in consumer behaviors and financial well-being 
during the coronavirus pandemic: results from the U.S. household pulse survey. Monthly Labor 
Review, 143(12), 1–21. 
Goldin, J., & Michelmore, K. (2022). Who Benefits from the Child Tax Credit? National Tax Journal, 
000–000. https://doi.org/10.1086/717919 
Gonzales, G., & Blewett, L. A. (2014). National and state-specific health insurance disparities for adults 
in same-sex relationships. American Journal of Public Health, 104(2), 95–105. 
Gonzales, G., & de Mola, E. L. (2021). Potential COVID-19 Vulnerabilities in Employment and 
Healthcare Access by Sexual Orientation. Annals of LGBTQ Public and Population Health, 2(2), 
87–103. https://doi.org/10.1891/LGBTQ-2020-0052 
Gonzales, G., & Deal, C. (2022). Health Risk Factors and Outcomes Among Gender Minority High 
School Students in 15 US States. JAMA, 327(15), 1498. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2022.3087 
Herek, G. M., Norton, A. T., Allen, T. J., & Sims, C. L. (2010). Demographic, Psychological, and Social 
Characteristics of Self-Identified Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual Adults in a US Probability Sample. 
Sexuality Research and Social Policy, 7(3), 176–200. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13178-010-0017-y 
Hoffman, S. D. (2008). Economic Costs and Social Consequences of Teen Pregnancy, second edition. In 
R. A. Maynard (Ed.), Kids Having Kids. The Urban Institute. 
Horsfall, S. (2012). Social Problems: An Advocate Group Approach. Avalon Publishing. 
Hussey, L. S. (2011). Is Welfare Pro-life? Assistance Programs, Abortion, and the Moderating Role of 
States. Social Service Review. 
Jackson Levin, N., Kattari, S. K., Piellusch, E. K., & Watson, E. (2020). “We Just Take Care of Each 
Other”: Navigating ‘Chosen Family’ in the Context of Health, Illness, and the Mutual Provision of 
Care amongst Queer and Transgender Young Adults. International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health, 17(19), 7346. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17197346 
Jones, P. E. (2021). Political Distinctiveness and Diversity Among Lgbt Americans. Public Opinion 
Quarterly. https://doi.org/10.1093/poq/nfab030 
Keith-Jennings, B., Llobrera, J., & Dean, S. (2019). Links of the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance 
Program With Food Insecurity, Poverty, and Health: Evidence and Potential. American Journal of 
Public Health, 109(12), 1636–1640. https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2019.305325 


23 
 
Kim, D. (2021). Financial hardship and social assistance as determinants of mental health and food and 
housing insecurity during the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States. SSM - Population Health, 
16, 100862. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssmph.2021.100862 
Klawitter, M. (2015). Meta-Analysis of the Effects of Sexual Orientation on Earnings. Industrial 
Relations: A Journal of Economy and Society, 54(1), 4–32. https://doi.org/10.1111/irel.12075 
Ko, W., & Moffitt, R. A. (2022). Take-up of Social Benefits. https://doi.org/10.3386/W30148 
Leppel, K. (2007). Home-ownership among opposite- and same-sex couples in the US. Feminist 
Economics, 13(1), 1–30. https://doi.org/10.1080/13545700601075070 
Lewis, G. B., Rogers, M. A., & Sherrill, K. (2011). Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual Voters in the 2000 U.S. 
Presidential Election [Article]. Politics & Policy, 39(5), 655–677. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1747-
1346.2011.00315.x 
Mann, S., Blackaby, D., & O’Leary, N. (2019). Sexual identity and wellbeing: A distributional analysis. 
Economics Letters, 181, 133–136. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.econlet.2019.04.023 
Manski, C. F. (1993). Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection Problem. The Review 
of Economic Studies, 60(3), 531. https://doi.org/10.2307/2298123 
Marcén, M., & Morales, M. (2022). The effect of same-sex marriage legalization on interstate migration 
in the USA. Journal of Population Economics, 35(2), 441–469. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00148-021-
00842-5 
Martell, M. E. (2019). Age and the new lesbian earnings penalty. International Journal of Manpower, 
41(6), 649–670. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJM-10-2018-0322 
Martell, M. E. (2021). Labor market differentials estimated with researcher-inferred and self-identified 
sexual orientation. Economics Letters, 205, 109959. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.econlet.2021.109959 
McConnell, E. A., Birkett, M. A., & Mustanski, B. (2015). Typologies of Social Support and 
Associations with Mental Health Outcomes Among LGBT Youth. LGBT Health, 2(1), 55–61. 
https://doi.org/10.1089/lgbt.2014.0051 
Moffitt, R. (1983). An Economic Model of Welfare Stigma. American Economic Review, 73(5), 1023–
1035. 
Morin, R., Taylor, P., & Patten, E. (2012). A Bipartisan Nation of Beneficiaries. Pew Research Center. 
https://www.pewresearch.org/social-trends/2012/12/18/a-bipartisan-nation-of-beneficiaries/ 
National Academies of Science Engineering and Medicine. (2020). Understanding the Well-Being of 
LGBTQI+ Populations. In C. J. Patterson, M.-J. Sepúlveda, & J. White (Eds.), Understanding the 
Well-Being of LGBTQI+ Populations. National Academies Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/25877 
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation. (2022). Poverty Guidelines. 
https://aspe.hhs.gov/topics/poverty-economic-mobility/poverty-guidelines 
Patacchini, E., Ragusa, G., & Zenou, Y. (2015). Unexplored dimensions of discrimination in Europe: 
homosexuality and physical appearance. Journal of Population Economics, 28(4), 1045–1073. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00148-014-0533-9 


24 
 
Perales, F., & Huang, Y. (2020). Parental Financial Transfers: Do They Vary by Children’s Sexual 
Orientation? Social Forces, 98(4), 1465–1497. https://doi.org/10.1093/sf/soz111 
Plug, E., & Berkhout, P. (2004). Effects of sexual preferences on earnings in the Netherlands. Journal of 
Population Economics, 17(1), 117–131. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00148-003-0136-3 
Riphahn, R. T., & Serfling, O. (2005). Item non-response on income and wealth questions. Empirical 
Economics, 30(2), 521–538. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00181-005-0247-7 
Rosario, M., Schrimshaw, E. W., & Hunter, J. (2012). Risk factors for homelessness among lesbian, gay, 
and bisexual youths: A developmental milestone approach. Children and Youth Services Review, 
34(1), 186–193. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.childyouth.2011.09.016 
Schenker, N., Raghunathan, T. E., Chiu, P.-L., Makuc, D. M., Zhang, G., & Cohen, A. J. (2006). Multiple 
Imputation of Missing Income Data in the National Health Interview Survey. Journal of the 
American Statistical Association, 101(475), 924–933. https://doi.org/10.1198/016214505000001375 
Schneebaum, A., & Badgett, M. V. L. (2019). Poverty in US Lesbian and Gay Couple Households. 
Feminist Economics, 25(1), 1–30. https://doi.org/10.1080/13545701.2018.1441533 
Sherkat, D. E. (2002). Sexuality and Religious Commitment in the United States: An Empirical 
Examination. Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 41(2), 313–323. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/1468-5906.00119 
Sherkat, D. E., de Vries, K. M., & Creek, S. (2010). Race, Religion, and Opposition to Same-Sex 
Marriage [Article]. Social Science Quarterly, 91(1), 80–98. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-
6237.2010.00682.x 
Smith, R. A., & Haider-Markel, D. P. (2002). Gay and Lesbian Americans and Political Participation. 
ABC-CLIO. 
Snapp, S. D., Watson, R. J., Russell, S. T., Diaz, R. M., & Ryan, C. (2015). Social Support Networks for 
LGBT Young Adults: Low Cost Strategies for Positive Adjustment. Family Relations, 64(3), 420–
430. https://doi.org/10.1111/fare.12124 
StataCorp. (2019). Stata Statistical Software: Release 16. StataCorp LLC. 
Stuber, J., & Schlesinger, M. (2006). Sources of stigma for means-tested government programs. Social 
Science & Medicine, 63(4), 933–945. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2006.01.012 
Tilcsik, A. (2011). Pride and Prejudice: Employment Discrimination against Openly Gay Men in the 
United States. American Journal of Sociology, 117(2), 586–626. https://doi.org/10.1086/661653 
Turnbull-Dugarte, S. J., & Townsley, J. (2020). Political engagement and turnout among same-sex 
couples in Western Europe. Research & Politics, 7(4), 205316802097695. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/2053168020976952 
Uhrig, S. C. N. (2015). Sexual Orientation and Poverty in the UK: A Review and Top-Line Findings from 
the UK Household Longitudinal Study. Journal of Research in Gender Studies, 5. 
https://heinonline.org/HOL/Page?handle=hein.journals/jogenst5&id=24&div=6&collection=journal
s 
US Census Bureau. (2021). Poverty Thresholds. 


25 
 
van Oorschot, W. (1991). Non-Take-Up of Social Security Benefits in Europe. Journal of European 
Social Policy, 1(1), 15–30. https://doi.org/10.1177/095892879100100103 
Western, B., Bloome, D., Sosnaud, B., & Tach, L. (2012). Economic Insecurity and Social Stratification. 
Annual Review of Sociology, 38(1), 341–359. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-soc-071811-145434 
Wilson, B. D. M., Gomez Madin, A.-G. H., Soon, S., Choi, K., & Lee Badgett, M. v. (2020). Pathways 
into Poverty: Lived Experiences Among LGBTQ People. https://doi.org/10.1177/0019793920902776 
Wilson, B., & Meyer, I. (2021). Nonbinary LQBTQ Adults in the United States. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/sgd0000384 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


26 
 
Table 1a: Descriptive Statistics, Household Pulse Survey, Stratified by Sexual Orientation 
and Sex 
Panel A: Full Sample, Men 
  
Heterosexual 
Gay/Lesbian 
Bisexual 
P-Value 
Sample Size 
199224 
11647 
4723 
  
Weighted Percentage 
92.5% 
4.6% 
2.9% 
  
Age 
50.088 
43.392 
36.067 
<0.001 
Number of Children 
0.630 
0.196 
0.414 
<0.001 
Race/Ethnicity 
 
 
 
  
White, non-Hispanic 
0.669 
0.652 
0.676 
<0.001 
Black, non-Hispanic 
0.093 
0.079 
0.061 
Asian, non-Hispanic 
0.056 
0.041 
0.044 
All other races, non-Hispanic 
0.031 
0.037 
0.044 
Hispanic 
0.151 
0.192 
0.174 
Relationship Status 
 
 
 
  
Married 
0.641 
0.285 
0.297 
<0.001 
Widowed, Divorced, or Separated 
0.138 
0.090 
0.123 
Never Married 
0.219 
0.623 
0.579 
Missing 
0.003 
0.002 
0.001 
Child Present 
0.344 
0.116 
0.241 
<0.001 
Gender Minority  
0.001 
0.040 
0.075 
<0.001 
Urban Area 
0.324 
0.419 
0.333 
<0.001 
Educational Attainment 
 
 
 
  
Less than High School 
0.062 
0.044 
0.060 
<0.001 
High School Graduate 
0.311 
0.213 
0.267 
Some College 
0.292 
0.348 
0.407 
Bachelor's or higher 
0.335 
0.395 
0.266 
Employment Status 
 
 
 
  
Employed 
0.629 
0.682 
0.683 
<0.001 
Unemployed 
0.098 
0.126 
0.124 
Not in Labor Force 
0.261 
0.182 
0.189 
Missing 
0.011 
0.010 
0.005 
Health Insurance 
 
 
 
  
Private Health Insurance 
0.557 
0.621 
0.604 
<0.001 
Public Health Insurance 
0.348 
0.273 
0.252 
Uninsured 
0.090 
0.099 
0.141 
Missing 
0.006 
0.008 
0.003 
Below FPL  
0.134 
0.168 
0.207 
<0.001 
Source: Weeks 34-43 Household Pulse Survey, authors’ calculations. Weighted means. Note average household 
income and poverty status are determined using the midpoint of each household income range or the lower limit of 
the range for those in the highest income range. P-values calculated using χ2 tests for categorical variables and 
ANOVA tests for continuous variables. 
 


27 
 
Panel B: Full Sample, Women 
  
Heterosexual 
Gay/Lesbian 
Bisexual 
P-Value 
Sample Size 
286275  
7360  
14567  
  
Weighted Percentage 
91.5% 
2.3% 
6.2% 
  
Age 
51.121 
42.500 
32.336 
<0.001 
Number of Children 
0.700 
0.472 
0.665 
<0.001 
Race/Ethnicity 
 
 
 
  
White, non-Hispanic 
0.657 
0.667 
0.661 
<0.001 
Black, non-Hispanic 
0.119 
0.106 
0.074 
Asian, non-Hispanic 
0.047 
0.030 
0.030 
All other races, non-Hispanic 
0.036 
0.050 
0.069 
Hispanic 
0.141 
0.147 
0.166 
Relationship Status 
 
 
 
  
Married 
0.558 
0.372 
0.315 
<0.001 
Widowed, Divorced, or Separated 
0.246 
0.134 
0.124 
Never Married 
0.192 
0.491 
0.559 
Missing 
0.003 
0.004 
0.002 
Child Present 
0.380 
0.259 
0.369 
<0.001 
Gender Minority  
0.001 
0.059 
0.048 
<0.001 
Urban Area 
0.315 
0.329 
0.309 
<0.001 
Educational Attainment 
 
 
 
  
Less than High School 
0.059 
0.058 
0.055 
<0.001 
High School Graduate 
0.281 
0.207 
0.220 
Some College 
0.305 
0.338 
0.397 
Bachelor's or higher 
0.355 
0.397 
0.328 
Employment Status 
 
 
 
  
Employed 
0.543 
0.625 
0.688 
<0.001 
Unemployed 
0.108 
0.120 
0.121 
Not in Labor Force 
0.338 
0.242 
0.190 
Missing 
0.011 
0.012 
0.002 
Health Insurance 
 
 
 
  
Private Health Insurance 
0.512 
0.587 
0.587 
<0.001 
Public Health Insurance 
0.419 
0.321 
0.300 
Uninsured 
0.064 
0.090 
0.111 
Missing 
0.006 
0.002 
0.002 
Below FPL  
0.183 
0.209 
0.264 
<0.001 
Source: Weeks 34-43 Household Pulse Survey, authors’ calculations. Weighted means. Note average household 
income and poverty status are determined using the midpoint of each household income range or the lower limit of 
the range for those in the highest income range. P-values calculated using χ2 tests for categorical variables and 
ANOVA tests for continuous variables. 
 
 
 
 


28 
 
Table 1b: Descriptive Statistics, Household Pulse Survey, Stratified by Sexual Orientation 
and Sex 
Panel A: Below the federal poverty level (FPL), Men 
  
Heterosexual 
Gay/Lesbian 
Bisexual 
P-Value 
Sample Size 
14203  
1238  
761  
  
Weighted Percentage 
90.0% 
5.7% 
4.4% 
  
Age 
46.098 
42.365 
34.881 
<0.001 
Number of Children 
0.812 
0.382 
0.567 
<0.001 
Race/Ethnicity 
 
 
 
  
White, non-Hispanic 
0.494 
0.548 
0.607 
<0.001 
Black, non-Hispanic 
0.160 
0.118 
0.072 
Asian, non-Hispanic 
0.051 
0.038 
0.008 
All other races, non-Hispanic 
0.042 
0.036 
0.072 
Hispanic 
0.254 
0.260 
0.242 
Relationship Status 
 
 
 
  
Married 
0.355 
0.125 
0.190 
<0.001 
Widowed, Divorced, or Separated 
0.235 
0.119 
0.175 
Never Married 
0.406 
0.755 
0.630 
Missing 
0.003 
0.000 
0.005 
Child Present 
0.394 
0.184 
0.278 
<0.001 
Gender Minority  
0.002 
0.072 
0.090 
<0.001 
Urban Area 
0.320 
0.385 
0.325 
0.084 
Educational Attainment 
 
 
 
  
Less than High School 
0.174 
0.107 
0.144 
<0.001 
High School Graduate 
0.459 
0.329 
0.315 
Some College 
0.259 
0.374 
0.392 
Bachelor's or higher 
0.108 
0.190 
0.148 
Employment Status 
 
 
 
  
Employed 
0.405 
0.384 
0.505 
<0.001 
Unemployed 
0.253 
0.310 
0.243 
Not in Labor Force 
0.329 
0.297 
0.251 
Missing 
0.013 
0.009 
0.002 
Health Insurance 
 
 
 
  
Private Health Insurance 
0.232 
0.238 
0.318 
0.068 
Public Health Insurance 
0.518 
0.553 
0.465 
Uninsured 
0.238 
0.188 
0.211 
Missing 
0.012 
0.022 
0.006 
Source: Weeks 34-43 Household Pulse Survey, authors’ calculations. Weighted means. Note average household 
income and poverty status are determined using the midpoint of each household income range or the lower limit of 
the range for those in the highest income range. P-values calculated using χ2 tests for categorical variables and 
ANOVA tests for continuous variables. 
 
 
 


29 
 
Panel B: Below the federal poverty level (FPL), Women 
  
Heterosexual 
Gay/Lesbian 
Bisexual 
P-Value 
Sample Size 
32068  
976  
2890  
  
Weighted Percentage 
88.7% 
2.6% 
8.7% 
  
Age 
47.764 
37.333 
30.732 
<0.001 
Number of Children 
1.091 
0.759 
0.889 
<0.001 
Race/Ethnicity 
 
 
 
  
White, non-Hispanic 
0.478 
0.506 
0.563 
<0.001 
Black, non-Hispanic 
0.209 
0.172 
0.123 
Asian, non-Hispanic 
0.028 
0.017 
0.030 
All other races, non-Hispanic 
0.050 
0.076 
0.075 
Hispanic 
0.235 
0.229 
0.209 
Relationship Status 
 
 
 
  
Married 
0.288 
0.178 
0.159 
<0.001 
Widowed, Divorced, or Separated 
0.378 
0.166 
0.157 
Never Married 
0.331 
0.651 
0.684 
Missing 
0.004 
0.006 
0.000 
Child Present 
0.527 
0.357 
0.457 
<0.001 
Gender Minority  
0.000 
0.095 
0.054 
<0.001 
Urban Area 
0.301 
0.299 
0.264 
0.094 
Educational Attainment 
 
 
 
  
Less than High School 
0.175 
0.139 
0.095 
<0.001 
High School Graduate 
0.422 
0.313 
0.316 
Some College 
0.301 
0.388 
0.447 
Bachelor's or higher 
0.102 
0.161 
0.142 
Employment Status 
 
 
 
  
Employed 
0.353 
0.430 
0.541 
<0.001 
Unemployed 
0.218 
0.224 
0.178 
Not in Labor Force 
0.414 
0.336 
0.281 
Missing 
0.014 
0.010 
0.001 
Health Insurance 
 
 
 
  
Private Health Insurance 
0.177 
0.306 
0.294 
<0.001 
Public Health Insurance 
0.661 
0.509 
0.527 
Uninsured 
0.150 
0.181 
0.176 
Missing 
0.013 
0.004 
0.005 
Source: Weeks 34-43 Household Pulse Survey, authors’ calculations. Weighted means. Note average household 
income and poverty status are determined using the midpoint of each household income range or the lower limit of 
the range for those in the highest income range. P-values calculated using χ2 tests for categorical variables and 
ANOVA tests for continuous variables. 
 
 
 
 
 


30 
 
Table 2: LGB Individuals, Especially Bisexuals, Experience Worse Economic Outcomes. 
Full Sample 
 
  
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
  
Log of 
household 
income  
Employed 
Below federal 
poverty level  
Financial hardship 
Male 
  
Gay 
-0.00297 
-0.00409 
-0.00140 
0.0344*** 
  
(0.0170) 
(0.00965) 
(0.00862) 
(0.0101) 
Bisexual 
-0.0812*** 
-0.0172 
0.0216* 
0.0613*** 
  
(0.0250) 
(0.0144) 
(0.0124) 
(0.0146) 
Mean of Outcome 
89810 
0.633 
0.138 
0.251 
N 
215594 
215594 
215594 
215594 
Female 
  
  
  
  
Lesbian 
-0.0322* 
-0.00667 
0.00878 
0.0458*** 
  
(0.0183) 
(0.0104) 
(0.00991) 
(0.0108) 
Bisexual 
-0.0891*** 
-0.00367 
0.0285*** 
0.0603*** 
  
(0.0146) 
(0.00805) 
(0.00786) 
(0.00828) 
Mean of Outcome 
78744 
0.554 
0.188 
0.308 
N 
308202 
308202 
308202 
308202 
Notes: Data are from the Weeks 34-43 Household Pulse Survey (HPS). Each column is from a separate regression 
using the HPS person weights. Linear probability models, except for column (1), which uses interval regression. We 
present coefficient estimates and standard errors, robust to heteroskedasticity. The individual-level controls include 
age, age squared, race, ethnicity, relationship status, the presence of a child in the household, sex, urban-rural status, 
gender minority status, the total number of children in the household, and education (four categories). We also control 
for survey week and state of residence. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


31 
 
Table 3: LGB Individuals Access and Use Government Assistance at Higher Rates. 
Full Sample  
 
  
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
  
Unemployment 
insurance 
utilization 
Stimulus 
check 
utilization 
SNAP 
receipt 
SNAP 
utilization 
Rental 
assistance 
utilization 
Medicaid 
Male 
  
  
Gay 
0.00708 
0.00193 
0.0272*** 
0.0215*** 
0.00558** 
0.0338*** 
  
(0.00551) 
(0.00783) 
(0.00693) 
(0.00520) 
(0.00230) 
(0.00743) 
Bisexual 
0.0162* 
0.0211* 
0.0393*** 
0.0377*** 
0.0138*** 
0.0341*** 
  
(0.00889) 
(0.0112) 
(0.0119) 
(0.00920) 
(0.00523) 
(0.0107) 
Mean of 
Outcome 
0.039 
0.115 
0.092 
0.041 
0.007 
0.121 
N 
215594 
215594 
215594 
215594 
215594 
215594 
Female 
  
  
Lesbian 
-0.000886 
0.0213** 
0.0186** 
0.00771 
0.00141 
-0.000759 
  
(0.00605) 
(0.00962) 
(0.00818) 
(0.00680) 
(0.00296) 
(0.00990) 
Bisexual 
0.00658 
0.0175** 
0.0238*** 
0.0204*** 
0.00260 
0.0374*** 
  
(0.00448) 
(0.00697) 
(0.00665) 
(0.00560) 
(0.00216) 
(0.00752) 
Mean of 
Outcome 
0.041 
0.121 
0.148 
0.087 
0.013 
0.194 
N 
308202 
308202 
308202 
308202 
308202 
308202 
Notes: Data are from the Weeks 34-43 Household Pulse Survey (HPS). Each column is from a separate regression 
using the HPS person weights. Linear probability models. We present coefficient estimates and standard errors, robust 
to heteroskedasticity. The individual-level controls include age, age squared, race, ethnicity, relationship status, the 
presence of a child in the household, sex, urban-rural status, gender minority status, the total number of children in 
the household, poverty status, and education (four categories). We also control for survey week and state of residence. 
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


32 
 
Table 4: Low-income LGB Individuals Access SNAP and Rent Assistance at Higher Rates. 
Sample is limited to those respondents with household incomes below the FPL. 
 
  
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
  
Unemployment 
insurance 
utilization 
Stimulus 
check 
utilization 
SNAP 
receipt 
SNAP 
utilization 
Rental 
assistance 
utilization 
Medicaid 
Male 
  
  
Gay 
-0.00975 
-0.0211 
0.0737*** 
0.0703*** 
0.0230** 
0.109*** 
  
(0.0168) 
(0.0231) 
(0.0274) 
(0.0230) 
(0.0117) 
(0.0266) 
Bisexual 
0.0120 
-0.0129 
0.0715** 
0.0910*** 
0.0412** 
0.0834** 
  
(0.0173) 
(0.0256) 
(0.0332) 
(0.0296) 
(0.0208) 
(0.0332) 
Mean of 
Outcome 
0.075 
0.197 
0.340 
0.174 
0.034 
0.388 
N 
16202 
16202 
16202 
16202 
16202 
16202 
Female 
  
  
Lesbian 
0.00814 
0.000320 
-0.00186 
-0.00544 
-0.00236 
-0.0424* 
  
(0.0199) 
(0.0284) 
(0.0250) 
(0.0230) 
(0.0106) 
(0.0257) 
Bisexual 
0.00184 
0.0165 
0.00267 
0.0126 
0.00716 
0.00688 
  
(0.0131) 
(0.0177) 
(0.0169) 
(0.0156) 
(0.00740) 
(0.0175) 
Mean of 
Outcome 
0.077 
0.213 
0.468 
0.303 
0.050 
0.536 
N 
35934 
35934 
35934 
35934 
35934 
35934 
Notes: Data are from the Weeks 34-43 Household Pulse Survey (HPS). Each column is from a separate regression 
using the HPS person weights. Linear probability models. We present coefficient estimates and standard errors, robust 
to heteroskedasticity. The individual-level controls include age, age squared, race, ethnicity, relationship status, the 
presence of a child in the household, sex, urban-rural status, gender minority status, the total number of children in 
the household, and education (four categories). We also control for survey week and state of residence. * p < 0.10, ** 
p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


33 
 
Table 5: Child-Related Programs are Differentially Accessed by LGB Populations. 
Full Sample at left; FPL sample at right. 
 
  
Full Sample 
<FPL Sample 
  
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
  
Child tax credit 
receipt 
School lunch 
card utilization 
Child tax credit 
receipt 
School lunch card 
utilization 
Male 
  
  
  
  
Gay 
-0.0161*** 
0.000625 
-0.0199 
-0.0243* 
  
(0.00553) 
(0.00416) 
(0.0160) 
(0.0125) 
Bisexual 
0.00456 
0.0124 
-0.00203 
0.00451 
  
(0.00839) 
(0.00872) 
(0.0221) 
(0.0232) 
Mean of Outcome 
0.161 
0.032 
0.191 
0.101 
N 
215594 
215594 
14187 
14187 
Female 
  
  
  
Lesbian 
-0.0369*** 
0.000354 
-0.0827*** 
-0.0139 
  
(0.00695) 
(0.00596) 
(0.0205) 
(0.0193) 
Bisexual 
-0.0211*** 
0.0139*** 
-0.0350** 
0.00119 
  
(0.00567) 
(0.00538) 
(0.0151) 
(0.0143) 
Mean of Outcome 
0.233 
0.061 
0.302 
0.161 
N 
308202 
308202 
31199 
31199 
Notes: Data are from the Weeks 34-43 Household Pulse Survey (HPS). Each column is from a separate regression 
using the HPS person weights. Linear probability models. We present coefficient estimates and standard errors, robust 
to heteroskedasticity. The individual-level controls include age, age squared, race, ethnicity, relationship status, the 
presence of a child in the household, sex, urban-rural status, gender minority status, the total number of children in 
the household, and education (four categories). Full sample regressions include a control for poverty status. We also 
control for survey week and state of residence. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


34 
 
Appendix 
 
Appendix Table 1: LGB Populations with Children Differentially  
Access Child-Related Programs. 
Full income sample with children at left; FPL sample with children at right. 
 
  
Full Sample 
<FPL Sample 
  
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
  
Child tax credit 
receipt 
School lunch 
card utilization 
Child tax credit 
receipt 
School lunch card 
utilization 
Male 
  
  
  
  
Gay 
-0.106*** 
-0.0265 
-0.130** 
-0.123*** 
  
(0.0363) 
(0.0185) 
(0.0554) 
(0.0387) 
Bisexual 
0.0469 
0.000273 
0.00439 
-0.0725 
  
(0.0316) 
(0.0189) 
(0.0715) 
(0.0461) 
Mean of Outcome 
0.558 
0.073 
0.410 
0.181 
N 
51898 
51898 
3603 
3603 
Female 
  
  
  
Lesbian 
-0.0968*** 
0.00745 
-0.155*** 
-0.0173 
  
(0.0232) 
(0.0179) 
(0.0538) 
(0.0402) 
Bisexual 
-0.0301** 
0.0221** 
-0.0561* 
0.0127 
  
(0.0135) 
(0.0109) 
(0.0288) 
(0.0253) 
Mean of Outcome 
0.605 
0.137 
0.568 
0.264 
N 
90610 
90610 
13380 
13380 
Notes: Data are from the Weeks 34-43 Household Pulse Survey (HPS). Each column is from a separate regression 
using the HPS person weights. Linear probability models. We present coefficient estimates and standard errors, robust 
to heteroskedasticity. The individual-level controls include age, age squared, race, ethnicity, relationship status, sex, 
urban-rural status, gender minority status, the total number of children in the household, and education (four 
categories). Full sample regressions include a control for poverty status. We also control for survey week and state of 
residence. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


35 
 
Appendix Table 2: Variable Creation 
Variable 
Type 
Coding 
Gender Minority 
Indicator 
0) "Cisgender" 1) "Gender Minority" 
Gay/Lesbian* 
Indicator 
0) "Heterosexual" 1) "Gay/Lesbian" 
Bisexual* 
Indicator 
0) "Heterosexual" 1) "Bisexual" 
Sex 
Indicator 
0) "Male" 1) "Female" 
Age 
Continuous 
17-88 
Race 
Categorical 
1) "White, Non-Hispanic" 2) "Black, Non-Hispanic" 3) “Asian, Non-
Hispanic” 4) "All Other Races, Non-Hispanic" 5) "Hispanic" 
Marital Status 
Categorical 
1) "Married" 2) "Widowed, Divorced, or Separated" 3) “Never 
Married” 4) "Missing"  
Child <18 Present in 
Household 
Indicator 
0) "No Child in House" 1) "Child in House" 
Educational 
Attainment 
Categorical 
1) "Less than High School" 2) "High School Graduate" 3) "Some 
College" 4) "Bachelor's or Higher" 
Household Income 
Range 
1) "Less than $24,999" 2) "$25,000-$34,999" 3) "$35,000-$49,999" 4) 
"$50,000-$74,999" 5) "$75,000-$99,999" 6) "$100,000-$149,999” 7) 
“$150,000-199,999” 8) “200,000+” 9) "Missing" 
Federal Poverty Line† 
Indicator 
0) "Above FPL" 1) "Below FPL" 
Employment 
Categorical 
1) "Employed" 2) "Unemployed" 3) "Not in Labor Force" 4) "Missing" 
Employed 
Indicator 
0) "Unemployed or Not in Labor Force" 1) "Employed" 
Health Insurance 
Categorical 
1) "Private Health Insurance" 2) "Public Health Insurance" 3) 
"Uninsured" 4) "Missing" 
Urban-Rural Status 
Indicator 
0) "Not in Metropolitan Statistical Area" 1) "In MSA" 
State 
Categorical 
1) "Alabama” 2) "Alaska" 3) "Arizona” …. 
Child Tax Credit 
Receipt 
Indicator 
0) "Did not receive Child Tax Credit" 1) "Received Child Tax Credit" 
SNAP Receipt 
Indicator 
0) "Did not receive SNAP" 1) "Received SNAP" 
Financial Hardship 
(Difficulty with 
Expenses) 
Categorical 
1) “Not at all difficult” 2) “A little difficult” 3) “Somewhat difficult” 4) 
“Very difficult” 
Financial Hardship⁑ 
Indicator 
0) “Not at all difficult or A little difficult” 1) “Somewhat difficult or 
Very difficult” 
Unemployment 
Insurance Utilization‡ 
Indicator 
0) "Did not utilize Unemployment Insurance" 1) "Utilized 
Unemployment Insurance" 


36 
 
Stimulus Payment 
Utilization‡ 
Indicator 
0) "Did not utilize Stimulus Payments" 1) "Utilized Stimulus 
Payments" 
Child Tax Credit 
Utilization‡ 
Indicator 
0) "Did not utilize Child Tax Credit" 1) "Utilized Child Tax Credit" 
School Meal Card 
Utilization‡ 
Indicator 
0) "Did not utilize School Meal Card" 1) "Utilized School Meal Card" 
Rental Assistance 
Utilization‡ 
Indicator 
0) "Did not utilize Rental Assistance" 1) "Utilized Rental Assistance" 
Medicaid Utilization 
Indicator 
0) "Did not report Medicaid as a source of health insurance" 1) "Report 
Medicaid as a source of health insurance " 
Notes: *Bisexuals are coded as missing (.) for the gay/lesbian indicator variable, and vice versa so that comparisons 
are to a strictly heterosexual group. †Following C. S. Carpenter et al., 2022, we use the midpoint of the reported 
income range as the value for that respondent, and then compare that to their federal poverty threshold (determined 
by household size and number of children in the household). If participants do not exceed the threshold, they are 
coded as below the federal poverty line. ⁑We dichotomize the financial hardship variable into an indicator variable 
for ease of interpretation and following Garner et al., 2020b; Kim, 2021. ‡Respondents were asked which of the 
following sources they and their household members used to meet their spending needs. They could choose multiple 
options including unemployment insurance (UI), stimulus payments, SNAP, school meal cards, and governmental 
rental assistance. If they selected one of these options, they were coded as having utilized that government assistance 
program. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


37 
 
Appendix Table 3: LGB Public Assistance Differentials, Controlling for Recent Job Loss 
  
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
  
Unemployment 
insurance 
utilization 
Stimulus 
check 
utilization 
SNAP 
receipt 
SNAP 
utilization 
Rental 
assistance 
utilization 
Medicaid 
Male 
  
  
Gay 
0.00576 
0.00134 
0.0267*** 
0.0213*** 
0.00555** 
0.0333*** 
(0.00533) 
(0.00779) 
(0.00697) 
(0.00522) 
(0.00230) 
(0.00742)    
Bisexual 
0.0133 
0.0197* 
0.0380*** 
0.0371*** 
0.0137*** 
0.0322*** 
(0.00861) 
(0.0112) 
(0.0118) 
(0.00922) 
(0.00525) 
(0.0108)    
Mean of 
Outcome 
0.039 
0.115 
0.092 
0.041 
0.007 
0.121 
N 
215594 
215594 
215594 
215594 
215594 
215594 
Female 
  
  
Gay/lesbian 
-0.00235 
0.0208** 
0.0178** 
0.00726 
0.00128 
-0.00159 
(0.00589) 
(0.00958) 
(0.00824) 
(0.00684) 
(0.00296) 
(0.00999) 
Bisexual 
0.00248 
0.0159** 
0.0214*** 
0.0188*** 
0.00224 
0.0351*** 
(0.00443) 
(0.00698) 
(0.00665) 
(0.00560) 
(0.00217) 
(0.00752)    
Mean of 
Outcome 
0.041 
0.121 
0.148 
0.087 
0.013 
0.194 
N 
308202 
308202 
308202 
308202 
308202 
308202 
Notes: Data are from the Weeks 34-43 Household Pulse Survey (HPS). Each column is from a separate regression 
using the HPS person weights. Coefficients are from linear probability models. We present coefficient estimates and 
standard errors, robust to heteroskedasticity. The individual-level controls include recent job loss age, age squared, 
race, ethnicity, relationship status, the presence of a child in the household, sex, urban-rural status, gender minority 
status, the total number of children in the household, poverty status, and education (four categories). We also control 
for survey week and state of residence. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


38 
 
Appendix Figure 1: Educational Attainment, by Income Reporting 
 
 
Notes: Data are from the Weeks 34-43 Household Pulse Survey (HPS). The first bar reports the distribution of 
educational attainment for the sample that reported their income (our primary analytic sample), and the second 
reports that distribution for the sample that did not report their income.