POLICE JUDGMENTS OF 
CULPABILITY AND HOMOPHOBIA 
 
 
 
Phillip M. Lyons, Jr. 
College of Criminal Justice 
 
Christine M. Anthony 
Karen M. Davis 
Krissie Fernandez 
Angela N. Torres 
David K. Marcus 
Department of Psychology 
 
Sam Houston State University 
 
 
This study (a) presented 152 Texas police officers with a scenario in which the sexual 
orientation of a criminal suspect was manipulated (b) assessed homophobia in this 
sample, and (c) examined the relationship between homophobia and the officers’ 
judgments of the suspect’s culpability.  Although the officers were no more likely to 
report that they would arrest a gay suspect than a heterosexual suspect, those who read a 
scenario with a gay suspect were more likely to indicate that they thought he should be 
convicted than those presented with a heterosexual suspect.  In general, the officers in our 
study endorsed homophobic attitudes and those officers who reported higher levels of 
homophobia were more likely to think that the gay suspect should be convicted. 
 
 
 
Although considerable psychological research on legal 
decision making has focused on juries, less attention has been paid 
to decisions that are made in the earlier stages of legal proceedings. 
 
 
We gratefully acknowledge the assistance of Rita Watkins, Executive Director 
of the Bill Blackwood Law Enforcement Management Institute of Texas (LEMIT), in 
granting access to the participants, David Webb, Assistant Director of LEMIT for 
coordinating that access across programs, and Jacklyn Merchant (posthumously), 
Director of LEMIT's Office of Law Enforcement Training for coordinating scheduling of 
participation.  We also thank Wendy McCoy for assistance with data collection and data 
entry. 
 
 
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Phillip Lyons, 
College of Criminal Justice, Sam Houston State University, Huntsville, TX 77341-2296; 
e-mail: plyons@shsu.edu. 
© Applied Psychology in Criminal Justice, 2005, 1(1) 
 


2 
POLICE JUDGMENTS 
 
Studies focusing on extra-legal factors that influence police 
officers’ decision making may be especially important because (a) 
police officers may detain citizens without formally arresting them 
(Walker, 1993), (b) most criminal proceedings begin when a police 
officer arrests a suspect, (c) officers often have considerable 
discretion about whether to make an arrest (Kleinig, 1996), (d) 
officers can encourage or discourage victims from pressing charges 
(Walker, 1993), and (e) through their testimony before grand juries 
 and petit juries, police officers play an important role in 
determining whether a defendant is indicted and convicted. 
 
 
Much of the police discretion literature has focused on the 
conditions that permit discretion and on the question of whether 
police discretion is desirable.  In a seminal paper on police 
discretion, J. Goldstein (1960) noted that for a variety of reasons, 
budgetary, personnel, and even investigative (e.g., shielding an 
informer from arrest), full enforcement of the law is not 
realistically possible.  Similarly, Dow (1981) has noted that there 
simply are not enough police officers to patrol the community 
enforcing every law in existence, and even if there were, the courts 
and the prison system could not manage the massive influx of 
offenders.  Reiman (1996) has argued that police discretion is not 
justified because by conflating legislative, judicial and executive 
power it becomes a threat to liberty.  In contrast, Herman 
Goldstein (1993) has argued that realistic, publicly discussed 
guidelines about arrest decisions could “substantially improve the 
quality of [police] performance” (p. 58). 
 
 
Even if full enforcement is not practically possible, most 
would agree that police discretion is problematic if it is applied in a 
manner that discriminates improperly.  McGregor (1996) has 
observed “differential treatment of members of minority groups is 
probably the largest area of abuse of police discretion” (p. 58).   
Given concerns about racial profiling, it is not surprising that much 
of the extant research on bias and extra-legal variables in the 
exercise of police discretion has focused on racial factors.  There is 
some evidence suggesting that police officers are more likely to 
arrest African American suspects than White suspects.  For 
example, Stradling, Tuohy, and Harper (1990) asked police 
© Applied Psychology in Criminal Justice, 2005, 1(1) 


 
LYONS, ET AL. 
3 
officers to read a vignette where a motorist had been stopped for 
exceeding the speed limit.  The officers were given a list of 40 
items and asked to indicate how much each item would influence 
their decisions whether to arrest the individual.  Consistent with 
concerns that the police may engage in racial profiling and target 
African Americans for “driving while black,” they found that 
ethnic qualities associated with African Americans were some of 
the most influential items.  Similarly, Powell (1990) found that 
officers who read a vignette that manipulated the race of the 
suspect were more punitive to African American suspects than 
Caucasian suspects.  
 
 
However, researchers have yet to examine whether there is 
a similar bias against homosexual suspects.  Although sexual 
orientation is not visibly apparent in the same way that race or 
ethnicity may be, there is considerable concern within the gay and 
lesbian community about police bias.  For example, because they 
are concerned that the police will not take their complaints 
seriously and may even respond with hostility, gay men and 
lesbians often do not report hate crimes (Berrill, 1993) and are less 
likely to report hate crimes than nonbias crimes to the police 
(Herek, Gillis, & Cogan, 1999).  Burke (1996) noted that many gay 
men and lesbians have negative impressions of police officers 
because they associate officers with harassment and abuse.  Arnott 
(2000) reported that during interviews with police officers the 
officers reported a variety of homophobic attitudes and 
misconceptions (but unfortunately he did not report any summary 
statistics on the prevalence of homophobia among the officers he 
interviewed).  Some have observed that the police themselves may 
act as perpetrators of anti-gay violence (Comstock, 1991; Nardi & 
Bolton, 1991).  Furthermore, because homophobic attitudes are 
more prevalent and socially acceptable than racist attitudes (e.g., 
Kite, 1994), officers may be more willing to express and act on 
these attitudes when using their discretion. 
 
 
Despite concerns that police officers may be biased against 
gay men and lesbians, there has been surprisingly little empirical 
research examining this topic.  There is evidence that college 
student law enforcement majors are more homophobic than prelaw 
© Applied Psychology in Criminal Justice, 2005, 1(1) 
 


4 
POLICE JUDGMENTS 
 
or paralegal majors (Olivero & Murataya, 2001), but we could not 
find any published study in which actual police officers completed 
a measure of homophobia.  In fact there was only one study that 
attempted to address this issue with a sample of police officers.  
Because of concerns that officers might not respond to same sex 
domestic violence in the same way that they respond to 
heterosexual domestic violence, Younglove, Kerr, and Vitello 
(2002) provided officers with vignettes in which they varied the 
gender and sexual orientations of the couples.  They found no 
differences in the officers’ responses regardless of whether the 
couple was heterosexual, gay, or lesbian.  However, the officers 
were never asked about their own attitudes toward gay men and 
lesbians, nor were they asked how they themselves would handle 
the situation.  Instead the respondents indicated how they thought 
the officers on the scene would respond (e.g., “How likely is an 
arrest to be made by the police officers,” p. 767) and how the 
members of the couple would behave (e.g., “How likely is the 
couple to seek counseling?” p. 767).  Therefore, it is difficult to 
know whether these null findings are “reasons for cautious 
optimism” (p. 760).  
  
 
Like the Younglove et al. (2002) study, we also provided 
police officers with scenarios in which we varied the sexual 
orientation of the suspect.  However, unlike their study, we asked 
the officers to indicate how they would respond to the situation 
themselves.  More importantly, the participants in this study also 
completed a standard measure of homophobia, which allowed us to 
examine 
the 
relationship 
between 
the 
officers’ 
reported 
homophobic attitudes and the way in which they reported they 
would respond to the case.  The primary aim of the present study 
was to examine whether the officers’ responses would vary 
depending on the sexual orientation of the suspect.  To simplify the 
design and analyses, these vignettes were limited to male suspects 
(heterosexual and gay).  Although it would have been valuable to 
have also examined responses to lesbian suspects, because gay 
men are usually rated more negatively than lesbians (e.g., Herek, 
2002a), we anticipated that we were more likely to find bias with 
male suspects. 
 
© Applied Psychology in Criminal Justice, 2005, 1(1) 


 
LYONS, ET AL. 
5 
 
Because police officers’ attitudes towards homosexuality 
have not been assessed in prior studies, a secondary aim of this 
study was to examine whether police officers endorse homophobic 
attitudes and to examine whether homophobia in police officers is 
related to any demographic variables. Polls of the general 
population have found that negative attitudes toward gay men, 
lesbians, and bisexuals are associated with lower levels of 
education, increased age, frequent religious attendance, and living 
in rural communities (e.g., Herek, 1994; Herek, 2002b; Plugge-
Foust & Strickland, 2000; Yang, 1998). 
 
METHOD 
 
Participants 
 
The participants were 152 self-reportedly heterosexual 
Texas police officers (141 men and 11 women).  The proportion of 
men and women in our sample (93% and 7%, respectively) 
roughly parallels the proportion of men and women in law 
enforcement statewide (90% and 10%, respectively; Federal 
Bureau of Investigation, 2003).  The officers had come from 
throughout the state to attend specialized training on leadership 
and management for police chiefs and commanders at a police 
command college. During the course of the scheduled training, a 
brief announcement was made inviting them to participate in the 
study. A regularly-scheduled break was extended to allow the 
participants time to complete the study. 
 
 
The officers ranged in age from 26 to 67 (M = 44.7 , SD = 
9.6), with an average of 19.0 years of police experience (ranging 
from 2 to 45 years).  Most participants were White (81%), with 7% 
Black, 11% Hispanic, and the remaining participants either 
indicating “other” or omitting this item (1%).  These proportions 
appear to be similar to nationwide figures (77%, 12%, 8%, and 3% 
for White, Black, Hispanic, and Other, respectively; Bureau of 
Justice Statistics, 2003).  Most of the officers were married (n = 
128), 16 were divorced or separated, 2 widowed, and 6 were 
single.  Twenty-eight officers were employed in urban 
departments, 53 in suburban departments, and 68 in rural 
departments. 
© Applied Psychology in Criminal Justice, 2005, 1(1) 
 


6 
POLICE JUDGMENTS 
 
Procedure 
 
After giving informed consent and completing a 
demographic questionnaire, the participants read one of two 
fictitious incident reports.  These reports were loosely based on 
Kohlberg’s (1981) Heinz scenario, in which a defendant has been 
arrested for stealing an unaffordable drug cocktail from a drugstore 
to save his dying partner.  In the scenario, the suspect is caught 
trying to steal the drugs by the owner of the drugstore, who serves 
as the complaining witness.  The suspect explains that although the 
drugs only cost the owner $200, the owner has kept secret how the 
drugs should be combined and charges $2,000 for the cocktail.  
The suspect also reports that he had raised $1,000 to buy the drugs, 
but the owner refused to sell them to him.  In one condition, the 
defendant’s partner was his wife (n = 71) and in the other it was 
his male domestic partner (n = 81). The participants indicated 
whether they thought the defendant did the right thing by breaking 
into the store, whether he had a duty to do so, and whether he 
should be (a) arrested, (b) indicted, and (c) convicted.   
 
 
Finally the participants completed the 10-item Attitudes 
Toward Gay Men (ATGM) subscale of the Attitudes Toward Gays 
and Lesbians Scale (ATGLS; Herek, 1994).  Participants read a 
series of statements (e.g., “Male homosexuality is a perversion”) 
and used a 9-point scale to indicate their level of agreement (-4 = 
strongly disagree to 4 = strongly agree).  Scores can range from      
-40 to 40, with positive scores indicating homophobic attitudes and 
negative scores indicative of less biased attitudes.  Three of the 
items are reverse scored.  The ATGM subscale was internally 
consistent in this administration (α = .92). 
 
 
RESULTS 
 
Demographic Variations in Homophobia 
 
Overall, based on their scores on the ATGM subscale (M = 
12.1, SD = 15.6), the officers tended to endorse homophobic 
statements. However, level of reported homophobia varied 
depending on the type of community in which the officer worked.  
Participants from rural departments reported considerably higher 
© Applied Psychology in Criminal Justice, 2005, 1(1) 


 
LYONS, ET AL. 
7 
levels of homophobia (M =16.8, SD = 16.4), than did officers from 
suburban (M = 8.8, SD = 13.8) or urban (M = 7.9, SD = 14.5) 
departments, F (2, 139) = 5.30, p < .01, MSE = 229.2; responses by 
officers from suburban departments were not significantly different 
from responses by officers from urban departments.  Homophobia 
was not significantly related to the participants’ age (r = .00, ns), 
level of education (rs = -.12, ns), or income (r = -.10, ns).  
However, homophobia was related to religiosity.  Participants who 
indicated that they attended religious services more frequently also 
endorsed more homophobic attitudes (rs = .30, p < .001).  The 
homogeneity of our sample (i.e., mostly White men), did not allow 
us to examine racial or gender differences in homophobia. 
 
Judgments of Morality and Culpability 
 
Virtually all of the participants (96%), regardless of the 
experimental condition indicated that they did not think that the 
defendant should have broken into the drugstore.  A similar 
percentage of the participants in the condition in which the 
defendant was gay (90%) indicated that they did not think that the 
defendant had a duty to steal the drug for his partner.  However, 
when asked whether they would steal the drug to save their 
spouse’s life, 34% of participants in all conditions indicated that 
they would.  
 
 
The vast majority of the officers believed that the defendant 
should be arrested (82.1%) and this belief did not vary with the 
defendant’s sexual orientation, χ2 (1, N = 145) = .12, ns.  Similarly, 
there were no differences in the proportion of participants who 
believed that the defendant should be indicted (86%) relative to his 
sexual orientation, χ2 (1, N = 145) = .47, ns.  In contrast, only 72% 
of the officers indicated that the defendant should be convicted, 
and the ratio of officers who thought that the defendant should or 
should not be convicted varied depending on the defendant’s 
sexual orientation, χ2 (1, N = 145) = 4.01, p < .05.  Thus, whereas 
64% of the officers who read about the heterosexual defendant 
indicated that he should be convicted, 79% of those who read 
about the homosexual defendant thought that he should be 
convicted.  Finally, only 19% of the participants believed that the 
defendant should receive the maximum sentence for his crime, and 
© Applied Psychology in Criminal Justice, 2005, 1(1) 
 


8 
POLICE JUDGMENTS 
 
this belief was also not related to the defendant’s sexual 
orientation, χ2 (1, N = 134) = .29, ns.   
 
 
We performed a direct logistic regression analysis with 
decision to convict as the outcome1 and (a) ATGM scores, (b) 
experimental condition, and (c) the interaction between ATGM 
scores and experimental condition as three predictors.  Compared 
to a constant-only model, the full model with all three predictors 
was statistically significant, χ2 (3, N = 133) = 11.25, p = .01, 
however, the model accounted for only a modest amount of 
variance in the decision to convict with Nagelkerke R2 = .12.  
Table 1 reports the regression coefficients, Wald’s statistics, and 
odds ratios for the three predictors.  Consistent with the 
aforementioned chi-square tests, the defendant’s sexual orientation 
reliably predicted whether officers thought that he should be 
convicted, z = .4.45, p < .05.  However, more interesting was the 
interaction between defendant sexual orientation and ATGM 
scores.  This interaction can be understood by examining the point-
biserial correlations between ATGM scores and decision whether 
the defendant should be convicted (dummy-coded with 0 = acquit 
and 1 = convict) for the officers in each of the two 
 
Table 1. 
 
Logistic Regression Analysis of Decision to Convict as a Function of Defendant Sexual 
Orientation (DSO) and Respondent Homophobia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
95% Confidence 
 
 
 
 
   Wald 
       Odds           Interval for Odds Ratio
      Variable 
 
B 
    Test  
       Ratio  
Upper 
Lower 
 
DSOa 
 
 
.43 
  4.45* 
 
    1.54  
2.30 
1.03 
ATGM 
 
 
.14 
      .45 
    1.15  
1.73 
  .76 
DSO X ATGM 
 
.51 
    6.02* 
 
    1.67  
2.51  
1.11 
(Constant)  
 
    .93          
  20.75 
______________________________________________________ 
 
 
Note.  Decision to convict was dummy-coded with 0 = acquit and 1 = convict.  DSO = Defendant 
Sexual Orientation; ATGM = Attitudes Toward Gay Men. 
a DSO was dummy-coded with 1 = heterosexual defendant and -1 = homosexual defendant. 
*p < .05. 
 
 
 
 
1Because there was so little variability in the officers’ judgments about whether 
the suspect should be arrested, it would not have been meaningful to examine the 
relationship between homophobia and the decision to arrest. 
 
 
© Applied Psychology in Criminal Justice, 2005, 1(1) 


 
LYONS, ET AL. 
9 
conditions.  In the heterosexual defendant condition there was no 
relationship between homophobia and the officers’ opinions about 
whether the defendant should be convicted, r(57) = -.17, ns.  In 
contrast, in the homosexual defendant condition, officers who were 
more homophobic were more likely to believe that the defendant 
should be convicted, r(74) = .26, p < .05. 
 
DISCUSSION 
 
 
This study (a) assessed homophobia in a convenience 
sample of Texas police officers, (b) presented the officers with a 
scenario in which the sexual orientation of a criminal suspect was 
manipulated, and (c) examined the relationship between 
homophobia and the officers’ judgments of the suspect.  As far as 
we can tell, this study was the first to assess homophobia in a 
sample of police officers.  Given concerns about and distrust of the 
police within the gay and lesbian community (e.g., Berrill, 1993; 
Burke, 1996; Herek, Gillis, & Cogan, 1999), we were surprised to 
see that most claims about anti-gay bias among officers have been 
based on anecdotal reports. 
 
 
In general, the officers in our study endorsed homophobic 
attitudes.  It could be argued that because there is evidence that in 
the United States anti-gay prejudice is highest in the South (e.g., 
Herek, 2002b), the officers’ responses simply reflected community 
values.  The problem with this argument can be seen by 
considering the officers’ responses to item 2 of the ATGM scale--
“I think male homosexuals are disgusting.”  The average response 
to this item was +0.64, with 32% of the officers’ agreeing or 
strongly agreeing with this statement.  Substitute Blacks, Jews, or 
any other minority group for “homosexuals” in this statement and 
it would be clearly troubling to find 32% of officers who have been 
sworn to uphold the rights of all citizens endorsing such a bigoted 
statement about a substantial group of them. We encourage 
researchers in other jurisdictions studying bias among law 
enforcement officers to administer the ATGLS or similar 
instruments to police officers in other localities to see whether such 
biased attitudes are widespread.   
 
© Applied Psychology in Criminal Justice, 2005, 1(1) 
 


10 
POLICE JUDGMENTS 
 
 
As in polls of the general population, there was a 
significant relationship between church (virtually all of the 
participants were Christian) attendance and homophobia in our 
sample of police officers.  A number of authors have noted that 
conservative Christianity has actively encouraged homophobia 
(e.g., Berliner, 1987; Lugg, 1998) and the relationship between 
religiosity and homophobia is a robust one that has been replicated 
frequently (e.g., Herek 1994; Plugge-Foust & Strickland, 2000).  
Also consistent with findings from the general population, officers 
in rural communities reported more homophobic attitudes than 
those from urban or suburban regions.  In fact, the officers from 
rural areas produced ATGM scores that were roughly twice as high 
as those from urban or suburban communities.  In recent years 
there has been a small but growing literature examining the 
experiences of gay men and lesbians in rural communities and 
although these papers have not explicitly discussed police issues, a 
continuing theme throughout these papers has been concern about 
conservative anti-gay sentiment in rural regions (e.g., Boulden, 
2001; Smith, 1997).  Unlike prior studies of the general population, 
we did not find any relationships between homophobia and either 
age or education level.  Greater professional homogeneity (all the 
respondents were police officers) may account for these null 
findings. 
 
 
For those concerned that homophobic attitudes may 
influence police officers’ behavior, the officers’ responses to the 
vignettes are open to a glass half full or half empty interpretation.  
On the one hand, there was no indication that the police officers 
would be more likely to arrest the gay defendant than the 
heterosexual defendant or to think that he should be indicted.  This 
finding is important because it is at the level of arrest that police 
officers have the most discretion.  However, this finding is limited 
by two characteristics of the vignettes that may have restricted the 
officers’ discretion: the seriousness of the charge (i.e., a second 
degree felony) and the presence of a complaining witness.  The 
seriousness of the crime and the complainant’s preference for an 
arrest are two of the primary factors that determine whether a 
suspect will be arrested (Gottfredson & Gottfredson, 1988; Powell, 
1990).  Thus, it may not be surprising that a large majority of 
© Applied Psychology in Criminal Justice, 2005, 1(1) 


 
LYONS, ET AL. 
11 
officers indicated that they would arrest the suspect regardless of 
his sexual orientation.  
 
 
Although the sexual orientation of the suspect did not 
appear to influence the officers’ judgments about arrest and 
indictment, the officers were more likely to believe that the 
defendant should be convicted if he stole the drug for his male 
partner than if he did it for his wife.  Although it is judges and 
juries who decide whether a defendant is convicted, the arresting 
officer will almost certainly testify during the trial and his or her 
level of certainty about the defendant’s guilt may very well 
influence the trier(s) of fact.  Interestingly the relationship between 
homophobia and desire to convict was specific to the homosexual 
defendant condition.  It was not the case that more homophobic 
officers were simply more punitive and conviction prone, because 
there was no relationship between ATGM scores and decisions to 
convict in the heterosexual defendant condition.  Thus, officers 
who were more disapproving of homosexuality were more likely 
than officers who were less disapproving of homosexuality to want 
the homosexual defendant convicted. It is possible that these 
results may partly be due to our having conducted the study in 
Texas, which until recently struck down by the Supreme Court 
(Lawrence v. Texas, 2003), had sodomy laws that specifically 
criminalize homosexual activities (Texas Penal Code, 2002).  
 
Limitations and Future Research 
 
Perhaps the most obvious limitation of the present study is 
that it was restricted to a convenience sample of Texas law 
enforcement officers. The officers who participated however,  
came from around the state and represented urban, suburban, and 
rural agencies.  Along these lines, the officers in our sample seem 
to be similar demographically to the population of police officers 
statewide and nationally.  Still, future research in other states using 
a similar approach will be necessary to determine whether officers 
in other jurisdictions hold similar attitudes.  Any such studies, like 
the one reported here, will be limited in their generalizability 
because of the difficulties in making inferences about behavior 
from attitudes (Fishbein & Ajzen, 1975).  
 
 
© Applied Psychology in Criminal Justice, 2005, 1(1) 
 


12 
POLICE JUDGMENTS 
 
 
The vignette for the present study was inspired by 
Kohlberg’s (1981) classic research on moral judgments.  However, 
as previously noted, a burglary under the circumstances presented 
is a second degree felony and using such a serious crime may have 
restricted the officers’ discretion.  Future research examining less 
serious crimes, in which there may be greater police discretion, 
will be necessary to provide a more complete determination of 
whether a suspect’s sexual orientation influences police officers’ 
self-reported intentions to arrest.  Perhaps a future study using a 
vignette in which the suspect has purchased marijuana for his 
terminally ill partner might further illuminate the relationship 
between homophobia and police discretion as would studies 
involving vignettes depicting lesbian suspects.  Studies involving 
large enough samples of women police officers would also allow 
comparisons for possible gender differences in attitudes toward 
gay and lesbian suspects. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Arnott, J. S. (2000). Gays and lesbians in the criminal justice system.  In J. E. Hendricks 
& B. D. Byers (Eds.) Multicultural perspectives in criminal justice and 
criminology (pp. 222-242).  Springfield, Il.  Charles C. Thomas Publisher. 
Berliner, A. K. (1987). Sex, sin, and the church: The dilemma of homosexuality. Journal 
of Religion and Health, 26, 137-142. 
Berrill, K. (1993). Anti-gay violence: Causes, consequences, and responses. In R. J. Kelly 
(Ed.) Bias crime: American law enforcement and legal responses (pp. 151-
164).  Chicago, IL: University of Illinois at Chicago Press. 
Boulden, W. T. (2001). Gay men living in a rural environment. Journal of Gay and 
Lesbian Social Services: Issues in Practice, Policy, and Research, 12, 63-75. 
Bureau of Justice Statistics. (2003). Local police departments, 2000. Washington, DC: 
Author. 
Burke, R. A.  (1996). A matter of justice: Lesbians and gay men in law enforcement.  
New York: Routledge. 
Comstock, G. D.  (1991). Violence against lesbians and gay men.  New York: Columbia 
University Press. 
Dow, P. E. (1981).  Discretionary justice: A critical inquiry. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger 
Publishing Company. 
Federal Bureau of Investigation (2003). Crime in the United States, 2002. Washington, 
DC: Author.  
Fishbein, M., & Ajzen, I. (1975). Belief, attitude, intention, and behavior: An 
introduction to theory and research. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.  
Goldstein, H. (1993). Confronting the complexity of the police functioning. In L. E. 
Ohlin & F. J. Remington (Eds.) Discretion in criminal justice: The tension 
between individualization and uniformity (pp. 23-71). Albany, NY: State 
University of New York Press. 
© Applied Psychology in Criminal Justice, 2005, 1(1) 


 
LYONS, ET AL. 
13 
Goldstein, J. (1960). Police discretion not to invoke the criminal process: low-visibility 
decisions in the administration of justice. Yale Law Journal, 69, 544-589. 
Gottfredson, M. R., & Gottfredson, D. M. (1988). Decision making in criminal justice: 
Toward the rational exercise of discretion (2nd ed.). New York: Plenum. 
Herek, G. M. (1994). Assessing heterosexuals attitudes toward lesbians and gay men: A 
review of empirical research with the ATLG scale.  In B. Greene & G. M. 
Herek (Eds.) Lesbian and gay psychology: Theory, research and clinical 
applications (pp. 206-228). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Herek, G. M., Gillis, J. R., & Cogan, J. C. (1999). Psychological sequelae of hate-crime 
victimization among lesbian, gay, and bisexual adults.  Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology, 67,  945-951. 
Herek, G. M. (2002a).  Gender gaps in public opinion about lesbians and gay men. Public 
Opinion Quarterly, 66, 40-66. 
Herek, G. M. (2002b).  Heterosexuals’ attitudes toward bisexual men and women in the 
United States.  Journal of Sex Research, 39, 264-274.  
Kite, M. E.  (1994). When perceptions meet reality: Individual differences in reactions to 
lesbians and gay men.  In B. Greene & G. M. Herek (Eds.) Lesbian and gay 
psychology: Theory, research and clinical applications (pp. 25-53).  Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Kleinig, J. (Ed.). (1996). Handled with discretion. New York: Rowman & Littlefield 
Publishers.  
Kohlberg, L. (1981). The philosophy of moral development, New York: Harper and Row. 
Lawrence v. Texas, 539 U.S. 558 (2003). 
Lugg, C. A. (1998). The religious right and public education: The paranoid politics of 
homophobia. Educational Policy, 12, 267-284. 
McGregor, J. (1996). From the state of nature to Mayberry: The nature of police 
discretion. In J. Kleinig (Ed.) Handled with discretion (pp. 47-64).  New York: 
Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.  
Nardi, P. M., & Bolton, R. (1991). Gay-bashing: Violence and aggression against gay 
men and lesbians. In R. Baenninger (Ed.) Targets of violence and aggression 
(pp. 349-400). New York: Elsevier. 
Olivero, J. M., & Murataya, R. (2001).  Homophobia and university law enforcement 
students.  Journal of Criminal Justice Education, 12, 271-281. 
Plugge-Foust, C., & Strickland, G. (2000). Homophobia, irrationality, and Christian 
ideology: Does a relationship exist? Journal of Sex Education and Therapy, 25, 
240-244. 
Powell, D. D. (1990). A study of police discretion in six southern counties. Journal of 
Police Science and Administration, 17, 1-7. 
Reiman, J. (1996). Is police discretion justified in a free society? In J. Kleinig (Ed.) 
Handled with discretion (pp. 71-83).  New York: Rowman & Littlefield 
Publishers. 
Smith, J. D.  (1997). Working with larger systems: Rural lesbians and gays. In J. D. 
Smith & R. J. Mancoske (Eds.) Rural gays and lesbians: Building on the 
strengths of communities (pp. 13-21)  New York: Harrington Park Press. 
Stradling, S. G., Tuohy, A.P., &  Harper, K. J. (1990). Judgmental asymmetry in the 
exercise of police.  Applied Cognitive Psychology. 4,  409-421. 
Texas Penal Code, § 21.06 (2002).  
Walker, S. (1993)  Taming the system:  The control of discretion in criminal justice 1950-
1990.  New York, NY: Oxford University Press.  
Yang, A. S. (1998). From wrongs to rights: Public opinion on gay and lesbian Americans 
moves toward equality.  New York: NGLTF Policy Institute. 
© Applied Psychology in Criminal Justice, 2005, 1(1) 
 


14 
POLICE JUDGMENTS 
 
Younglove, J. A., Kerr, M. G., & Vitello, C. J. (2002).  Law enforcement officers’ 
perceptions of same sex domestic violence.  Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 
17, 760-772. 
 
 
 
Received: September 2004 
Accepted: January 2005 
 
 
Suggested Citation: 
 
Lyons, P. M., Jr., Anthony, C. M., Davis, K. M., Fernandez, K., Torres, A. N., & Marcus, 
D. K. (2005).  Police judgments of culpability and homophobia [Electronic Version].  
Applied Psychology in Criminal Justice, 1(1), 1-14. 
© Applied Psychology in Criminal Justice, 2005, 1(1)