1
July 2013
Oseguera
Importance of High School Conditions
for College Access
Leticia Oseguera1
J U L Y 2 0 1 3     N u m b e r 7
PATHWAYS to Postsecondary 
Success is a series of mixed-
methods studies of the educational 
pathways of California’s lower 
income youth. Through a series 
of research briefs and reports, the 
project aims to advance research 
on poverty, produce useful tools 
that improve educational practice, 
and inform the U.S. policy agenda 
on the relationship between 
poverty and education.
Importance of High School 
Conditions for College Access 
explores critical factors in 
preparing students for college. 
In this brief, Oseguera builds on 
a widely-used framework to set 
the stage for an empirical analysis 
of how school culture interacts 
with individual experiences to 
form students’ postsecondary 
pathways.
 
Students from low-income backgrounds are less likely than their peers to 
enroll in and complete college, thus limiting their employment prospects in a 
job market that demands increasingly higher skill levels.  Often, reform efforts 
designed to address this problem focus on individual factors such as academic 
performance or parental education level.  But an over-emphasis on student 
characteristics at the expense of attention to school culture and climate under-
mines a more complete understanding of student achievement. By exploring 
high school institutional factors—including academic curriculum, teacher 
qualifications, and school commitment to college access—we can explain the 
variation in the postsecondary pathways of students from low-income back­
grounds more fully than if we focus only on family or “cultural” factors.2 If we 
overlook what is going on within schools, we may limit the potential impact 
of current policy initiatives on the academic success of low-income students. 
A focus on strengthening schools is a more proactive approach to ensuring 
student success. 
Earlier findings on the four-year trajectories of a national cohort of tenth 
graders illustrate profound differences in the pathways of students from 
low- and higher-income families and the central role of their high school 
experiences in preparing them for a range of postsecondary options.3
In previous analyses, only 14% of students raised in poverty completed a 
college preparatory curriculum when they were in high school, while close to a 
third (32%) of students whose families were not in poverty did so.  A majority 
(57%) of lower-income students who finished high school without completing 
this type of curriculum pursued postsecondary education at the two-year level; 
just 34% enrolled in four-year institutions. In contrast, lower-income students 
who had completed an academic concentrator curriculum were more likely 
to enroll in four-year schools (75%) than in two-year colleges (23%). Higher-
income students, on the other hand, largely entered four-year colleges and 
universities, whether they had (84%) or had not (49%) completed an academic 
concentrator curriculum. This previously published research is a stark reminder 
of the importance of school conditions in determining the obstacles that 
students face as they prepare for post-high school education and a range of 
career options. 
This research brief builds on the earlier descriptive analyses to inform future 
empirical work on the specific school conditions that correlate with high levels 


2
Importance of High School Conditions for College Access
of college enrollment. Specifically, I examine a set 
of school-level factors that help explain the striking 
divergences. I use a conceptual framework developed 
by Jeannie Oakes, who identified seven critical condi­
tions in our nation’s high schools for creating equity in 
access to college.4  Oakes’ seven key conditions can 
be categorized into three clusters around high-quality 
instruction, a school-based commitment to college 
access, and a shared responsibility for college access 
and choice. 
Elements of Oakes’ seven conditions have been 
empirically established in the literature, but 
they have not previously been combined into a 
comprehensive portrait. Moreover, they have not yet 
been operationalized using a nationally representative 
database, something that would allow us to further 
untangle which school-level variables in particular 
most limit or expand college access for low-
income students—a population that continues to be 
understudied.5  Thus, I draw from a wide range of 
disciplines (e.g., sociology, economics, and education) 
and subject areas (e.g., educational policy, college 
access and choice, and high-school performance) 
to describe the current evidence in the empirical 
literature that links these seven critical conditions 
to college-going among all students, regardless of 
socioeconomic background. 
With an eye toward a more comprehensive analysis 
of Oakes’ framework, I also identify measures in the 
Education Longitudinal Study (ELS)—an ongoing, 
multilevel study conducted by the National Center for 
Education Statistics—that conceptually fit under each 
condition. These measures can be used to assess 
quantitatively whether the seven conditions exist in 
particular high schools and how they collectively and 
individually affect students’ postsecondary pathways. 
Ultimately, I establish that there is substantial 
empirical evidence to use Oakes’ school conditions 
framework as a foundation for understanding college-
going. It is also clear that a quantitative test of the 
existence and impact of these school conditions 
is warranted and necessary in order to more fully 
understand school context and to enable schools 
to effectively develop and support students’ college 
aspirations and to prepare them—academically and 
otherwise—for a range of postsecondary options. 
High-Quality Academic Instruction
An effective school environment is perhaps the most 
basic ingredient in the preparation of students for their 
postsecondary pathways.  An effective school must 
offer a rigorous academic curriculum, employ qualified 
teachers, and be housed in a safe and adequate 
facility. The value of these three conditions is strongly 
supported in the literature.
Adapted Model of Oakes’ 
Seven Critical Conditions For Equity
HIGH-QUALITY ACADEMIC INSTRUCTION
• Rigorous academic curriculum to give stu­
dents the skills, knowledge, and credits to en­
ter and succeed in college.
• Qualified teachers who engage students 
in intellectually challenging work and bridge 
home cultures with school requirements.
• Safe and adequate school facilities so that 
students and teachers can devote their ener­
gies to learning and teaching.
SCHOOL-BASED COMMITMENT TO 
COLLEGE ACCESS
• A college-going school culture characterized 
by high expectations, rigorous instruction, and 
other formalized supports.
• Intensive academic and social supports that 
enable students to negotiate the academic 
pipeline.
SHARED RESPONSIBILITY FOR COLLEGE 
ACCESS AND CHOICE
• Opportunities to develop a multicultural col­
lege-going identity that provides confidence 
and skills without asking students to sacrifice 
who they are.
• Family-neighborhood-school connections 
that recognize all three as valuable resources 
for students.


3
July 2013
Oseguera
Rigorous Academic Curriculum
Advanced courses not only foster academic 
achievement, they are a precondition to college 
admission. As Oakes notes, exposure to high-level 
academic classes, including algebra in middle school 
and college preparatory and Advanced Placement 
(AP) courses in high school, creates an environment 
of achievement that leads to desirable academic 
outcomes for all students. 
	
Early exposure to algebra significantly increases 
achievement.6
	
Controlling for academic ability, students taking 
algebra by the eighth grade score higher on the 
SAT I and are more likely to attend college and 
remain in a mathematics pathway when compared 
to their peers who take algebra later or not at all. 
Both district- and national-level data indicate that 
all students realize achievement gains through 
instruction in algebra. If students are provided with 
opportunities to enroll in this gateway course, their 
likelihood of attending college increases. 
	
Students’ ability to access AP courses reflects a 
school’s commitment to college-going.7
	
Scholars have observed a positive relationship 
between the rigor of students’ academic 
coursework in high school and their movement 
through college. Specifically, the presence of AP 
courses indicates a school’s curricular intensity 
and allows students to earn college credit while 
in high school, moving them closer to achieving 
postsecondary degrees. The College Board 
identified a positive correlation between AP 
coursework and higher grades once students 
enroll in college. 
	
Schools serving low-income students offer 
fewer AP courses than schools serving more 
affluent communities. Importantly, expanding 
AP coursework does signal a commitment to 
college-going, but studies have documented that 
additional access does not ensure students are 
prepared to succeed in these courses, or that 
teachers are sufficiently qualified to teach them. 
Thus, it is not simply a matter of quantity, but also 
of quality.
Qualified Teachers
As Oakes notes, all students deserve teachers who 
are “knowledgeable, experienced, and fully certified,” 
largely because they are more capable of “teaching 
[that] makes knowledge accessible to students 
from diverse backgrounds.”8 Thus, this section 
summarizes current literature that relates teachers’ 
subject knowledge, experience, and certification 
to students’ academic achievement. While the 
literature demonstrates a correlation between teacher 
qualifications, a rigorous academic curriculum, and 
college access, it also shows a connection between 
school conditions and teacher quality. Specifically, 
safe and adequate school facilities make it easier to 
recruit and retain the qualified teachers that Oakes 
notes are critical to college attendance.
	
Teacher knowledge and experience are associ­
ated with student achievement.9
	
Empirical research often suggests a relationship 
between teachers’ subject knowledge, the depth 
of their subject area instruction in undergradu­
ate and graduate degree programs, and student 
achievement. However, a meta-analysis of stud­
ies documenting various teacher educational 
improvement initiatives points to the difficulty in 
establishing which aspects of these initiatives lead 
to improved teaching practices. In other words, 
these factors matter, but their precise impact is dif­
ficult to measure because they are often conflated 
with other factors. Nonetheless, the association 
between teacher experience and student achieve­
ment is consistently borne out.
	
The association between teacher certification 
and student achievement is not clear.10
	
Well-resourced schools are better able to 
attract certified teachers—a finding repeatedly 
documented in analyses of national datasets. 
There is no clear consensus, however, regarding 
the role of teacher certification in student 
achievement. Nevertheless, certification reflects, at 
minimum, that a teaching professional has secured 
adequate training to be present in the classroom. 
As such, it is a critical public policy issue and I 
include it as a component of Oakes’ conditions. 


4
Importance of High School Conditions for College Access
Safe and Adequate School Facilities
Oakes defines safe and adequate school facilities 
as “schools that are free of overcrowding, violence, 
unsafe and unsanitary conditions, and other features 
of school climates that diminish achievement and 
access to college.”11  The majority of the literature in 
this area describes the impact of safe and adequate 
school facilities on short-term student performance, 
and that is therefore my focus here. 
	
Smaller class size is related to higher student 
achievement, although recent evidence points to 
a lack of consensus on this issue.12
	
Insights from educational psychology indicate that 
deviations from optimal learning environments, 
including those related to class size, produce 
negative results. Indeed, there is some evidence 
to suggest a connection between class size and 
student achievement at a range of grade levels. 
Although a recent California study showed no 
achievement improvements related to class size 
reduction, many scholars continue to advocate for 
smaller classes to facilitate greater student-teacher 
contact and for its connection to other outcomes 
such as increased college enrollment—a key focus 
of this work.
	
School violence suppresses student achieve­
ment.13
	
The relationship between schooling and violence 
has received considerable attention in the 
literature, especially in recent years. Studies 
confirm Oakes’ claim that school violence has a 
suppressive effect on achievement. School-based 
violence—as defined by student perceptions of 
safety in and around school, and of substance 
use among school peers—is associated with a 
reduction in standardized test scores for pre-
secondary school students. Students who report 
being frequently harassed have a grade point 
average approximately one half-letter grade lower 
than students who have not been harassed. And 
10th graders who have been victims of violent acts 
are likely to be less engaged in school and they 
perform at lower levels than their peers. Other 
studies have linked the threat of violence in the 
community to depressed achievement.  
	
A school’s physical environment influences 
student learning.14
	
Though the quality of school facilities may seem 
qualitatively different from school crowding and 
violence, Oakes suggests its centrality to college-
going in part because of its obvious connections 
to other elements of safe and adequate schooling. 
For example, older buildings are more common in 
school districts that cannot afford to build newer, 
larger facilities or maintain low teacher-to-student 
ratios, resulting in school crowding. Some scholars 
also argue that well-maintained school buildings 
perform a critical role in the creation of student 
and faculty morale.  More directly, however, a 
significant body of literature suggests that a 
school’s physical environment influences student 
learning. In district and statewide studies, there 
is a consistent relationship between the quality of 
the building—as measured by items ranging from 
leaky roofs and poor flooring—and the availability 
of technology and internet/intranet utilization and 
student achievement. 
School-Based Commitment to 
College Access
Oakes suggests that a sustained school-based 
commitment to college attendance for all students 
is linked to two key things: a college-going school 
culture and academic and social support. First, 
as students form college aspirations and connect 
those aspirations to concrete strategies necessary 
for success, they need “teachers, administrators, 
parents, and students [who] expect students to have 
all the experiences they need for high achievement 
and college preparation.”  This will lead students to 
“believe that college is for them.”15  Thus, I review 
literature related to the effects of others’ expectations 
on students’ college aspirations and attendance. 
The suggestion is that adults’ expectations create an 
environment conducive to college attendance, and 
hence, foster a college-going culture.
Second, Oakes claims a college-going school culture 
is one that provides intensive academic and social 
supports.  She defines these as the “networks of 
adults and peers who help access tutors, material 
resources, counseling services, summer academic 
programs, SAT prep, coaching about college 
admission and financial aid, and other timely 


5
July 2013
Oseguera
assistance.”16  Broadly speaking, these headings 
can be subsumed under three categories related to: 
(1) additional academic support and programs like 
Talent Search, GEAR UP, and Upward Bound;17 (2) co-
curricular resources indirectly associated with college 
attendance; (3) and high-quality college counseling 
and test preparation programs. 
College-Going School Culture
A high school with a college-going culture embodies 
expectations and provides resources that ensure 
that students are prepared for a full range of 
postsecondary options when they graduate. This 
culture is created by a network of people who 
reinforce the importance and possibility of college 
for all students. Although there are some studies 
on this topic, they are less conclusive than other 
bodies of work. Nevertheless, recent research does 
offer evidence that high schools with a college-going 
culture broaden access to college for their students. 
This type of culture relies on the contributions of 
school personnel, family, and social networks. 
	
Students’ aspirations may be influenced by the 
expectations that others hold for them.18
	
Research has long linked teacher expectations and 
student academic achievement, but the literature 
is less explicit concerning the role of teachers in 
fostering students’ college aspirations. While some 
studies suggest negative teacher expectations 
have a persistent negative effect on student 
aspirations to attend college, others indicate the 
effect can be mitigated by a range of influences, 
including the intercession of other school 
personnel. Claims concerning the importance of 
surrounding students with a network of supportive 
adults are reinforced in the sociological literature, 
which indicates a critical factor in college 
attendance is the combined influence of other 
individuals who are significant in students’ lives. 
	
Family knowledge of college-going affects stu­
dents’ college attendance.19
	
Scholars have suggested important linkages 
between a family’s knowledge related to preparing 
for and attending college and a student’s eventual 
college enrollment; specifically, when they are 
informed about the benefits of college attendance 
and about financial aid, and when they know 
others who have attended and succeeded in 
college, families can help students transition from 
aspiring to attend college to actually enrolling. 
Likewise, some studies that highlight the 
importance of parental expectations in predicting 
students’ college aspirations—and note that 
schools and teachers should acknowledge and 
build upon these expectations—also indicate 
that the effects may be tempered if parents have 
limited knowledge of postsecondary education.
	
Extended social networks may play a role in 
fostering students’ college aspirations.20
	
Some scholars expand the concept of family 
to include peers, key school personnel, or 
other agents who help in the college process 
by shaping students’ knowledge about the 
value of educational attainment. Students who 
have families with limited college knowledge 
or resources often rely on schools to provide 
“navigational capital.”21  Moreover, many types of 
cultural knowledge often thought to be unrelated 
to college attendance—including language 
maintenance or the ability to code switch between 
mainstream and non-dominant cultures—might 
in fact play an important role in fostering college 
aspirations. 
Intensive Academic and Social Supports
To test the applicability of Oakes’ claim that intensive 
academic and social supports encourage students 
to attend college, I sought evidence of the effects of 
programs in support of academic achievement, co-
curricular resources for students, and high-quality 
college counseling and test preparation programs.
	
Academic support programs foster higher levels 
of college attendance and completion.22
	
Programs designed to accelerate acclimation 
to college-level work and raise expectations of 
gifted students have a long history and can be 
clearly linked to gains in academic achievement. 
Many see these programs as an important means 
of cultivating college aspirations and promoting 
equality of access, though they are also often 
critiqued for failing to redress stratification in 
access because they reify distinctions between 
high- and low-achieving students. Nonetheless, 


6
Importance of High School Conditions for College Access
they have been evaluated with randomized 
controlled trials that demonstrate they have a 
positive influence on college attendance and 
completion.
	
Based on these programs’ success, other 
initiatives designed specifically for low-income, 
minority, and possible first-generation college 
students are increasingly being adopted. For 
example, programs like GEAR UP represent critical 
partnerships between high schools and colleges 
and are designed to foster equity of access. Policy 
briefs have demonstrated the success of GEAR 
UP in raising both college aspirations and eventual 
college attendance. Similar effects have been 
observed for Upward Bound.23 
	
Participation in afterschool activities predicts 
college attendance.24
	
It is broadly assumed that, within a framework 
of holistic college admissions, the ability to 
participate in afterschool athletic, music, and 
academic programs matters a great deal. We know 
participation in extra- and co-curricular activities is 
predictive of college persistence and success, and 
also that the ability to participate in these activities 
is conditional on family income background. These 
findings hold true at the high school level as well, 
and serve to predict college attendance. 
	
Although access to college counseling is associ­
ated with college attendance, most low-income 
students do not receive it.25
	
College counseling represents an important means 
by which students accumulate the knowledge and 
relationships associated with college attendance. 
Unfortunately, those most in need may be the least 
likely to receive it, because counselors at under-
resourced schools often have caseloads as high as 
three times the recommended number. Scholars 
find access to counselors via program participation 
improves the odds of college attendance for all 
students, regardless of family income level—in 
fact, those in poverty experience the greatest 
gains.  Such programs are likely providing 
students with much needed information, skills, 
and relationships that are valued in the college-
going process. This cultural capital helps them to 
navigate under-resourced school environments.
	
Standardized test preparation indirectly predicts 
college enrollment, yet low-income students 
tend not to access supplemental services.26
	
Students from lower-income backgrounds are 
less likely than their more affluent peers to have 
access to programs designed to prepare them 
for college entrance examinations. Though test 
preparation programs have been shown to have 
a minimal effect on actual test scores, they are 
nonetheless reflective of the larger deployment of 
resources to support students’ college attendance. 
Unfortunately, statistical analyses of students’ test 
performance typically focus on family background 
and formal schooling processes and generally do 
not consider the contribution of private coaching, 
tutoring, test-preparation classes, sitting for 
practice exams, etc. These educational activities 
outside of school may help to explain persistent 
gaps in test scores and subsequent achievement 
of test-takers—gaps that lead to increased 
advantages in the college application process.  In 
other words, family income background can work 
indirectly through a family’s ability (or inability) to 
purchase more expensive educational supports for 
its children.  
Shared Responsibility for College 
Access and Choice
The development of a shared responsibility for 
college access and choice depends on two 
opportunities: (1) for each student to develop what 
Oakes calls a “multicultural college-going identity” 
and (2) for connections between the student’s 
family, neighborhood, and school to foster college 
attendance. 
Developing a Multicultural College-Going 
Identity
According to Oakes, a multicultural college-going 
identity develops when “students see college-going 
as integral to their identities.”  She suggests this 
comes about when students acquire the “confidence 
and skills to negotiate college without sacrificing 
their own identity and connections with their home 
communities.”27  In line with this definition, I review 
literature on cultural agents, socialization, and 
culturally relevant pedagogy.


7
July 2013
Oseguera
	
Early, ongoing socialization fosters the success 
of minority students.28
	
The vital role of socialization (i.e., the process of 
acquiring norms, skills, values, and behaviors) in 
college-going and college success has long been 
recognized. In the past, this recognition has led 
researchers to focus on students’ integration into 
collegiate norms after admission. But more recent 
work has suggested socialization is an ongoing 
process that begins before college and continues 
throughout its duration. The normative college-
going experience includes socialization with 
individuals who have attended college and who 
can share college experiences with prospective 
college attendees. Students whose high school 
experiences do not include this “anticipatory 
socialization” struggle to adapt to the college 
environment. 
	
Some scholars suggest that cultural agents—
individuals capable of translating institutional 
mores into a student’s home culture—represent a 
viable means of fostering minority student success. 
Studies have also demonstrated the importance of 
students’ ability to see themselves in the college 
context through the success of others from similar 
backgrounds. Furthermore, recent socialization 
research suggests myriad influences (e.g., familial, 
occupational, organizational) play a role in the 
creation of a multicultural college-going identity.
	
Culturally relevant pedagogy fosters student 
achievement.29
	
Broadly speaking, culturally relevant pedagogy 
is rooted in the notion that better teaching and 
learning occurs when, regardless of the racial 
or ethnic composition of a classroom, students 
and teachers see themselves in the curriculum. 
Students whose racial and ethnic identities are 
affirmed in the classroom are more likely to 
achieve academically than similarly academically 
qualified students who do not receive these 
messages. Conversely, where culturally competent 
faculty and staff are lacking and representation of 
positive racial/ethnic contributions in curriculum 
and marketing materials is limited, students 
may experience a sense of isolation (although 
investigators have identified “protective factors” 
and conditions that appear to alleviate the risk 
of student failure due to discrimination, feeling 
unwelcomed in school, and limited access to 
important adults).  Such key relationships help 
promote acculturation styles that moderate the 
effects of racial segregation, economic marginality, 
and institutionalized racism. 
Connections Among Families, Neighborhoods, 
and Schools Around College-Going
As Oakes explains, families, neighborhoods, and 
schools must “work together to ensure that all families 
have access to essential knowledge of college 
preparation, admission, and financial aid.”30  With 
this in mind, I review recent literature that explores 
conceptualizations of community resources as 
aspects of the college-going process.
	
Many forms of cultural capital can enable stu­
dents to navigate pathways to college.31
	
Cultural capital generally represents the knowledge 
and values of a community’s dominant class. 
Variations in cultural capital represent not deficits 
to be rectified, but opportunities for understanding 
the world differently. Research shows that students 
find alternative pathways to college and can rely 
on the support of family members who may not 
possess the forms of cultural capital typically 
associated with college-going. Perhaps most 
importantly, these findings suggest the need to 
transcend deficit models of college choice to 
include a broader definition of what counts as 
capital to capture behaviors and experiences not 
noted in more traditional definitions of capital. 
Some examples would be the ability to navigate 
complicated educational systems in a non-linear 
fashion or expanding ideas that college only 
represents residential four-year campuses. 
	
Low-income parents may not be able to provide 
the necessary resources to enable students to 
pursue further education, so communities and 
schools become even more important in the 
process.32
	
Recent college attendance literature that 
focuses on the experiences of students of 
color has embraced an alternative, broader 
conceptualization of community resources. Some 
scholars find that lower-income families actively 


8
Importance of High School Conditions for College Access
encourage their children to complete their college 
education, even when they themselves lack the 
knowledge necessary within the dominant cultural 
framework to help their children successfully 
transition into postsecondary opportunities. 
They rely instead on other parents and families, 
interacting in schools, churches, and their 
communities, to gather and share important 
college knowledge. 
ELS Variables Associated with Oakes’ 
Critical Conditions for Equity
An important next step is quantitative assessment to 
determine whether Oakes’ seven conditions exist in 
particular high schools, and how they collectively and 
individually affect students’ postsecondary pathways. 
The Education Longitudinal Study (ELS), conducted 
by the National Center for Education Statistics 
(NCES), follows a national sample of youth as they 
transition from high school into work and college. In 
2002, the NCES surveyed 14,000 United States tenth 
graders attending public, religious, and private high 
schools. These same respondents were surveyed 
again in 2004, and for a third time in 2006. Their 
responses are weighted to represent the population of 
tenth graders nationally.33 
The ELS contains a range of variables that measure 
the extent to which students have access to and 
partake in the seven critical conditions described 
in this brief. It is a multilevel study that collects 
information from students and their parents, as 
well as the students’ high school teachers and 
administrators. Table 1 summarizes specific variables 
that lend themselves well to an analysis of how these 
conditions do or do not contribute to postsecondary 
success for lower-income students.
Conclusion and Next Steps 
in the Research
Through an integrative literature review, I have de­
scribed sound support for the seven critical high 
school conditions described by Oakes; together they 
represent key school-level factors that can facilitate 
students’ transitions to college.  The scholarly inquiry 
that has emerged in the decade since Oakes first 
proposed this framework supports the assertion that 
this is a valid foundation for broad-scale, quantitative 
analysis that could change the focus of policy and 
practice in this area.  
With an eye toward expanded inquiry into 
how the factors in Oakes’ model may collectively 
influence actual student college enrollment behavior, I 
have identified measures in the Education Longitudi­
nal Survey that correspond to each of the seven con­
ditions. This framework will allow researchers to begin 
to integrate the insights of qualitative researchers and 
educational theorists with the quantitative methods 
and empirical data presently favored by foundations 
and policymakers. Research that utilizes a model that 
focuses on schools and communities—social orga­
nizations that can be readily targeted for policy and 
funding interventions—has greater potential to shape 
policies that can improve the educational achievement 
of low-income students.
While extensive research has been conducted on 
college access, few studies have offered empirical 
analyses of a comprehensive framework focused 
specifically on what happens within secondary 
classrooms and schools. An evaluation of whether the 
ELS measures identified in Table 1 operate similarly 
for lower- and higher-income students will reveal 
whether some conditions have a stronger effect than 
others on the college-going behaviors of youth who 
have grown up in poverty. Such data will allow for the 
refinement of the conceptual model and guide future 
work in this area. They will also enable policymakers 
and program designers to determine where to 
focus their efforts in order to improve the college 
preparation and enrollment of low-income students.  


9
July 2013
Oseguera
Table 1
 Selected ELS Variables That Measure Critical Conditions for Success
Variable
Rationale for Inclusion
HIGH-QUALITY INSTRUCTION
Rigorous Academic Curriculum
Student’s 10th grade curricular track (academic or vocational)
Formal measures of student abilities may predict 
students’ college pathways, as they determine the 
types of colleges they are eligible for and whether to 
apply. 
Student’s 10th grade mathematics test score
Student’s 10th grade reading test score
Student’s 10th grade academic coursework GPA
Student’s 9th–12th grade academic coursework GPA
Student’s 10th grade self-report of ever taking AP course
Teacher opinion that student works hard (opinion about individual student & 
aggregate for all students in the school)
Teachers can shed light on levels of student 
engagement with the curriculum. 
Qualified Teachers 
Percent of full-time teachers who are certified 
Teachers’ training and certification suggest their 
ability to deliver content effectively and to students of 
diverse backgrounds. Likewise, their engagement with 
students can affect student achievement.
Percent of full-time teachers who teach out of their fields 
Counselor opinion of teacher quality (% of counselors rating them “good” or 
“excellent”)
Student-faculty ratio
Parent agreement that teachers are well-trained (opinion of student’s own parent & 
aggregate for all parents of students in the school)
Teachers’ interest in students (opinion of individual student & aggregate for all 
students in the school)
Safe & Adequate School Facilities
Parent opinion of school safety (opinion of individual parent & aggregate for all 
parents in the school)
Feeling safe and comfortable in school can 
contribute to students’ ability to learn, which affects 
postsecondary pathways.
Counselor opinion about whether problematic learning environment exists
Counselor opinion about whether school has poor buildings/lack of space
Student opinion of school climate (opinion of individual student & aggregate for all 
students in the school)
SCHOOL-BASED COMMITMENT
College-Going School Culture
Student educational aspirations, ranging from high school to graduate school 
(opinion of individual student & aggregate for all students in the school) 
Students’ and parents’ expectations about educational 
attainment, as well as peers’ opinions and behaviors, 
may determine how far students actually go. Likewise, 
a school’s focus on college preparatory coursework is 
indicative of its focus on college-going.
Parent educational expectations for student, ranging from high school to graduate 
school (opinion of individual parent & aggregate for all parents in the school)
Student perception of degree to which friends value education (opinion of 
individual student & aggregate for all students in the school)
Number of student’s friends going to two-year or four-year colleges (for individual 
student & aggregate for all students in the school)
Percent of student body in AP courses
Percent of 10th graders in college preparatory program


10
Importance of High School Conditions for College Access
Intensive Academic and Social Supports
Counselor perception of whether school has good learning morale
The degree to which students are afforded a space 
conducive to rigorous learning may affect college-
going. Likewise, teachers’ expectations of students 
and parent expectations (as evidenced by their levels 
of involvement, support, and planning) can also 
influence college-going.
Student opinion that teachers expect success (opinion of individual student & 
aggregate for all students in the school)
Parent report of how often they check homework (report from individual parent & 
aggregate for all parents in the school)
Parent report of how often they discuss school with student (report from individual 
parent & aggregate for all parents in the school)
Student report of how often parents check homework (report from individual 
student & aggregate for all students in the school)
Student report of parent expectations for success (report from individual student & 
aggregate for all students in the school)
Student report of frequency of parent discussion of school with them (report from 
individual student & aggregate for all students in the school)
Parent report of saving for college (report from individual parent & aggregate for 
all parents in the school)
SHARED RESPONSIBILITY
Multicultural College-Going Identity
Percent of full-time teachers of each racial/ethnic identity
A school whose teachers reflect the student body may 
have greater student success.
Percent minority enrollment in ethnic/cultural programs
A school’s success in fostering amicable racial and 
ethnic relations may help students succeed. Similarly, 
when students with higher levels of altruism, they 
may have greater academic success.
Student perception that different racial/ethnic groups get along (report from 
individual student & aggregate for all students in the school)
Student opinion of importance of working to help others (report from individual 
student & aggregate for all students in the school)
Family-Neighborhood-School Connections
Parent report of frequency of parent/school communication (report from individual 
parent & aggregate for all parents in the school)
Schools that have strong relationships with students’ 
families may have greater student success. Frequent 
family/school communication, parent agency, and 
parent participation can all build these relationships.  
Parent opinion that parents have say in school policy (report from individual parent 
& aggregate for all parents in the school)
Parent report of participation in school organizations (report from individual parent 
& aggregate for all parents in the school)


11
July 2013
Oseguera
RESOURCE GUIDE
Key Studies Establishing Oakes’ Critical Conditions
This Resource Guide lists key citations for each of the seven critical conditions identified by Oakes. These 
sources—all published after 2003, when Oakes issued her seminal document—provide quantitative evidence of 
the conditions being operationalized. For a more complete list of sources please see the endnotes included for 
each section of the brief, which collectively identify all of the studies summarized throughout the document. 
Seven Critical Conditions
Oakes, J. (2003). Critical conditions for equity and diversity in college access: Informing policy and monitoring 
results. Los Angeles: University of California, UC/ACCORD. Retrieved from http://ucaccord.gseis.ucla.edu/
publications/pdf/criticalconditions.pdf
Rigorous Academic Curriculum
Burris, C. C., Wiley, E., Welner, K., & Murphy, J. (2008). Accountability, rigor, and detracking: Achievement effects 
of embracing a challenging curriculum as a universal good for all students. Teachers College Record, 110(3), 
571–607.
Lee, J. (2012). College for all: Gaps between desirable and actual p–12 math achievement trajectories for college 
readiness. Educational Researcher, 41(2), 43–55. doi: 10.3102/0013189X11432746
McCauley, D. (2007). The impact of Advanced Placement and dual enrollment programs on college graduation. 
San Marcos, TX: Texas State University, San Marcos. 
Spielhagen, F. R. (2006). Closing the achievement gap in math: Considering eighth grade algebra for all students. 
American Secondary Education, 34(3), 29–42.
Stearns, E., Potochnick, S., Moller, S., & Southworth, S. (2008). High school course-taking and postsecondary 
institutional selectivity. Research in Higher Education, 51, 366–395. doi: 10.1007/s11162-009-9161-8
Qualified Teachers
Baile, J., Donohue, D., Anthony, E., Baker, A., Weaver, S., & Henrich, C. (2012). Teacher-student relationship 
climate and school outcomes: Implications for educational policy initiatives. Journal of Youth Adolescence, 
41, 256–267.
Clotfelter, C. T., Ladd, H. F., & Vigdor, J. L. (2010). Teacher credentials and student achievement in high school: A 
cross-subject analysis with student fixed effects. Journal of Human Resources, 45(3), 655–681.
Darling-Hammond, L. (2004). Inequality and the right to learn: Access to qualified teachers in California’s public 
schools. Teachers College Record, 106(10), 1936–1966.
Talbert-Johnson, C. (2004). Structural inequities and the achievement gap in urban schools.  Education and 
Urban Society, 37(1), 22. doi: 10.1177/0013124504268454
Zazkis, R., & Leikin, R. (2010). Advanced mathematical knowledge in teaching practice: Perceptions of 
secondary mathematics teachers. Mathematical Thinking and Learning: An International Journal, 12(4), 
263–281.


12
Importance of High School Conditions for College Access
Safe and Adequate School Facilities
Kosciw, J. G., Greytak, E. A., Diaz, E. M., & Bartkiewicz, M. J. (2010). The 2009 National School Climate Survey: 
The experiences of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender youth in our nation’s schools. New York: Gay, 
Lesbian and Straight Education Network.
Milam, A. J., Furr-Holden, C., & Leaf, P. J. (2010). Perceived school and neighborhood safety, neighborhood 
violence and academic achievement in urban school children. Urban Review: Issues and Ideas in Public 
Education, 42(5), 458–467.
Ready, D. D., Lee, V. E., & Welner, K. G. (2004). Educational equity and school structure: School size, 
overcrowding and schools-within-schools. Teachers College Record, 106(10), 1989–2014.
Sims, D. P. (2009). Crowding Peter to educate Paul: Lessons from a class size reduction externality. Economics 
of Education Review, 28(4), 465–473.
Whipple, S. S., Evans, G. W., Barry, R. L., & Maxwell, L. E. (2010). An ecological perspective on cumulative 
school and neighborhood risk factors related to achievement. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 
31(6), 422–427.
Wolniak, G. C., & Engberg, M. E. (2010). Academic achievement in the first year of college: Evidence of the 
pervasive effects of the high school context. Research in Higher Education, 2010(51), 451–467. doi: 10.1007/
s11162-010-9165-4
College-Going School Culture
Chang, E. S., Heckhausen, J., Greenberger, E., & Chen, C. (2010). Shared agency with parents for educational 
goals: Ethnic differences and implications for college adjustment. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 39(11), 
1293–1304.
Kirk, C. M., Lewis-Moss, R. K., Nilsen, C., & Colvin, D. Q. (2011). The role of parent expectations on adolescent 
educational aspirations. Educational Studies, 37(1), 89–99. doi:10.1080/03055691003728965
Kiyama, J. M. (2010). College aspirations and limitations: The role of educational ideologies and funds of 
knowledge in Mexican American families. American Educational Research Journal, 47(2), 330–356.
Roderick, M., Coca, V., & Nagoka, J. (2011). High school effects in shaping urban students’ participation in 
college application, four-year college enrollment, and college match: Potholes on the road to college. 
Sociology of Education, 84(3), 178–211. doi: 10.1177/0038040711411280
Van Houtte, M. (2004). Tracking effects on school achievement: A quantitative explanation in terms of the 
academic culture of school staff. American Journal of Education, 110(4), 354–388.
Woolley, M. E. (2009). Supporting school completion among Latino youth: The role of adult relationships. 
Prevention Researcher, 16(3), 9–12.
Intensive Academic and Social Supports
Engberg, M. E., & Wolniak, G. C. (2010). Examining the effects of high school contexts on postsecondary 
enrollment. Research in Higher Education, 51(1), 132–153. doi: 10.1007/s11162-009-9150-y


13
July 2013
Oseguera
Hao, L., & Pong, S. (2008). The role of school in the upward mobility of disadvantaged immigrants’ 
children. The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 620(1), 62–89. doi: 
10.1177/0002716208322582
Kezar, A. (2007). A tale of two cultures: Schools and universities in partnership for school reform and student 
success. Metropolitan Universities, 18(4), 28–47.
Lee, S., Matthews, M. S., & Olszewski-Kubilius, P. (2008). A national picture of talent search and talent search 
educational programs. Gifted Child Quarterly, 52(1), 55–69.
Perna, L. W., Rowan-Kenyon, H. T., Thomas, S. L., Bell, A., Anderson, R., & Li, C. (2008). The role of college 
counseling in shaping college opportunity: Variations across high schools. The Review of Higher Education, 
31(2), 131–159.  
Seftor, N. S., Mamun, A., & Schirm, A. (2009). The impacts of regular upward bound on postsecondary outcomes 
seven to nine years after scheduled high school graduation.  Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education.
Multicultural College-Going Identity
Bohon, S., Johnson, M., & Gorman, B. (2006). College aspirations and expectations among Latino adolescents 
in the United States. Social Problems, 53(2), 207–225.
Museus, S. D., & Quaye, S. J. (2009). Toward an intercultural perspective of racial and ethnic minority college 
student persistence. The Review of Higher Education, 33(1), 67–94.
Family-Neighborhood-School Connections
Francois, S., Overstreet, S., & Cunningham, M. (2012). Where we live: The unexpected influence of urban 
neighborhoods on the academic performance of African American adolescents. Youth & Society, 44(2), 
307–328.
Freeman, K. (2005). African Americans and college choice. Albany: SUNY Press.  
McDonough, P. M., & Calderone, S. (2006). The meaning of money: Perceptual differences between college 
counselors and low-income families about college costs and financial aid. American Behavioral Scientist, 
49(12), 1703–1718. doi: 10.1177/0002764206289140
Perna, L. W., & Titus, M. A. (2005). The relationship between parental involvement as social capital and college 
enrollment: An examination of racial/ethnic group differences. Journal of Higher Education, 76(5), 485–
518.
Swail, W. S., Cabrera, A. F., & Lee, C. (2004). Latino youth and the pathway to college (No. 485304). Washington, 
DC: Pew Hispanic Center. 
Yosso, T. J. (2005). Whose culture has capital? A critical race theory discussion of community cultural wealth. 
Race, Ethnicity and Education, 8(1), 69–91.


14
Importance of High School Conditions for College Access
Notes
1	 The author would like to thank Charles E. Gibson for his valu­
able assistance throughout this project. Although this brief has a 
single author, the research was very much a collaborative effort.
2	 Oseguera, L., Conchas, G., & Mosqueda, E. (2011).  Beyond 
family and ethnic culture:  Understanding the preconditions for 
the potential realization of social capital. Youth and Society, 
43(3), 1136–1166.
	
Perna, L. W., Rowan-Kenyon, H. T., Thomas, S. L., Bell, A., 
Anderson, R., & Li, C. (2008). The role of college counseling in 
shaping college opportunity: Variations across high schools. The 
Review of Higher Education, 31(2), 131–159. 
3	 Oseguera, L. (2012). High school coursework and postsecondary 
education trajectories: Disparities between youth who grow up 
in and out of poverty. Los Angeles, CA: UC/ACCORD and PATH­
WAYS to Postsecondary Success. Retrieved from http://pathways.
gseis.ucla.edu/publications/201201_OsegueraRB_online.pdf
	
Oseguera, L. (2012). Postsecondary educational pathways of 
low- and middle-/high-income youth: Using the Education Lon­
gitudinal Study (ELS) to examine tenth graders’ transitions from 
high school. Los Angeles, CA: UC/ACCORD and PATHWAYS to 
Postsecondary Success. Retrieved from http://pathways.gseis.
ucla.edu/publications/201205_osegueraWP.pdf
4	 Oakes, J. (2003). Critical conditions for equity and diversity in 
college access: Informing policy and monitoring results. Los 
Angeles: University of California, UC/ACCORD.  Retrieved from 
http://ucaccord.gseis.ucla.edu/publications/pdf/criticalcondi­
tions.pdf
5	 Park, V., & Watford, T. (2012). Peer-reviewed research on low-
income students in postsecondary education: Trends and future 
directions. Los Angeles, CA: UC/ACCORD and PATHWAYS to 
Postsecondary Success. Retrieved from http://pathways.gseis.
ucla.edu/publications/201203_parkwatfordRB.pdf
6	 Adelman, C. (1999). Answers in the tool box: Academic 
intensity, attendance patterns, and bachelor’s degree attainment. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, Office of 
Education Research and Improvement.
	
Adelman, C. (2006). The toolbox revisited: Paths to degree 
completion from high school through college. Washington, DC: 
U.S. Department of Education.
	
Burris, C. C., Wiley, E., Welner, K., & Murphy, J. (2008). 
Accountability, rigor, and detracking: Achievement effects of 
embracing a challenging curriculum as a universal good for all 
students. Teachers College Record, 110(3), 571–607.
	
Gamoran, A., & Hannigan, E. C. (2000). Algebra for everyone? 
Benefits of college-preparatory mathematics for students with 
diverse abilities in early secondary school. Educational Evalua­
tion and Policy Analysis, 22(3), 241–254.
	
Lee, J. (2012). College for all: Gaps between desirable 
and actual p–12 math achievement trajectories for college 
readiness. Educational Researcher, 41(2), 43–55. doi: 
10.3102/0013189X11432746
	
Oakes, Critical conditions for equity (see n. 4).
	
Spielhagen, F. R. (2006). Closing the achievement gap in math: 
Considering eighth grade algebra for all students. American 
Secondary Education, 34(3), 29–42.
	
Spielhagen, F. R. (2006). Closing the achievement gap in math: 
The long-term effects of eighth-grade algebra. Journal of Ad­
vanced Academics, 18(1), 34–59. 
	
Stein, M. K., Kaufman, J. H., Sherman, M., & Hillen, A. F. 
(2011) Algebra: A challenge at the crossroads of policy and 
practice. Review of Educational Research, 81(4), 453–492. doi: 
10.3102/0034654311423025
7	 Adelman, Answers in the tool box (see n. 6).
	
Adelman, The toolbox revisited (see n. 6).
	
College Board. (2013). The 9th annual AP report to the nation. 
New York: Author. Retrieved from http://research.collegeboard.
org/programs/ap/data/nation
	
Geiser, P., & Santelices, V. (2004). The role of Advanced Place­
ment and honors courses in college admissions. Berkeley, CA: 
Center for Studies in Higher Education.
	
Hallet, R. E., & Venegas, K. M. (2011) Is increased access 
enough? Advanced Placement courses, quality, and success 
in low income urban schools. Journal for the Education of the 
Gifted, 34(3), 468–487.
	
Horn, L., Kojaku, L., & Carroll, C. D. (2001). High school aca­
demic curriculum and the persistence path through college: 
Persistence and transfer behavior of undergraduates 3 years after 
entering 4-year institutions [NCES 2001-163]. Washington, DC: 
U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and 
Improvement.
	
Hughes, K. (2012). The college completion agenda: 2012 prog­
ress report. New York: College Board Advocacy & Policy Center. 
Retrieved from http://media.collegeboard.com/digitalServices/
pdf/advocacy/cca/12b-6368_CCAProgressReport_WR.pdf
	
McCauley, D. (2007). The impact of Advanced Placement and 
dual enrollment programs on college graduation. San Marcos, 


15
July 2013
Oseguera
TX: Texas State University. Retrieved from http://ecommons.
txstate.edu/arp/206
	
Stearns, E., Potochnick, S., Moller, S., & Southworth, S. (2008). 
High school course-taking and postsecondary institutional 
selectivity. Research in Higher Education, 51, 366–395. doi: 
10.1007/s11162-009-9161-8
	
Zarate, M. E., & Pachón, H. P. (2006). Equity in offering Advanced 
Placement courses in California high schools, 1997–2003. Los 
Angeles, CA: The Tomas Rivera Policy Institute.
8	 Oakes, Critical conditions for equity, p. 4 (see n. 4).
9	 Archibald, S. (2006). Narrowing in on educational resources that 
do affect student achievement. Peabody Journal of Education, 
81(4), 23–42.
	
Baile, J., Donohue, D., Anthony, E., Baker, A., Weaver, S., & 
Henrich, C. (2012). Teacher-student relationship climate and 
school outcomes: Implications for educational policy initiatives. 
Journal of Youth Adolescence, 41, 256–267.
	
Chidolue, M. E. (1996). The relationship between teacher char­
acteristics, learning environment and student achievement and 
attitude. Studies in Educational Evaluation, 22(3), 263–274.
	
Crosnoe, R., & Cooper, C. E. (2010). Economically disadvantaged 
children’s transitions into elementary school: Linking family 
processes, school contexts, and educational policy. American 
Educational Research Journal, 47(2), 258–291.
	
Darling-Hammond, L. (2004). Inequality and the right to learn: 
Access to qualified teachers in California’s public schools. 
Teachers College Record, 106(10), 1936–1966.
	
Huang, F. L., & Moon, T. R. (2009). Is experience the best teach­
er? A multilevel analysis of teacher characteristics and student 
achievement in low performing schools. Educational Assessment, 
Evaluation and Accountability, 21(3), 209–234.
	
Kikas, E., Peets, K., Palu, A., & Afanasjev, J. (2009). The role 
of individual and contextual factors in the development of math 
skills. Educational Psychology, 29(5), 541–560.
	
Talbert-Johnson, C. (2004). Structural inequities and the 
achievement gap in urban schools.  Education and Urban Society, 
37(1), 22. doi: 10.1177/0013124504268454
	
Ubuz, B., & Yayan, B. (2010). Primary teachers’ subject matter 
knowledge: Decimals. International Journal of Mathematical Edu­
cation in Science and Technology, 41(6), 787–804.
	
Yeh, S. S. (2010). The cost effectiveness of 22 approaches for 
raising student achievement. Journal of Education Finance, 36(1), 
38–75.
	
Zazkis, R., & Leikin, R. (2010). Advanced mathematical knowl­
edge in teaching practice: Perceptions of secondary mathematics 
teachers. Mathematical Teaching and Learning, 12(4), 263–281. 
10	 Boyd, D., Lankford, H., Loeb, S., Rockoff, J., & Wyckoff, J. 
(2008). The narrowing gap in New York City teacher qualifica­
tions and its implications for student achievement in high-poverty 
schools. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 27(4), 
793–818.
	
Clotfelter, C. T., Ladd, H. F., & Vigdor, J. L. (2010). Teacher 
credentials and student achievement in high school: A cross-
subject analysis with student fixed effects. Journal of Human 
Resources, 45(3), 655–681.
	
Darling-Hammond, L., Berry, B., & Thoreson, A. (2001). Does 
teacher certification matter? Evaluating the evidence. Educational 
Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 23(1), 57–77.
	
Goldhaber, D. D., & Brewer, D. J. (2000). Does teacher certifica­
tion matter? High school teacher certification status and student 
achievement. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 22(2), 
129–145.
	
Huang & Moon, Is experience the best teacher? (see n. 9).
	
Lubienski, S. T., Lubienski, C., & Crane, C. C. (2008). Achieve­
ment differences and school type: The role of school climate, 
teacher certification, and instruction. American Journal of Educa­
tion, 115(1), 97–138.
11	 Oakes, Critical conditions for equity, p. 2 (see n. 4).
12	 Finn, J. D., & Achilles, C. M. (1990). Answers and questions 
about class size: A statewide experiment. American Educational 
Research Journal, 27, 557–577.
	
Hoxby, C. M. (2000). The effects of class size on student achieve­
ment: New evidence from natural population variation. Quarterly 
Journal of Economics, 115(2000), 1239–1285.
	
Legislative Analyst’s Office (2012). Year three survey: Update on 
school district finance in California. Sacramento, CA: Author.
	
Ready, D. D., Lee, V. E., & Welner, K. G. (2004). Educational 
equity and school structure: School size, overcrowding and 
schools-within-schools. Teachers College Record, 106(10), 
1989–2014.
	
Rein, A. S. (1997). The state of municipal services in the 1990s: 
Crowding, building conditions and staffing in New York City pub­
lic schools. New York: Citizens Budget Commission.
	
Rivkin, S. G., Hanushek, E. A., & Kain, J. F. (2005) Teachers, 
schools and academic achievement, Econometrica, 73, 417–458.


16
Importance of High School Conditions for College Access
	
Sims, D. P. (2009). Crowding Peter to educate Paul: Lessons 
from a class size reduction externality. Economics of Education 
Review, 28(4), 465–473.
13	 Engel, L. C., Rutkowski, D., & Rutkowski, L. (2009). The harsher 
side of globalisation: Violent conflict and academic achievement. 
Globalisation, Societies and Education, 7(4), 433–456.
	
Kosciw, J. G., Greytak, E. A., Diaz, E. M., & Bartkiewicz, M. J. 
(2010). The 2009 national school climate survey: The experiences 
of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender youth in our nation’s 
schools. New York: Gay, Lesbian and Straight Education Network.
	
Milam, A. J., Furr-Holden, C., & Leaf, P. J. (2010). Perceived 
school and neighborhood safety, neighborhood violence and 
academic achievement in urban school children. Urban Review: 
Issues and Ideas in Public Education, 42(5), 458–467.
	
Ripski, M. B., & Gregory, A. (2009). Unfair, unsafe, and unwel­
come: Do high school students’ perceptions of unfairness, hostil­
ity, and victimization in school predict engagement and achieve­
ment? Journal of School Violence, 8(4), 355–375.
14	 Guy, L. G. (2001). Student achievement and school condition: 
Examining the relationship in West Virginia’s high schools 
(Unpublished doctoral dissertation). West Virginia University, 
Morganstown, VA.
	
McGowen, R. S. (2007). The impact of school facilities on student 
achievement, attendance, behavior, completion rate and teacher 
turnover rate in selected Texas high schools (Unpublished doc­
toral dissertation). Texas A&M University, College Station, TX.
	
O’Neill, D. J., & Oates, A. D. (2001). The impact of school facili­
ties on student achievement, behavior, attendance, and teacher 
turnover rate in central Texas middle schools. Educational Facility 
Planner, 36(3), 14–22. 
	
Roberts, L. W., Edgerton, J. D., & Peter, T. (2008). The importance 
of place: Facility conditions and learning outcomes. Education 
Canada, 48(3), 48–51.
	
Whipple, S. S., Evans, G. W., Barry, R. L., & Maxwell, L. E. 
(2010). An ecological perspective on cumulative school and 
neighborhood risk factors related to achievement. Journal of 
Applied Developmental Psychology, 31(6), 422–427.
	
Wolniak, G. C., & Engberg, M. E. (2010). Academic achievement 
in the first year of college: Evidence of the pervasive effects of the 
high school context. Research in Higher Education, 2010(51), 
451–467. doi: 10.1007/s11162-010-9165-4
15	 Oakes, Critical conditions for equity, p. 2 (see n. 4).
16	 Oakes, Critical conditions for equity, p. 4 (see n. 4).
17	 Talent Search, GEAR UP, and Upward Bound are federal college 
access programs. These programs can provide many important 
antidotes to the dearth of opportunities provided in low-income 
and segregated school settings.  Perhaps the most important 
things they provide are access to high-level curricula and “de-
tracking,” which move these students into college preparatory 
coursework, and targeted counseling that provides a roadmap for 
how to navigate both high school and college. See:
	
Gándara, P. (2002). High School Puente: What we have learned 
about preparing Latino youth for higher education, Educational 
Policy, 16, 474–495.
	
Gándara, P., & Bial, D. (2001). Paving the way to postsecondary 
education: K–12 intervention programs for underrepresented 
youth. Washington, DC: National Center for Education Statistics.
	
Slavin, R. E., & Calderon, M. (Eds). (2001). Effective programs 
for Latino students. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
18	 Alvidrez, J., & Weinstein, R. S. (1999). Early teacher perceptions 
and later student academic achievement. Journal of Educational 
Psychology, 91(4), 731–746.
	
Cheng, S., & Starks, B. (2002). Racial differences in the effects 
of significant others on students’ educational expectations. 
Sociology of Education, 75(4), 306–327.
	
de Boer, H., Bosker, R. J., & van de Werf, M. (2010). Sustainability 
of teacher expectation bias effects on long-term student perfor­
mance. Journal of Educational Psychology, 102(1), 168–179.
	
Grieve, K. A. (2010). Urban African American male high school 
students’ educational aspirations for college and the influence of 
family, school, and peers (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). 
University of Toledo, Toledo, OH.
	
Howard, T. C. (2003). “A tug of war for our minds”: African 
American high school students’ perceptions of their academic 
identities and college aspirations. High School Journal, 87(1), 
4–17.
	
Jussim, L., & Eccles, J. S. (1992). Teacher perceptions II: Con­
struction and reflection of student achievement.  Journal of Per­
sonality and Social Psychology, 63, 947–961.
	
Rubie-Davies, C., Hattie, J., & Hamilton, R. (2006). Expecting the 
best for students: Teacher expectations and academic outcomes. 
British Journal of Educational Psychology, 76(3), 429–444.
	
Van Houtte, M. (2004). Tracking effects on school achievement: 
A quantitative explanation in terms of the academic culture of 
school staff. American Journal of Education, 110(4), 354–388.


17
July 2013
Oseguera
19	 Kirk, C. M., Lewis-Moss, R., Nilsen, C., & Colvin, D. Q. (2011). 
The role of parent expectations on adolescent educational aspira­
tions. Educational Studies, 37(1), 89–99.
	
Woolley, M. E. (2009). Supporting school completion among La­
tino youth: The role of adult relationships. Prevention Researcher, 
16(3), 9–12.
20	 Blair, S. L., & Qian, Z. (1998). Family and Asian students’ educa­
tional performance: A consideration of diversity. Journal of Fam­
ily Issues, 19(4), 355–374.
	
Chang, E. S., Heckhausen, J., Greenberger, E., & Chen, C. 
(2010). Shared agency with parents for educational goals: Ethnic 
differences and implications for college adjustment. Journal of 
Youth and Adolescence, 39(11), 1293–1304.
	
Kiyama, J. M. (2010). College aspirations and limitations: The 
role of educational ideologies and funds of knowledge in Mexican 
American families. American Educational Research Journal, 
47(2), 330–356.
	
Kiyama, J. M. (2011). Family lessons and funds of knowledge: 
College-going paths in Mexican American families. Journal of 
Latinos and Education, 10(1), 23–42.
	
Ma, P. W., & Yeh, C. J. (2010). Individual and familial factors in­
fluencing the educational and career plans of Chinese immigrant 
youths. Career Development Quarterly, 58(3), 230–245.
	
Roderick, M., Coca, V., & Nagoka, J. (2011). High school effects 
in shaping urban students’ participation in college application, 
four-year college enrollment, and college match: Potholes on the 
road to college. Sociology of Education, 84(3), 178–211. doi: 
10.1177/0038040711411280
	
Yosso, T. J. (2005). Whose culture has capital? A critical race 
theory discussion of community cultural wealth. Race, Ethnicity 
and Education, 8(1), 69–91.
21	 Yosso, Whose culture has capital? (see n. 20).
22	 Brewer, E. W., & Landers, J. M. (2005). A longitudinal study of 
the talent search program. Journal of Career Development, 31(3), 
195–208.
	
Brody, L. E. (1998). The talent searches: A catalyst for change in 
higher education. Journal of Secondary Gifted Education, 9(3), 
124–133.
	
Engberg, M. E., & Wolniak, G. C. (2010). Examining the effects 
of high school contexts on postsecondary enrollment. Research 
in Higher Education, 51(1), 132–153. doi: 10.1007/s11162-009-
9150-y
	
Kezar, A. (2007). A tale of two cultures: Schools and universities 
in partnership for school reform and student success. Metropoli­
tan Universities, 18(4), 28–47.
	
Lee, S., Matthews, M. S., & Olszewski-Kubilius, P. (2008). A 
national picture of talent search and talent search educational 
programs. Gifted Child Quarterly, 52(1), 55–69.
	
Lee, S., Olszewski-Kubilius, P., & Peternel, G. (2010). 
Achievement after participation in a preparatory program for 
verbally talented students. Roeper Review, 32(3), 150–163.
	
Lee, S., Olszewski-Kubilius, P., & Peternel, G. (2010). The effi­
cacy of academic acceleration for gifted minority students. Gifted 
Child Quarterly, 54(3), 189–208.
	
Olsen, R., Seftor, N., Silva, T., Myers, D., DesRoches, D., & 
Young, J. (2007). Upward Bound math-science: Program de­
scription and interim impact estimates. Washington, DC: U.S. De­
partment of Education, Office of Planning, Evaluation, and Policy 
Development.
	
Seftor, N. S., Mamun, A., & Schirm, A. (2009). The impacts of 
regular upward bound on postsecondary outcomes seven to nine 
years after scheduled high school graduation.  Washington, DC: 
U.S. Department of Education, Office of Planning, Evaluation, and 
Policy Development.
	
Standing, K., Judkins, D., Keller, B., & Shimshak, A. (2008). Early 
outcomes of the GEAR UP program. Washington, DC: U.S. De­
partment of Education, Office of Planning, Evaluation, and Policy 
Development.
	
VanTassel-Baska, J. (1998). A critique of the talent searches: Is­
sues, problems, and possibilities. Journal of Secondary Gifted 
Education, 9(3), 139–144.
23	 See n. 17.
24	 Eccles, J. S., & Barber, B. L. (1999). Student council, 
volunteering, basketball, or marching band. What kind of 
extracurricular involvement matters? Journal of Adolescent 
Research, 14(1), 10–43.
	
Karabel, J. (2005). The chosen: The hidden history of admission 
and exclusion at Harvard, Yale, and Princeton. New York: 
Harcourt.
	
Mahoney, J. L., Cairns, B. D., & Farmer, T. W. (2003). Promoting 
interpersonal competence and educational success through extra­
curricular activity participation. Journal of Educational Psychol­
ogy, 95(2), 409–418.
	
Stevens, M. L. (2009). Creating a class: College admissions and 
the education of elites. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.


18
Importance of High School Conditions for College Access
	
Walpole, M. (2003). Socioeconomic status and college: How SES 
affects college experiences and outcomes. Review of Higher Edu­
cation, 27(1), 45–73.
25	 Briggs, D. C. (2001). The effect of admissions test preparation: 
Evidence from NELS:88. Chance, 14(1), 10–18.
	
Briggs, D. C. (2002). SAT coaching, bias and causal inference 
(Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of California, 
Berkeley, CA.
	
Briggs, D. C. (2009). Preparation for college admission exams. 
Arlington, VA: National Association for College Admission Coun­
seling. 
	
Fullinwider, R. K., & Lichtenberg, J. (2004). Leveling the playing 
field: Justice, politics, and college admissions. New York: Row­
man & Littlefield.
	
Hao, L., & Pong, S. (2008). The role of school in the upward 
mobility of disadvantaged immigrants’ children. The ANNALS of 
the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 620(1), 
62–89. doi: 10.1177/0002716208322582
	
Jones, M. (2013). “I need more information”: How college 
advising is still absent from college preparation in high schools.  
Los Angeles, CA: UC/ACCORD and PATHWAYS to Postsecondary 
Success. Retrieved from http://pathways.gseis.ucla.edu/
publications/
	
Lemann, N. (2000). The big test: The secret history of the Ameri­
can meritocracy. New York: Farrar, Straus, & Giroux.
	
McDonough, P. M., & Calderone, S. (2006). The meaning of 
money: Perceptual differences between college counselors and 
low-income families about college costs and financial aid. 
American Behavioral Scientist, 49(12), 1703–1718.
	
Perna et al., The role of college counseling (see n. 2). 
	
Powers, D. E., & Rock, D. A. (1999). Effects of coaching on 
SAT I: Reasoning test scores. Journal of Educational Measure­
ment 36(2), 93–118.
26	 Alon, S., & Tienda, M. (2007). Diversity, opportunity, and the 
shifting meritocracy in higher education. American Sociological 
Review, 72(4), 487–511.
	
Bishop, J. H., & Mane, F. (2001). The impacts of minimum 
competency exam graduation requirements on college attendance 
and early labor market success of disadvantaged students. In G. 
Orfield & M. L. Kornhaber (Eds.), Raising standards or raising 
barriers?  Inequality and high-stakes testing in public education 
(pp. 51–83). New York: Century Foundation Press.
	
Bishop, J. H., & Mane, F. (2001). The impacts of minimum com­
petency exam graduation requirements on high school gradua­
tion, college attendance and early labor market success. Labour 
Economics, 8, 203–222.
	
Buchmann, C., Condron, D., & Roscigno, V. (2010). Shadow 
education, American style: Test preparation, the SAT, and college 
enrollment. Social Forces, 89(2), 435–462.
	
Dee, T. S., & Jacob, B. A. (2006). Do high school exit exams 
influence educational attainment or labor market performance? 
Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
	
Lee et al., A national picture of talent search (see n. 22).
	
Mattern, K. D., Patterson, B. F., Shaw, E. J., Kobrin, J. L., & 
Barbuti, S. M. (2008). Differential validity and prediction of the 
SAT (No. 2008-4). New York: The College Board.
	
Stevenson, D., & Baker, D. P. (1992). Shadow education and al­
location in formal schooling: Transition to university in Japan. 
American Journal of Sociology 97(6), 1639–1657.
27	 Oakes, Critical conditions for equity, p. 5 (see n. 4).
28	 Bank, B. J., Slavings, R. L., & Biddle, B. J. (1990). Effects of peer, 
faculty, and parental influences on students’ persistence. Sociol­
ogy of Education, 63(3), 208–225. 
	
Bohon, S., Johnson, M., & Gorman, B. (2006). College 
aspirations and expectations among Latino adolescents in the 
United States. Social Problems, 53(2), 207–225.
	
Lee, W. Y. (1999). Striving toward effective retention: The effect of 
race on mentoring African American students. Peabody Journal of 
Education, 74(2), 27–43. 
	
Museus, S. D., & Quaye, S. J. (2009). Toward an intercultural 
perspective of racial and ethnic minority college student persis­
tence. The Review of Higher Education, 33(1), 67–94.
29	 Conchas, G. Q. (2006) The color of success: Race and high-
achieving youth. New York: Teachers College Press. 
	
Ladson-Billings, G. J. (1995). Toward a theory of culturally 
relevant pedagogy. American Educational Research Journal, 
32(3), 465–491. 
	
Ladson-Billings, G. J. (1997). The dreamkeepers: Successful 
teachers of African-American children. San Francisco, CA: 
Jossey-Bass.
	
Lee, C. D. (1992). Profile of an independent Black institution: 
African-centered education at work. The Journal of Negro Educa­
tion, 61(2), 160–177. 


19
July 2013
Oseguera
	
Tan, G. (2001). “I want my teachers to like me”: Multiculturalism 
and school dropout rates among Mexican Americans. Equity & 
Excellence in Education, 34(2), 35.
30	 Oakes, Critical conditions for equity, p. 6 (see n. 4).
31	 Ceja, M. (2004). Chicana college aspirations and the role of 
parents: Developing educational resiliency. Journal of Hispanic 
Higher Education, 3(4), 338–362. 
	
Ceja, M. (2006). Understanding the role of parents and siblings 
as information sources in the college choice process of Chi­
cana students. Journal of College Student Development, 47(1), 
87–104. 
	
Francois, S., Overstreet, S., & Cunningham, M. (2012). Where 
we live: The unexpected influence of urban neighborhoods on the 
academic performance of African American adolescents. Youth & 
Society, 44(2), 307–328.
	
Perna, L. W., & Titus, M. A. (2005). The relationship between 
parental involvement as social capital and college enrollment: An 
examination of racial/ethnic group differences. Journal of Higher 
Education, 76(5), 485–518.
	
Yosso, Whose culture has capital? (see n. 20).
32	 Fann, A., Jarsky, K. M., & McDonough, P. M. (2009). Parent 
involvement in the college planning process: A case study of 
P–20 collaboration. Journal of Hispanic Higher Education, 8(2), 
374–393.
	
Freeman, K. (2005). African Americans and college choice. 
Albany: SUNY Press.  
	
Gonzalez, K. P., Stoner, C., & Jovel, J. E. (2003). Examining the 
role of social capital in access to college for Latinas: Toward a 
college opportunity framework. Journal of Hispanic Higher 
Education, 2(2), 146–170.
	
Jarsky, K. M., McDonough, P. M., & Nuñez, A.-M. (2009). 
Establishing a college culture in secondary schools through P–20 
collaboration: A reflective case study. Journal of Hispanic Higher 
Education, 8(2), 357–373.
	
McDonough & Calderone, The meaning of money (see n. 25). 
	
Smith, M. J. (2009). Right directions, wrong maps: Understand­
ing the involvement of low-SES African American parents to enlist 
them as partners in college choice. Education and Urban Society, 
41(2), 171–196.
	
Swail, W. S., Cabrera, A. F., & Lee, C. (2004). Latino youth and 
the pathway to college (No. 485304). Washington, DC: Pew His­
panic Center. 
33	 More information about the study is available at http://nces.
ed.gov/surveys/els2002/.


Contact Us
1041 Moore Hall, UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90095
Phone: 310-267-4412
Fax: 310-206-8770
ucaccord@ucla.edu
www.pathways-ucaccord.org
All Campus Consortium On Research for Diversity (UC/ACCORD) is an 
interdisciplinary, multi-campus research center devoted to a more equitable distribution of 
educational resources and opportunities in California’s diverse public schools and universities.
UC/ACCORD harnesses the research expertise of the University of California to identify 
strategies that will increase college preparation, access and retention. Policymakers, 
researchers, teachers, outreach staff and students all benefit from this source of reliable 
information for equitable education policy and practice.
WEBSITE: ucaccord.org
Leticia Oseguera is a Research Associate in the Center for the Study of Higher 
Education and an Associate Professor in the Department of Education Policy Studies at 
Pennsylvania State University.
Supported by funding from The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation