Regardless of the type of job that you’re looking for, the following seven areas are of utmost importance to not only landing the job that you want, but also holding on to that job for the long haul. So what are the skills that employers value and seek in potential employees? This same question was asked of hiring managers and their responses may surprise you! Below are the most common skills mentioned, whether the employee happens to be a manager, network engineer, or a cook. Here are seven “In-Demand Skills for Success” in the workplace:
Basic Skills
Employers are seeking employees who can read well and write coherently, and who can calculate math in a business environment (fractions, percentages, etc.). The ability to use appropriate computer tools specific to the job round out the basic skill sets needed for employment success.
Personal Skills
Can a potential employee speak well? Can he/she answer customer questions in a positive, informative manner? While not everyone has an outgoing sales personality, successful employees need to be able to communicate in a non-confrontational, positive manner with their coworkers, subordinates, managers, and customers. Being able to work well with others is a vital skill for success in all jobs.
Job Attainment
Job search is a process that requires a great deal of dedication and attention to be conducted successfully. If you put in little effort, you will receive little results. Employers are seeking employees who know how to present themselves in a positive manner and who display enthusiasm and knowledge about the companies they approach. Not only do candidates get evaluated on their skills and experience, but also on how they are approaching the job search. Enthusiastic candidates that follow up and show true interest will win success above equally qualified candidates.
Job Survival
It’s true that who gets laid-off and who doesn’t is often a matter of numbers, but it is also often a matter of performance. Employees who have consistently demonstrated their worth and made themselves a valuable asset have lower incidences of being downsized than employees who put forth average effort. Surviving in a company during layoffs is a skill that makes a candidate stand out among peers.
Professional Development
Successful individuals are constantly attending seminars, taking classes, attaining training, and otherwise learning new skills that will keep them marketable in their careers. Successful people are lifelong learners. Employers are looking for people who understand this.
Career Development
Career development differs from professional development. Professional development is learning, while career development is a planning and goal setting process. Successful individuals design a career plan with written goals for the short term and long term. They lay out the steps needed to move their careers from Point A to Point B within a certain timeframe, and plan how they are going to achieve those steps. Employers seek individuals who (believe it or not) wish to commit to the company for a long period of time. Good career progression is a high selling point for candidates to prospective employers.
Healthy Attitude
Employees who approach their work with passion and energy certainly have a leg up on those who simply “go through the motions” each day. By coming to work every day with a smile on your face and a song in your heart may seem like a cliché, but these are things that communicate to others your attitude towards work. Employers value those with a “healthy attitude” over those who always seem to be down in the dumps.
By focusing on the seven areas throughout your interview process will certainly show the potential employer that you are a candidate worth their investment. When you do get a job, it’s even more important to focus on these seven areas every day.