What the data shows about police use of force by race
Black Americans saw a rise in police threats and nonfatal use of force in recent years.
From 2018 to 2020, the share of Black Americans who experienced threats and nonfatal use of physical force during police contact increased, according to a report from the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). The same is true for people in the multiracial, Native, or Pacific Islander American category.
Rates increased from 3.8% to 4.3% for Black Americans and from 2.5% to 2.7% for multiracial, Native, or Pacific Islander Americans.
Meanwhile, Hispanic Americans and Asian Americans saw a decrease from 3.4% to 2.4% and from 1.3% to 1%, respectively. Threats and nonfatal use of force rates for white Americans remained at 1.5%.
Get weekly insights
Subscribe for data-driven insights. No spin, just the facts.
In 2018, Black Americans had the highest rates of police handcuffing (4.4%), threats of force (2%), cursing (1.7%), and pushing, grabbing, hitting, or kicking (1.6%) in cases when police initiated contact or the interaction was related to a car accident. Additionally, at 0.9%, Black Americans were slightly more likely than Hispanic Americans (0.8%) to have a weapon used on them by police. Hispanic Americans had the highest rate of being shouted at by police.
There is often a lag between government data collection and release. The Police-Public Contact Survey collected data in 2018 and 2020, but Bureau of Justice statisticians did not release the report analyzing the data until November 2022.
For a fuller picture of crime in the US, read about racial discrepancies in police enforcement and get more USAFacts data in your inbox by subscribing to our weekly newsletter.
Keep exploring
- Traffic stop data reveals racial discrepancies in police enforcement - Black Americans and Hispanic Americans were the most likely to be searched or arrested at a traffic stop in 2020.
- Data says domestic violence incidents are down, but half of all victims don’t report to police - Fewer victims reported the crime to authorities in 2019 than in 2010, according to a Bureau of Justice Statistics survey.
- What FBI data says about law enforcement use-of-force - FBI data offers some insight into when use-of-force incidents happen and what happens when they do.
- Has COVID-19 disproportionately affected Black and Hispanic Americans? - A roundup of how the State of the Union looks through the lens of race and ethnicity.