TRANSGENDER STUDENTS 
IN HIGHER EDUCATION
Abbie E. Goldberg	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
  AUGUST 2018


 
 
 
Transgender Students in Higher Education  1 
 
 
 
DEFINITIONS 
 
Genderism is the rigid adherence to the gender binary in practices, policies, and norms (Marine & Nicolazzo, 
2014). Cisnormativity refers to the perpetuation of the false belief that there are only two genders, that gender 
is immutable, and that bodies define gender, such that people assigned as female at birth will identify as 
girls/women, and people assigned as male at birth will identify as boys/men (Simmons & White, 2014). 
Cisgender (cis) is used to refer to people with binary gender identities that align with cisnormative 
expectations for the gender they were assigned at birth (Simmons & White, 2014). An authentic critique of 
cisnormativity not only considers gender but its intersection with social class and race, whereby cisgender 
identities are especially privileged when “accompanied by the appearance of normative race, class, ability, and 
nationality” (Enke, 2012b, p. 64). 
 
In this report, trans refers to the spectrum of individuals whose gender identities do not align with cisnormative 
expectations for the gender assigned to them birth, or the expectations associated with that gender (Enke, 
2016a; Stryker, 2008). The term binary trans refers to trans persons with binary (i.e., “man” or “woman”) 
identities—that is, trans men who were born with female bodies and consider themselves to be men and live 
socially as men, and trans women who were born with male bodies and consider themselves to be women and 
live socially as women (Stryker, 2008). Nonbinary trans refers to individuals who identify as both man and 
woman, as an alternative gender that lies outside of the gender binary, or who do not have or identify with 
any gender (Cruz, 2014; Nicolazzo, 2016a). Nonbinary trans identity labels include agender, gender fluid, and 
genderqueer (Beemyn, 2019; Nicolazzo, 2016a; Stryker, 2008).  
 
These terms (cisgender, trans, binary, nonbinary) are conceptual tools—not rigid and absolute categories. 
People who identify with so-called binary gender identities may not, for a variety of reasons, undergo 
biomedical transition (e.g., hormone treatment, chest reconstruction), and they may actively resist compliance 
to certain gendered norms (Catalano, 2015; Nicolazzo, 2016a, 2016b).1 Further, there is significant diversity within 
and across the binary/nonbinary dichotomy, and the meaning of trans (and binary trans, and nonbinary trans) 
varies across time and place (Enke, 2012a). Thus, there is great fluidity within and across these categories. 
 
 
                                                             
1 Both binary and nonbinary individuals may pursue biomedical interventions such as hormones, but binary identified 
individuals may be more likely to pursue such options. For example, in the USTS, the majority of trans men and women (95%) 
desired hormone therapy, compared to 49% of non-binary respondents. Trans men and women were also much more likely 
to have ever had hormone therapy (71%) than non-binary respondents (13%). 
 


 
 
 
Transgender Students in Higher Education  2 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
A. Background 
In 1960, only 45% of youth recently completing high school entered a two- or four-year college (U.S. 
Department of Education, 2018). In the Fall of 2015, almost 70% of high school graduates were enrolled in 
college (U.S. Department of Labor, 2018). About 10.5 million undergraduate students (62%) attend 4-year 
institutions, and 6.5 million (38%) attend 2-year institutions (National Center for Education Statistics, 2018), 
with only about 60% of students who initially enroll in four-year institutions completing a degree within 150% 
of normal time from their initial institution (Kena et al., 2016). Institutions of higher education serve learners 
who are diverse in terms of race, class, ability status, sexual orientation, and gender identity, and may face 
challenges in effectively meeting the needs of, and retaining, such diverse students. Institutions of higher 
education may struggle in particular with addressing the needs of students who identify as transgender (trans) 
or gender nonconforming (TGNC) (Beemyn, 2003, 2016). 
 
Many trans students experience discrimination and harassment at college, which may have implications for 
their academic success and retention. The U.S. Transgender Survey (USTS), a survey of over 27,000 trans adults, 
found that 24% of respondents who were out as or perceived as trans in college reported being verbally, 
physically, or sexually harassed at that time—with 16% of those who experienced harassment having left 
college because of the harassment (James et al., 2016). The National Transgender Discrimination Survey (NTDS; 
Grant et al., 2017), which surveyed nearly 6,500 trans respondents, found that individuals attending college, 
graduate school, professional school, or technical school reported high rates of negative treatment by 
students, teachers and staff, including harassment and bullying (35%). According to the NTDS, participants 
experienced a variety of barriers to attendance in school—including harassment, financial issues related to 
transition, and lack of financial aid—that in some cases forced them leave (i.e., K-12 or higher education). 
Students of color and trans women were especially likely to highlight these barriers (Grant et al., 2017).  
 
Stolzenberg and Hughes (2017) found that almost 19% of trans first year students reported major concerns 
about financing their college education, compared to 12% of a national sample—concerns that are supported 
by data showing that these trans students (a) came from families with lower annual parental income, and (b) 
received more financial aid, compared to the national sample.2 
                                                             
2 Stolzenberg and Hughes (2017) conducted an analysis of data from the Cooperative Institutional Research Program (CIRP) 
Freshman Survey (see: http://heri.ucla.edu/cirp-freshman-survey), which was modified in 2015 to allow students to indicate 
whether they identify as transgender. That change allowed them to disaggregate data for a sample of incoming first-year 
students consisting of 678 transgender students from 209 colleges and universities, which they then compared to the 
national norms for all incoming first-time, full-time college students. See: 
 https://www.aacu.org/liberaleducation/2017/spring/stolzenberg_hughes   


 
 
 
Transgender Students in Higher Education  3 
 
Experiences of harassment and bullying within the higher educational setting may be preceded by even worse 
treatment in secondary school. Estimates indicate that as many as 75% of trans students report feeling unsafe 
in high school because of their gender expression, and 50% of trans students report being prevented (e.g., by 
school officials) from using the name or pronoun that match their gender, highlighting how structural and 
interpersonal forms of stigma intersect (Movement Advancement Project & GLSEN, 2017). National survey data 
suggest high rates of harassment (78%) and physical assault (35%) perpetrated against trans students during 
grade school (i.e., K-12), causing nearly one in six students to leave school (Grant et al., 2017)3.  
 
In turn, many trans students—especially those who were out as trans in high school—may begin college with 
a history of victimization. College has the capacity to reinforce the gendered and transphobic treatment that 
many students have already experienced in school and in society, leading to poor academic and psychosocial 
outcomes; or, to support and empower these students (who already show signs of resilience, in that they have 
completed high school and enrolled in college), thus enhancing academic and personal success. For students 
who were not out as trans in high school, college can play an important role in facilitating gender identity 
exploration—such as by providing the supports and resources needed to allow students to navigate this 
process while staying in college. 
B. Purpose 
The current report reviews research on trans students’ experiences in higher education with the goal of 
informing knowledge and practice by higher education administrators as well as policymakers. In this report, 
attention is paid to the institutional structures and interpersonal contexts that reify and enforce biased 
treatment towards trans students, or which serve as sources of support and transformation. The report 
concludes with recommendations to institutions of higher education regarding the creation of more trans-
inclusive communities.  
 
The report draws in particular from a multi-stage, multi-pronged project conducted by the author, which 
involved (a) focus groups with seven nonbinary (e.g., agender, genderqueer) trans college students, which in 
turn informed the development of (b) a large-scale survey disseminated to over 500 trans college and graduate 
students, about three-quarters of whom were nonbinary trans, and one-quarter of whom were binary trans 
                                                             
 
3 Gender identity, assigned sex at birth, and race were all important factors in determining risk for sexual assault, physical 
assault, and harassment and bullying. For example, multiracial students reported a higher incidence of physical assault than 
students of other races; respondents identifying as trans men who were assigned female at birth reported especially high 
rates of harassment and bullying; and respondents identifying as trans women who were assigned male at birth reported 
especially high rates of physical and sexual assault (Grant et al., 2017). 
 


 
 
 
Transgender Students in Higher Education  4 
 
(e.g., trans man, trans woman) and (c) interviews with trans students, nine of whom were binary trans and five 
of whom were nonbinary identified.i All quotes are from participants in this multi-pronged project.4 
C. Colleges and Universities as Gendered Institutions 
Colleges and universities typically reflect and reinforce societal genderism in practices, policies, and norms 
(Marine & Nicolazzo, 2014). Trans students seeking to express their gender identities encounter pressures to 
conform to socially constructed gender norms in terms of appearance, dress, and pronouns (Catalano, 2015), 
which affects all trans students but especially nonbinary students. Nonbinary students may struggle with 
presenting themselves in ways that are consonant with their gender identity (e.g., using pronouns other than 
“she/her/hers” or “he/him/his”) inasmuch as they face particular scrutiny for not seeking to conform to or be 
seen as “either” gender (Goldberg & Kuvalanka, 2018; McGuire, Kuvalanka, Catalpa, & Toomey, 2016). 
Cisnormativity and genderism are evident in multiple domains within the higher education microsystem, from 
physical structures to official records to policies to curricula to classroom practices (Bilodeau, 2005)—and, over 
time, may create chronic stress for gender minorities actively navigating their identity within such restrictive 
and potentially alienating structures. According to gender minority stress theory (Hendricks & Testa, 2012), 
structural forms of stigma create stressful environments for trans people, which may contribute to problematic 
affective, cognitive, and behavioral responses, and result in compromised well-being (Perez-Brumer, Day, 
Russell, & Hatzenbuehler, 2017).  
 
Sex-segregated restrooms represent one institutional feature that excludes trans people and/or exposes them 
to harassment, which causes them significant stress (Seelman, 2014a, 2014b, 2016; Singh, Meng, & Hansen, 2013). 
Gender-inclusive and/or single stall restrooms are rare or nonexistent on many campuses (Goldberg, Beemyn, 
& Smith, 2018a; Seelman, 2014b). Sex-segregated housing represents another institutional feature that 
contributes to exclusion, invisibility, and discomfort for trans students (Goldberg et al., 2018a; Seelman, 2014b). 
As one white college student who identified as a trans man said: “Most of our university dorms are split by sex 
so I was forced to live for three years on the half of the building that related to the sex on my ID rather than 
how I identify. It made me very uncomfortable, and considering how I present, I’m not sure anyone else was 
comfortable with it either” (Goldberg et al., 2018a). Nonbinary students face particular challenges with regard 
to accessing housing options that are safe and comfortable. As a white nonbinary student in Goldberg et al. 
(2018a) said: 
 
I only have one issue: Gender-blind housing. Currently, students are assigned housing based on a binary choice 
of M/F. I believe it is easy to change your official university gender, but housing only sees those two options. 
Students are automatically randomly assigned a roommate of the “same” gender, unless they request “gender-
neutral housing.” But “gender-neutral housing” just means that you have to specify a particular person of the 
                                                             
4 A series of papers related to this project are published, in press, and in preparation. See, for example: Goldberg & Kuvalanka, 
2018; Goldberg, Beemyn, & Smith, 2018a; Goldberg, Kuvalanka, Budge, Benz, & Smith, 2018b; Goldberg, Kuvalanka, & 
dickey, 2018c; Goldberg, Smith, & Beemyn, 2018d. 
 


 
 
 
Transgender Students in Higher Education  5 
 
“opposite” gender that you want to live with. There is no option to just be randomly assigned a roommate of 
any gender. For a nonbinary person, this is very othering. 
 
Significantly, some colleges and universities have adopted gender inclusive housing policies, but these are 
considerably diverse. For example, some allow students to live in the same room with one or more roommates 
of any legal sex or gender identity, and others offer apartment-style housing wherein each student is given a 
room with a locking door within a larger apartment (Krum, Davis, & Galupo, 2013).  
 
Forms, documents, and records can also be alienating for trans students, who routinely confront paperwork 
that only allows male and female as gender options, does not differentiate between sex and gender, and 
provides no means for students to change their gender marker without legally changing their “sex.” In addition, 
few institutions enable trans students to use the name they go by, rather than their “dead” (i.e., birth, or legal) 
name, on records and documents, and the institutions that do offer this option do not always advertise it 
effectively or make the process easy (Beemyn & Brauer, 2015; Campus Pride, 2018; Seelman, 2014a, 2014b). In 
their study of over 500 trans students, Goldberg, Beemyn, and Smith (2018a) found that some respondents 
reported that their colleges and universities had instituted a chosen name process, but described it as 
incomplete or inefficient. As one white trans man said: “The preferred name option is not utilized for anything 
except the school login, leaving the email that everybody sees, and your name on school documents, as the 
birth name, which needs to be fixed.”  
 
Colleges and universities also vary greatly in the extent to which they have policies that protect trans students, 
staff, and faculty from harassment, with community colleges and religiously affiliated institutions typically 
offering fewer protections (Campus Pride, 2018; Goldberg et al., 2018a). Despite the fact that, over the past 
decade, more than a thousand colleges and universities have added “gender identity” to their 
nondiscrimination policies (Campus Pride, 2018), such policies are not always enforced, wherein faculty, staff, 
and students who engage in transphobic language and acts are not always held accountable (Goldberg et al., 
2018a; Seelman, 2014a, 2014b). Similarly, institutions’ health insurance policies are often trans-exclusionary: they 
do not cover counseling, hormones, and/or surgery for trans students or staff (Campus Pride, 20185; Goldberg, 
Kuvalanka, Budge, Benz, & Smith, 2018b), despite evidence that such coverage would ultimately be cost-
effective for insurance companies (Padula, Heru, & Campbell, 2016). 
 
Cisnormativity and genderism are also evident in the context of the classroom (Pryor, 2015; Pusch, 2005). Trans 
students often experience avoidance or antagonism from faculty and other students, leading them to feel 
anxious, uncomfortable, and possibly threatened (Bilodeau, 2005). Often, faculty do not take seriously 
students’ requests to use their affirmed (as opposed to birth or legal) name, creating anxiety and discomfort 
for trans students (Goldberg et al., 2018a).  
 
                                                             
5According to Campus Pride, a total of 86 colleges and university currently cover gender transition related medical expenses 
(e.g., hormones; gender affirming surgery); see https://www.campuspride.org/tpc/student-health-insurance/  


 
 
 
Transgender Students in Higher Education  6 
 
 
 
FINDINGS 
A. Climate 
Indicative of their marginalization within college communities, trans students nationwide report greater levels 
of harassment and discrimination, have a more negative perception of campus and classroom climates, and 
feel less accepted as part of the campus community, as compared to cisgender students (Dugan et al., 2012; 
Garvey & Rankin, 2015; James et al., 2016). Again, the USTS found that 24% of respondents who were out as or 
perceived as trans in college/vocational school reported being verbally, physically, or sexually harassed at that 
time—with 16% of those who experienced harassment reporting that they left college because of it (James et 
al., 2016). A study by Dugan et al. (2012), which compared trans-identified students, cisgender LGB students, 
and cisgender heterosexual students, found that the trans students viewed the climate on their campuses as 
more hostile (i.e., less tolerant and inclusive of them as trans people), and also reported a lower sense of 
belonging (i.e., acceptance and integration) within their campus community. Goldberg, Kuvalanka, and dickey 
(2018c) found that two-thirds of trans students reported that concerns about physical/emotional safety 
affected how they presented their gender on campus, with many stating that they dressed and presented in 
ways that were in closer alignment with the gender binary than was their actual gender identity. Similarly, in 
focus groups with trans students, Goldberg and Kuvalanka (2018) found that students constantly weighed the 
benefits of freely expressing gender (e.g., via beginning hormone treatment at college; via the use of binders, 
among female-bodied participants) with the risks of discomfort and possible physical harm associated with 
visibility and public scrutiny. 
 
Some research has linked the presence of trans-inclusive policies/supports on college campuses to trans 
students’ psychosocial and academic outcomes. In their study of over 500 trans students, Goldberg, Beemyn, 
and Smith (2018a) found that the presence of trans-inclusive policies/supports was related to a greater sense 
of belonging and more positive perceptions of campus climate. Among the supports that students valued most 
were gender-inclusive restrooms, non-discrimination policies that are inclusive of gender identity, and the 
ability to change one’s name on campus records (Goldberg et al., 2018a). In a study of 152 trans college students, 
Woodford, Joslin, Pitcher, and Renn (2017) found that the frequency of experiencing select trans environmental 
microaggressions (e.g., not having access to comfortable bathrooms as a trans person) was associated with 
increased risk of negative academic outcomes. Finally, Seelman (2016), using data from the NTDS, found that 
among students who had attended college, being denied access to restrooms or gender-appropriate housing 
during while in college was associated with a higher risk for suicidality.  


 
 
 
Transgender Students in Higher Education  7 
 
CLASSROOM CLIMATE  
Classrooms are a microcosm of the larger college or university. In turn, faculty can play a powerful role in 
reinforcing, or resisting, the transphobic treatment that students may face on campus and in society at large. 
Faculty are often unwilling or resistant to using students’ affirmed names (i.e., the names that students use for 
themselves, which may differ from their legal or birth names, which appear on the class roster), prompting 
discomfort and anxiety among trans students when they try to assert themselves (Goldberg & Kuvalanka, 2018; 
Goldberg et al., 2018a). As one trans student said, “Needing to explain your name and pronouns to every new 
professor, and dreading knowing that they’ll probably read your birth name out loud to the class, is extremely 
stressful and miserable and embarrassing” (Goldberg et al., 2018a).  
 
Distinct challenges may be present for students who do not hold binary gender identities, whose physical 
presentation is not clearly gendered as stereotypically male or female, and/or who do not pursue biomedical 
transition (Catalano, 2015; Pusch, 2005; Pryor, 2015; Rankin & Beemyn, 2012). Nonbinary identified students may 
feel highly visible and vulnerable, but also invisible, in that their gender identities are often “foreign” or 
unrecognizable to others. Goldberg, Kuvalanka, and dickey (2018c) found that nonbinary students reported 
more frequent misgendering by staff, faculty, and peers as compared to binary students—in part because of 
the lack of cultural visibility surrounding nonbinary identities; or, as one student said, “nobody knows nonbinary 
is a thing.” As one agender and nonbinary identified student noted, “Because I am nonbinary, it is impossible 
for them to gender me correctly unless I have informed them of my gender and/or pronouns.” Yet some 
students do not wish to endure the stress and discomfort of constantly educating, reminding, and correcting 
faculty of their affirmed names and pronouns; in turn, they may “give up” on these efforts, especially if faculty 
promise to use them but don’t (Goldberg & Kuvalanka, 2018; Nicolazzo, 2016a).  
FACULTY ADVISORS AND MENTORS 
Relationships with faculty mentors and advisors may be important sources of support and potential buffers to 
transphobic treatment that students face on campus and in society. In their study of 91 trans graduate students, 
Goldberg et al. (2018c) inquired about experiences with faculty, and students’ relationships with advisors and 
supervisors emerged as salient contexts for support or invalidation. Some participants described how, even 
though their advisors and supervisors were not necessarily highly aware of TGNC issues or identities, they had 
made a strong effort to learn from and respond compassionately to participants. Participants appreciated when 
their advisors and supervisors took responsibility for their actions, apologizing or correcting themselves if they 
accidentally misgendered them—and indicated a commitment to learning and “doing better.” Some students 
noted that had it not been for their advisor’s support and affirmation of their trans identity, they may not have 
“survived” the stress of graduate school. This highlights the potential for advisors to represent powerful sources 
of resilience, buffering against the broader stress associated with both graduate school and being a gender 
minority (Beemyn, 2016; Grady, LaTouche, Oslaski-Lopez, Powers, & Simacek, 2014; McKinney, 2005).  
 


 
 
 
Transgender Students in Higher Education  8 
 
Other graduate students in Goldberg et al.’s 2018c study reported much less positive experiences. For example, 
some participants described repeated misgendering by advisors and supervisors, which was especially 
distressing insomuch as students worked closely with them and had talked to them about their affirmed names 
and pronouns. Participants were aware of existing power differentials and were often scared to address 
repeated instances of misgendering. In turn, they typically remained silent as a means of avoiding retribution 
and possible jeopardy to their academic and professional futures. A genderqueer participant shared: “My 
dissertation advisor, who is aware of my gender identity, refers to me exclusively using the wrong pronouns. 
It’s upsetting and frustrates me, but I haven't corrected her yet because I don't feel comfortable doing so 
[because of the] culture [within] my department.”  
B. Academic Self Esteem and Achievement 
National data on first-year college or university students suggests that, compared to national norms, trans first 
year students rate themselves lower in the areas of physical health, social self-confidence, leadership ability, 
and academic self-concept, a composite that integrates respondents’ self-rated academic ability, mathematical 
ability, intellectual self-confidence, and drive to achieve (Eagan et al., 2017). First year students who identify as 
trans appear to have graduated high school with a slightly lower GPA than the national average. Namely, 53.9% 
of trans students had a high school GPA of A- or higher, compared to 58.7% of the national sample (Stolzenberg 
& Hughes, 2017). At the same time, however, they have greater confidence in their artistic ability and creativity, 
compared to national norms (Eagan et al., 2017). 
C. Mental Health, Counseling, and Health Care 
Trans people are at an elevated risk for mental health problems in the broader population, due to the 
multifaceted stressors associated with their gender identity (Perez-Brumer et al., 2017). Trans students 
specifically may also be at elevated risk for mental health issues. Research indicates higher rates of distress 
among trans college students (Effrig, Bieschke, & Locke, 2011), suicidal ideation (Becker, Roberts, Ritts, 
Branagan, Warner, & Clark, 2017), and eating disorder diagnoses (Diemer, Grant, Munn-CHernoff, Patterson, & 
Duncan, 2015) compared to cisgender college students. In their analysis of data from first year college students, 
Stolzenberg and Hughes (2017) found trans students were more likely to report frequently feeling depressed, 
compared to the national sample (47.2% vs. 9.5%)—as well as to report feeling “overwhelmed” in the year prior 
to college (54.9% vs. 34.1%). In Goldberg, Kuvalanka, Budge, Benz, and Smith (2018b)’s mixed-methods study of 
over 500 trans students’ mental health, mental health care, and health care experiences, almost 58% of 
students reported at least one mental health diagnosis from a health provider, and another 27% said they 
struggled with mental health concerns that had not been diagnosed. Thus, only 15% said that they were not 
dealing with any mental health issues. Across diagnosed and undiagnosed difficulties, 68% reported depression 
(including bipolar disorder), 67% anxiety (including social anxiety and generalized anxiety), 4% ADHD, 4% 
eating disorders, and 4% personality disorders.  
 


 
 
 
Transgender Students in Higher Education  9 
 
In light of these challenges—which students in Goldberg et al.’s (2018b) study attributed to a range of factors, 
including experiences of and fears of victimization, invalidation and nonsupport from family, lack of 
community, loneliness/alienation, and stress related to gender dysphoria—trans students may be especially 
likely to seek out and benefit from mental health care treatment. Indeed, Stolzenberg and Hughes’ (2017) 
analysis of data from first year college students indicated that nearly three-quarters of trans first year students 
anticipated seeking counseling, compared to half of students in the national sample. Yet trans students are 
vulnerable to insensitive, incompetent, and even destructive interventions by mental health care providers.  
 
In Goldberg et al.’s (2018b) study, students named a range of negative experiences with mental health 
providers, which often involved explicit invalidation of their gender identity, whereby therapists had denied 
their particular trans experience or identity, especially nonbinary identities. One white genderfluid 
undergraduate student shared: “I go to a trans-affirming therapist for my PTSD which was caused by a very 
violent assault where my gender identity was the main trigger. [Before that] I had non-affirming therapists who 
suggested I go off hormones and try to live as a female.” Other students described how their therapists 
overemphasized their gender identity, centering it as the root cause of all their mental health issues, which 
participants felt was misplaced. As one white nonbinary graduate student shared, “My therapists always 
assume my depression stems from my gender identity, but it doesn’t. So they are sensitive to my gender, but 
also make it my defining aspect.”  By contrast, some students encountered avoidance of their trans identity, 
wherein therapists seemed unwilling or uninterested in addressing their gender, “skirting around [it].” Often, 
students asserted that their therapists were never explicitly transphobic, but lacked competence in trans 
issues, were generally unhelpful, and sometimes expected clients to educate them about trans issues. Notably, 
therapists who used participants’ affirmed name/pronouns were appreciated, as were those who showed 
knowledge of trans identities and issues. 
 
Regarding campus mental health and health care experiences specifically, over one-third of the students in 
Goldberg et al.’s (2018b) study who had experiences with on-campus health services reported being 
misgendered sometimes or often. Almost one-quarter of students who had experiences with campus 
counseling described their experiences as mixed or not affirming, whereas slightly less than half of students 
who went to campus health services described their experiences as mixed or not affirming. While binary 
students did not rate counseling services significantly differently than nonbinary students, binary students 
rated health services as more trans-affirming than did nonbinary students. Nonbinary students were also 71% 
more likely to report frequent misgendering than binary students by on-campus therapists, and 76% more 
likely to report frequent misgendering by on-campus health care providers. 
D. Community and Support 
Many schools lack formal or informal LGBTQ organizations or clubs. Even among those that do, membership in 
LGBTQ student organizations tends to be predominantly cisgender, so trans students often have a difficult 
time meeting other trans people on campus (Nicolazzo, 2016a, 2016b). The needs and experiences of TGNC 
people in such groups tend to be “silenced and ignored in favor of those who are cisgender” (Marine & 


 
 
 
Transgender Students in Higher Education  10 
 
Nicolazzo, 2014, p. 266) and also white (Nicolazzo, 2016c), reflecting broader tensions within the LGBTQ 
community (Beemyn, 2016; dickey, 2016). For example, a participant in Goldberg and Kuvalanka’s (2018) study 
of seven trans students said: “As someone who self identifies as both gender nonconforming/gender neutral 
and as sexuality-wise queer, it feels very different to be in a space that is sexuality oriented. It feels problematic 
to me personally that the two are paired together, in general. Spaces that are very genuinely attempting to be 
supportive are also clumping groups together that don’t necessarily identify along similar lines. And therefore 
some stories become heard and catered to more than others, even though that often is not intentional.” 
 
To address or offset a lack of perceived connection, support, and community within LGBTQ oriented groups, 
some students form formal or informal trans-specific campus groups. Indeed, Goldberg et al. (2018a) found that 
students often described a desire and perceived need for TGNC-specific support groups and student 
organizations, where they could gather with other TGNC students, share information and resources, and 
receive mentorship. Students saw a variety of possibilities for these trans-specific spaces, including serving as 
a resource exchange wherein students could share binders, breast inserts, and tucking supplies, as well as 
offering a safe space to congregate and/or hold events and host speakers. Among the small group of students 
who did have TGNC groups on their campus, some mentioned problems with these groups, including 
organizational issues, such as poor funding and inconsistent leadership; and failure to address 
intersectionality—i.e., they were not inclusive of trans students who were of color, older, or had a disability. 
 
In the absence of supportive networks on campus, trans students may spend more time engaging with online 
social networks (Goldberg & Kuvalanka, 2018). In their focus groups with seven trans college students, Goldberg 
and Kuvalanka (2018) found that the Internet (and Tumblr specifically) was a valued source of information, 
community, and affirmation, especially when students lacked support elsewhere. Significantly, Stolzenberg 
and Hughes’s (2017) analysis of first year student data found that trans students were more likely to participate 
in online social networks for six or more hours per week compared to national averages (3.9% vs. 26.3%).  
E. Civic Engagement Activism, and Leadership 
National data on trans first-year students indicate that they outpace other student in their pre-college civic 
engagement (e.g., volunteering, protesting) and social agency (i.e., their valuing of social and political 
engagement), highlighting trans students’ unique strengths (Egan et al., 2017). Further, trans first-year college 
students appear to be committed to influencing politics and social values in the long term: 43.1% believed that 
influencing the political structure was an important or essential goal, compared to 22.3% of students in general 
(Stolzenberg & Hughes, 2017). Trans students were also more likely than students in general to regard 
influencing social values as important or essential (63.3% vs. 43.9%). Trans students were also twice as likely to 
score high on a measure of civic engagement compared to the national sample (47.5% s. 23.4%) and also 
reported a higher likelihood of committing to social change after college, possibly reflecting their awareness 
of and commitment to influencing ongoing public debates affecting transgender communities (Stolzenberg & 
Hughes, 2017). 
 


 
 
 
Transgender Students in Higher Education  11 
 
Goldberg, Smith, and Beemyn (2018d) examined over 500 trans students’ experiences with advocacy and 
activism. Some students described engaging formal advocacy, such as working on campus campaigns on issues 
such as gender inclusive restrooms and housing, leading trainings on trans issues on campus, organizing trans 
educational/social events on campus, and speaking on university panels about their experiences. More often, 
though, students described engaging in informal advocacy, such as providing support and mentoring to trans 
students, offering themselves as resources to administrators, faculty, and students, and correcting 
peers/faculty regarding names and pronoun use in class. Some participants, intriguingly, emphasized that their 
primary advocacy took place in the context of academic work or employment, whereby they pursued class 
projects and faculty research opportunities that focused on trans identities or trans related topics. As one 
participant said: “I did a project interviewing different departments of the university about everything involved 
in changing one's name in the university system.”  
 
Students were asked why they did or did not engage in advocacy, and the following facilitative factors 
emerged: personal values (e.g., it was important to them), perceived need for change (e.g., perceived invisibility 
of trans people on campus; a lack of trans-inclusive services, supports, and infrastructure); sense of personal 
responsibility (e.g., “If I don’t do it, who will? I need to do it; I need to give back”); and desire for trans 
community/support. Barriers to engagement in advocacy included: lack of time/other responsibilities (e.g., job, 
classes, etc.); structural constraints (e.g., live off campus/commute); concerns related to outness and 
(hyper)visibility; lack of identification with campus trans community; other identities are more salient and 
warranting advocacy (e.g., racial justice advocacy; disability advocacy); mental health issues (e.g., social 
anxiety); lack of a priority; and lack of opportunity (e.g., no known opportunities for advocacy or activism on 
campus).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
Transgender Students in Higher Education  12 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
The following recommendations draw from work by Beemyn (2003, 2005, 2016, 2019), Seelman (2014a, 2014b), 
Goldberg and colleagues (2018a, 2018b, 2018c, 2018d; Goldberg & Kuvalanka, 2018), and others (Donatone & 
Rachlin, 2013; Miner, 2009). See these publications for more details. 
A. Policies and protections 
Trans students in the US currently lack important legal protections that would enable them to participate fully 
in higher education—and the lack of these protections has important consequences for their ability to succeed 
academically and for their social and emotional well-being. To counter the broader negative climate, colleges 
and universities should explicitly include gender identity and expression in their nondiscrimination policies. 
Such policies should codify protections for TGNC students, prohibit transphobic acts and language, and be 
widely disseminated, discussed, and enforced. 
B. Curriculum 
College curricula should address gender identity, and specifically trans identities and experiences. Trans-
inclusive content is beneficial to both trans and cisgender students and should be incorporated across 
disciplines and in some depth. Colleges and universities should encourage faculty to develop appropriate trans-
inclusive curricular content, possibly providing seed money or other incentives to faculty so that they have the 
time and resources to develop such content. 
C. Trainings/educations aimed at students 
Students should be provided with education/training to enhance their understanding and acceptance of 
gender diversity—including nonbinary gender identities. This education can begin with new student 
orientations. Training student leaders (e.g., resident advisors; officers of student organizations) is especially 
important, so that these leaders can help to transform campus climate and create respectful spaces for all 
students. Such training can include role plays and educational content that will help students to develop 
comfort with trans-affirming and inclusive language. 
D. Trainings/education aimed at faculty and staff 
Faculty/staff (e.g., campus security, dining services, financial aid, and residential life staff) should be exposed 
to mandatory training which include trans terminology, pronouns, tools to interrupt the gender binary, best 
practices, acting as an ally to TGNC students, and resources to create a more inclusive campus. Counseling and 


 
 
 
Transgender Students in Higher Education  13 
 
health services staff in particular need professional development to support their competence in serving trans 
students.  
 
E. Name and gender change; pronouns 
Students should be able to list a name other than their legal first name on campus records, including student 
ID cards, class rosters, email addresses, and diplomas. The change of chosen name process should be clearly 
and effectively advertised. Students should also have the option to change their gender marker on campus 
records and documents without having to change their gender marker first on legal documents. Alternatives 
to male/female (e.g., nonbinary options) should be provided.   
F. Documents, forms, and records: An overhauling of the gender binary 
Universities and colleges should review all documents, forms, records, and website pages to ensure that 
gender-inclusive language is being used (e.g., acknowledge the existence of trans people; include gender 
options beyond male and female). Avoid unnecessarily gendered language (e.g., in communications to parents, 
say “your child” instead of “your son or daughter”). Consistency across offices (e.g., admissions, the registrar) 
should be prioritized. 
G. Restrooms 
Plans for all new buildings should account for the presence of gender-inclusive or single-stall campus 
restrooms. All existing restrooms should be reviewed, and a not insignificant number should be modified to be 
gender-inclusive or single-stall. These should be well advertised around campus (e.g., universities should 
develop a campus map that identifies all gender-inclusive restrooms on campus). These restrooms should be 
just as well maintained as all other restrooms. 
H. Housing 
Trans-inclusive/trans-accommodating housing options, in which students can be housed in keeping with their 
gender identity should be pursued, and residential life staff should provide support to trans students 
navigating the housing process. For example, institutions can ask all housing applicants to designate if they 
would prefer sharing a room/floor with women, men, both men and women, and/or people of other gender 
identities. Institutions should offer alternate housing options for transgender and gender non-conforming 
individuals who, for safety reasons, would rather not have a roommate (e.g., single-occupancy dorm rooms). 
I. Trans-inclusive/sensitive counseling and health care 
Counseling and health services staff should receive training on trans-inclusive and trans-affirming practices. 
Effort to hire trans providers should be made. Providers should be familiar with the trans-affirming providers 
and services in the broader community, and should regularly update their referral lists—especially if on-campus 


 
 
 
Transgender Students in Higher Education  14 
 
providers cannot provide transition-related medical care such as hormone therapy. Health insurance coverage 
should be reviewed and negotiated to be inclusive of trans students. 
J. Trans-specific spaces 
Trans-specific spaces and/or groups should be pursued, and provided with sufficient resources to support trans 
related programming and events. Notably, LGBTQ resource centers and university-sanctioned LGBTQ student 
groups are often primarily white spaces, limiting their meaningfulness to trans people of color. Further, most 
LGBTQ groups are primarily centered around sexual orientation rather than gender identity, and thus it can be 
difficult for trans students to gain support and community within these groups, especially when there are few 
if any out trans students (e.g., at small colleges/universities or religious institutions). Staff and administrators 
who work to support marginalized or underrepresented community members should become knowledgeable 
about off-campus trans resources and supports and ensure that this knowledge is accessible to trans students 
or students exploring their gender identity (e.g., via counseling services, campus diversity office(s), and/or the 
university website). 
 
 


 
 
 
Transgender Students in Higher Education  15 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Arnett, J. J., & Tanner, J. L. (2006). Emerging Adults in America: Coming of Age in the 21st 
 
century. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
 
Becker, M. A., Roberts, S. F. N., Ritts, S. M., Branagan, W. T., Warner, A. R., & Clark, S. L. (2017). Supporting 
transgender college students: Implications for clinical intervention and campus prevention. Journal of College 
Student Psychotherapy, 31, 155-176. 
 
Beemyn, B. (2003). Serving the needs of transgender college students. Journal of Gay and Lesbian Issues in 
Education, 1, 33-50. 
 
Beemyn, G. (2016). Transgender inclusion on college campuses. In A. E. Goldberg (Ed.), The Sage encyclopedia 
of LGBTQ studies (pp. 1226-1229). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
 
Beemyn, B., Dominque, D., Pettitt, J., & Smith, T. (2005). Suggested steps to make campuses more trans-
inclusive. Journal of Gay and Lesbian Issues in Education, 3, 89-94. 
 
Beemyn, G. (2019). Get over the binary: The experiences of nonbinary trans college students.  
In G. Beemyn (Ed.), Trans people in higher education. Albany, NY: SUNY Press. 
 
Beemyn, G., & Brauer, D. (2015). Trans-inclusive college records: Meeting the needs of an  
increasingly diverse U.S. student population. Transgender Studies Quarterly, 2, 478-487. 
 
Beemyn, G., & Rankin, S. (2011). The lives of transgender people. New York, NY: Columbia  
University Press. 
 
Bilodeau, B. (2005). Beyond the gender binary: a case study of two transgender students at a Midwestern 
research university. Journal of Gay & Lesbian Issues in Education, 3, 29-44. Campus Pride (2018). Campus Pride 
Trans Policy Clearinghouse.  https://www.campuspride.org/tpc. 
 
Case, K. A., Kanenberg, H., Erich, S. A., & Tittsworth, J. (2012). Transgender inclusion in university 
nondiscrimination statements: Challenging gender nonconforming privilege through student activism. Journal 
of Social Issues, 68, 145-161. 
 


 
 
 
Transgender Students in Higher Education  16 
 
Catalano, D. C. J. (2015). “Trans enough?”: The pressures trans men negotiate in higher education. TSQ: 
Transgender Studies Quarterly, 2, 411-430. 
 
Cruz, T. (2014). Assessing access to care for transgender and gender nonconforming people: A consideration of 
diversity in combating discrimination. Social Science & Medicine, 110, 65-73. 
 
dickey, l. (2016). Transgender inclusion in the LGBTQ rights movement. In A. E. Goldberg (ed.) The SAGE 
encyclopedia of LGBTQ studies (pp. 1223–1226). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.  
 
Diemer, E. W.; Grant, J. D., Munn-Chernoff, M. A.; Patterson, D. A., & Duncan, A. E. (2015). Gender identity, sexual 
orientation, and eating related pathology in a national sample of college sudents. Journal of Adolescent Health, 
57, 144-149. 
 
Donatone, B., &  Rachlin, K. (2013). An intake template for transgender, transsexual, genderqueer, gender 
nonconforming, and gender variant college students seeking mental health services. Journal of College Student 
Psychotherapy, 27, 200-211. 
 
Dugan, J. P., Kusel, M. L., & Simounet, D. M. (2012). Transgender college students: An exploratory study of 
perceptions, engagement, and educational outcomes. Journal of College Student Development, 53, 719-736. 
 
Eagan, M. K., Stolzenberg, E. B., Zimmerman, H. B., Aragon, M. C., Whang Sayson, H., & Rios-Aguilar, C. (2016). The 
American freshman: National norms Fall 2016. Los  Angeles, CA: Higher Education Research Institute (HERI). 
Retrieved from: https://www.heri.ucla.edu/monographs/TheAmericanFreshman2016.pdf  
 
Effrig, J., Bieschke, K., & Locke, B. (2011). Examining victimization and psychological distress in transgender 
college students. Journal of College Counseling, 14, 143-157. 
 
Enke, A. (2012a). Introduction: Transfeminist perspectives. In A. Enke (Ed.), Transfeminist perspectives in and 
beyond transgender and gender studies (pp. 1-15). Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press. 
 
Enke, A. (2012b). The education of little cis: Cisgender and the discipline of opposing bodies. In A. Enke (Ed.), 
Transfeminist perspectives in and beyond transgender and gender studies (pp. 60-80). Philadelphia, PA: Temple 
University Press. 
 
Garvey, J., & Rankin, S. (2015). The influence of campus experiences on the level of outness 
among trans-spectrum and queer-spectrum students. Journal of Homosexuality, 62, 374-93. 
 


 
 
 
Transgender Students in Higher Education  17 
 
Goldberg, A. E., & Kuvalanka, K. A. (2018). Navigating identity development and community belonging when 
“there are only two boxes to check”: An exploratory study of trans nonbinary college students. Journal of LGBT 
Youth, 15, 106-131. 
 
Goldberg, A. E., Beemyn, G., & Smith, J. Z. (2018a). What is needed, what is valued: Trans’ students’ perspectives 
on trans-inclusive policies and practices in higher education. Journal of Educational & Psychological 
Consultation. doi: 10.1080/10474412.2018.1480376 
 
 
Goldberg, A. E., Kuvalanka, K. A., Budge, S., Benz, M., & Smith, J. Z. (2018b). Mental health and health care 
experiences of trans students in higher educational settings: A mixed methods study. The Counseling 
Psychologist. 
 
Goldberg, A. E., Kuvalanka, K. A., & dickey, l. (2018c; in press). Transgender graduate students’ experiences in 
higher education: A mixed-methods exploratory study. Journal of Diversity in Higher Education. 
 
Goldberg, A. E., Smith, J. Z., & Beemyn, G. (2018d; in preparation). Advocacy and activism among transgender 
students in higher education. 
 
Grady, R., LaTouche, R., Oslawski-Lopez, J., Powers, A., & Simacek, K. (2014). Betwixt and between: The social 
position 
and 
stress 
experiences 
of 
graduate 
students. 
Teaching 
Sociology, 
42, 
5-16. 
doi: 
10.1177/0092055X13502182 
 
Grant, J., Mottet, L., Tanis, J., Harrison, J., Herman, J., & Keisling, M. (2011). Injustice at every turn: A Report of the 
National Transgender Discrimination Survey. Washington: National Center for Transgender Equality and 
National Gay and Lesbian Task Force.   
 
Hendricks, M., & Testa, R. J. (2012). A conceptual framework for clinical work with transgender  
and gender nonconforming clients: An adaptation of the Minority Stress Model. Professional Psychology: 
Research and Practice, 43, 460-467. doi: 10.1037/a0029597 
 
James, S., Herman, J., Rankin, S., Keisling, M., Mottet, L., & Anaf, M. (2016). The report of the 2015 US Transgender 
Survey. Washington, DC: National Center for Transgender Equality. 
 
Jourian, T. J., & Nicolazzo, Z. (2016). Bringing our communities to the research table: The liberatory potential of 
collaborative methodological research practices alongside LGBTQ participants. Educational Action Research, 
doi: 10.1080/09650792.2016.1203343 
 


 
 
 
Transgender Students in Higher Education  18 
 
Kena, G., Hussar W., McFarland J., de Brey C., Musu-Gillette, L., Wang, X., Dunlop Velez, E. (2016). The Condition 
of Education 2016 (NCES 2016-144). Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for 
Education Statistics. 
Krum, T., Davis, K., & Galupo, M. P. (2013). Gender-inclusive housing preferences: A survey of college-aged 
transgender students. J of LGBT Youth. 
 
Marine, S., & Nicolazzo, Z. (2014). Names that matter: Exploring the tensions of campus LGBTQ centers and trans 
inclusion. Journal of Diversity in Higher Education, 7, 265-81. 
 
Mairne, S. B., Helfrich, G., & Randhawa, L. (2017). Gender-inclusive practices in campus women’s and gender 
centers: Benefits, challenges, and future prospects. NASPA Journal About Women in Higher Education, 10, 45-
63. 
 
McGuire, J. K., Kuvalanka, K. A., Catalpa, J., & Toomey, R. (2016). Transfamily theory: How the presence of trans* 
family members informs gender development in families. Journal of Family Theory and Review, 8, 60-73.  
 
McKinney, J. S. (2005). On the margins: A study of the experiences of transgender college students. Journal of 
Gay & Lesbian Issues in Education, 3(1), 63-75.  
 
Miner, J. (2009, Spring). How to make your office and institution more transgender friendly. College and 
University, 84, 69-72. 
Movement Advancement Project and GLSEN. (2017, April). Separation and stigma: Transgender youth and 
school facilities. Retrieved from: http://lgbtmap.org/transgender-youth-school  
 
Nicolazzo, Z. (2016a). Trans* in college: Transgender students’ strategies for navigating campus life and the 
institutional politics of inclusion. Sterling, VA: Stylus. 
 
Nicolazzo, Z. (2016b). ‘It’s a hard line to walk’: black non-binary trans* collegians’ perspectives on passing, 
realness, and trans*-normativity. International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education, 29, 1173-1188. 
 
Padula, V., Heru, S., & Campbell, J. D. (2016). Societal implications of health insurance coverage for medically 
necessary services in the U.S. transgender population: A cost- effectiveness analysis. Journal of General Internal 
medicine, 31, 394-401.  
 
Perez-Brumer, A., Day, J. K., Russell, S. T., Hatzenbuehler, M. L. (2017). Prevalence and correlates of suicidal 
ideation among transgender youth in California: Findings from a representative, population-based sample of 
high school students. Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaac.2017.06.010 


 
 
 
Transgender Students in Higher Education  19 
 
Pryor, J. T. (2015). Out in the classroom: Transgender student experiences at a large public university. Journal of 
College Student Development, 56(5), 440-455.  
 
Pusch, R. S. (2005). Objects of curiosity: Transgender college students' perceptions of the reactions of others. 
Journal of Gay & Lesbian Issues in Education, 3, 45-61.  
 
Seelman, K. L. (2014a). Recommendations of transgender students, staff, and faculty in the USA for improving 
college campuses. Gender & Education, 26, 618-635. 
 
Seelman, K. L. (2014b). Transgender individuals’ access to college housing and bathrooms: Findings from the 
National Transgender Discrimination Survey. Journal of Gay & Lesbian Social Services, 26, 186-206, 
 
Seelman, K. L. (2016). Transgender adults’ access to college bathrooms and housing and the relationship to 
suicidality. Journal of Homosexuality, 63, 1378-1399.  
 
Simmons, H., & White, F. (2014). Our many selves. In L. Erickson-Schroth (Ed.), Trans bodies, trans selves: A 
resource for the transgender community (pp. 3-23). New York, NY: Oxford. 
 
Singh, A., Meng, S., & Hansen, A. (2013). “It's already hard enough being a student”: Developing affirming college 
environments for trans youth, Journal of LGBT Youth, 10, 208-223.  
 
Stolzenberg, E. B., & Hughes, B. (2017, Spring). The experiences of incoming transgender college students; New 
data on gender identity. Association of American Colleges & Universities, 103(2). Retrieved from 
 
https://www.aacu.org/liberaleducation/2017/spring/stolzenberg_hughes  
 
Stryker, S. (2008). Transgender history. Berkeley, CA: Seal Press. 
 
U.S. Department of Education. (2018). Recent high school completers and their enrollment in 2-year and 4-year 
colleges, by sex: 1960 through 2010. Retrieved from 
 
http://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d11/tables/dt11_209.asp 
 
U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2018). 69.7 percent of 2016 high school graduates enrolled 
in college in October 2016. Retrieved from  
https://www.bls.gov/opub/ted/2017/69-point-7-percent-of-2016-high-school-graduates-enrolled-in-college-
in-october-2016.htm   
 
Woodford, M. R., Joslin, J., Pitcher, E. N., & Renn, K. A. (2017). A mixed methods inquiry into trans* environmental 
microaggressions on college campuses: Experiences and outcomes. Journal of Ethnic & Cultural Diversity in 
Social Work, 26, 95-111.  


 
 
 
Transgender Students in Higher Education  20 
 
 
 
ENDNOTES 
 
 
A) Focus groups. In the first stage of the project, I drew inspiration from participatory action research models (Case, 
Kanenberg, Erich, & Tittswort, 2012), whereby I, a cisgender female professor of psychology, partnered with three TGNC 
students on my campus to create the focus group questions. I also trained two of these students to be the focus group 
leaders. The purpose of our collaborative research approach was to bring trans students into the research process not merely 
as subjects to be studied but as active agents in the construction of research and the knowledge produced by it (Jourian & 
Nicolazzo, 2016). Two focus groups with 4-7 individuals were held. Five individuals participated in both group meetings. One 
unique individual was present in each meeting. Participants were between 18-22 years and undergraduates at a liberal arts 
university in a mid-sized city. Five were white and two were of color. All seven participants identified as nonbinary trans. 
 
A primary aim of the focus groups was to gain insight into the experiences of nonbinary trans students in college, with the 
ultimate goal of improving services aimed at TGNC students. A second aim was to inform the development of a survey that 
could be disseminated to TGNC college students and which would be sensitive to the experiences of nonbinary identified 
students. A third aim was to provide an opportunity for networking and connection. Focus group sessions ttackled a variety 
of topics, including feeling scrutinized for one’s gender identity, reasons for pursuing or not pursuing advocacy around 
gender/trans issues, perceptions of existing and needed supports and services for TGNC students on campus, experiences 
with faculty and staff, and career goals. (For more details, see Goldberg & Kuvalanka, 2018.) 
 
B) Survey. The focus groups, along with the existing literature and input by scholars who study trans populations, helped to 
inform the development of a large-scale online survey of trans students’ experiences in higher education. After pilot testing, 
the survey, which was constructed using the Qualtrics software application, went “live”; it was active from May–November 
2016. Study information was distributed to LGBTQ groups, clubs, and resource centers on college campuses across the US. 
Some colleges did not have LGBTQ groups or resource centers, but, rather, a designated staff member within a larger center, 
such as multicultural affairs, that provided support or resources to LGBTQ students. In such cases, study information was 
provided to them directly with a request to disseminate to relevant individuals. Information was also distributed to listservs 
and social media pages aimed at trans people and/or college students.   
 
The survey included questions on a range of topics, including demographics, gender identity, experiences with faculty, and 
sense of belonging on campus. Students with nonbinary gender identities were particularly encouraged to participate. 
Ultimately, approximately three-quarters of the sample identified as nonbinary, and about one-quarter as binary (e.g., trans 
man, trans woman). About three-quarters were white, and about a quarter were of color. About three-quarters were assigned 
female at birth, and the remainder were assigned male at birth. (For more details, especially about the breakdown of binary 
and nonbinary categories, see Goldberg, Beemyn, & Smith, 2018a; Goldberg, Kuvalanka, Budge, Benz, & Smith, 2018b; 
Goldberg, Kuvalanka, & dickey, 2018c; Goldberg, Smith, & Beemyn, 2018d.) These demographics are very similar to those of 
younger trans participants, particularly nonbinary trans participants, in other studies of trans adults (Beemyn, 2019; Beemyn 
& Rankin, 2011; Grant, Mottet, & Tanis, 2011; James et al., 2016). 
 
 Research Methods 


 
 
 
Transgender Students in Higher Education  21 
 
 
C) Interviews. I conducted interviews with 14 students who had left college (i.e., they took leave, dropped out, or transferred). 
These 14 students (12 white, two of color; nine binary, five nonbinary) took the survey and indicated a willingness to be 
contacted about future study opportunities. In turn, they were willing to complete a telephone interview about their 
experiences of leaving college, including why they left and, if relevant, why they returned. Data analysis of the interview data 
from these interviews is underway.