| FALL 2011 JOURNAL OF COLLEGE ADMISSION
18
WWW.NACACNET.ORG
Recasting Non-Cognitive Factors 
in College Readiness as What They 
Truly Are: Non-Academic Factors
by Amanda Sommerfeld
Against the backdrop of traditional measures of college readiness (i.e., high school GPA, 
standardized test scores, and high school rank), the consideration of “non-cognitive” factors 
marked a significant departure when they were first discussed as integral aspects of college 
success. Used to refer to any characteristic, ability or disposition that was theorized to af-
fect college success or retention, the term “non-cognitive” became a kind of a catchall for 
any variables beyond those “cognitive” or “intellectual” variables listed above. However, the 
term “non-cognitive” is now and has always been a misnomer, used to refer to a vast array 
of constructs, many of which reflect cognitive process. 
Now, this could be considered simply a semantic issue; “non-
cognitive,” “dispositional” or “non-academic,” what difference does 
it make if there is shared understanding of what the term refers to? 
The problem is that there isn’t shared understanding and as a result 
this essential area of study has been compromised by critiques and 
misunderstandings, causing not only confusion about how these 
factors affect college readiness, but also general skepticism about 
their utility in predicting college success. It seems, then, that for 
more transparent discourses to take place about the multifaceted 
nature of college readiness, this crucial area of research must 
be recast, enhancing the clarity of the field in order to provide a 
linguistic grounding for future research. With this in mind, as 
a preliminary step the author proposes that “non-cognitive” be 
replaced with the more appropriate “non-academic” term, thereby 
elucidating the true distinction that researchers are making between 
various contributing factors to college preparation and success. 
Why Do “Non-Cognitive” Factors Matter?
The introduction of “non-cognitive” factors into college readiness 
discussions grew out of necessity, prompted by decades of disparity 
between the rates of college acceptance, attendance and completion 
by non-traditional college students (i.e., students of color, first-
generation college students, older students, students with special 
learning needs, etc.) in comparison to the more traditional college-
going population (i.e., white, middle to upper-middle class men). 
These disparities were quickly attributed to higher education’s 
reliance on cognitive factors (i.e., standardized test scores, high 
school rank, high school GPA) as the basis of college admission 
that, though shown to be effective in identifying students likely to 
succeed in higher education (e.g., Bentekoe 1992, Bridgeman, 
McCamley-Jenkins and Ervin 2000, Kuncel et al. 2005, Kuncel, 
Hezlett and Ones 2001, Mouw and Khanna 1993, Noble 1991) 
were criticized for their inutility across more diverse student groups. 
In particular, the use of traditional college admission criteria as 
the sole grounds for college access has been criticized for two 
reasons: first, because traditional measures of college admission 
are ineffective identifiers of students at risk of attrition (Sedlacek 


FALL 2011 JOURNAL OF COLLEGE ADMISSION |
19
WWW.NACACNET.ORG
about a field. Based on these factors, he developed the Non-
Cognitive Questionnaire (NCQ), which has been used in scores of 
studies since its development in 1976 (Sedlacek and Brooks 1976). 
An equally compelling, though less-employed approach uses the 
work of Owens and colleagues (e.g., Mumford and Owens 1987) 
who promote the use of biodata in predicting student outcomes 
such as overall achievement, disciplinary actions, college GPA, 
and course withdrawals. The “non-cognitive” factors they propose 
include: knowledge and mastery of general principles (Knowledge); 
continuous learning, and intellectual interest and curiosity 
(Learning); artistic and cultural appreciation (Artistic); appreciation 
for diversity (Diversity); leadership (Leadership); interpersonal skills 
(Interpersonal); social responsibility and citizenship (Responsibility); 
physical and psychological health (Health); career orientation 
(Career); adaptability and life skills (Adapt); perseverance 
(Persevere); and ethics and integrity (Ethics). 
However, not all research on non-cognitive factors in college success 
is grounded in an overarching theory. In fact, most studies explore 
the utility of a single variable or cluster of variables in predicting out-
comes, resulting in a seemingly limitless list of constructs that have 
fallen under the “non-cognitive” umbrella, including metacognitive 
skills (e.g., Credé and Kuncel 2008, Zeegers 2001), study attitudes 
(e.g., Zimmerman, et al. 1977), study motivation (e.g., Melancon 
2002), academic and social integration (e.g., Milem and Berger 
1997, Tinto 1993); college knowledge (Conley 2005); personality 
1993); and second because they tend to lack predictive validity 
for assessing non-traditional college students’ readiness for college, 
oftentimes either resulting in a number of false negatives or 
overpredicting performance (Young and Koplow 1997). For example, 
although traditional admission criteria have been routinely criticized 
for underestimating the college performance of non-traditional 
students, other studies have identified the tendency for “highly 
qualified” non-traditional students (e.g., students of color who 
score well on SATs and have high GPAs from high-quality schools) to 
oftentimes stumble academically in the face of unwelcoming college 
environments (c.f., Linn 1990, Young 1993).
Considering “non-cognitive” factors in assessments of college 
readiness was, therefore, seen as a way to improve the accuracy 
of selection criteria, casting light on students’ abilities to navigate 
the multiple demands of the college environment so that they may 
have been better able to persist to graduation. In fact, research has 
consistently supported this theory, with dozens of studies across 
multiple populations demonstrating that the validity of college 
success predictions can be improved by including non-cognitive 
factors, such as commitment to school (Tinto 1993), long-term-
goal setting (Young and Sowa 1992) and social support (Lotkowski, 
Robbins and Noeth 2004), just to name a few. 
What Are “Non-Cognitive” Factors?
When we’re referring to “non-cognitive” factors, what exactly de-
fines them? The answer, albeit troubling, is “It depends;” it depends 
Considering “non-cognitive” factors in assessments of college 
readiness was, therefore, seen as a way to improve the accuracy 
of selection criteria, casting light on students’ abilities to navigate 
the multiple demands of the college environment so that they 
may have been better able to persist to graduation.
on who conducts the research and whether they’re basing their work 
on an established theory or exploring a new variable of interest. 
For example, one of the most prolific researchers in the field of 
college readiness is William Sedlacek, who theorized that there 
are eight essential non-cognitive components of college readiness: 
positive self-concept regarding academics; realistic self-appraisal; 
understanding/dealing with racism; long-term goal setting; having 
an available support person; demonstrated experience and success 
with leadership; community service; and knowledge acquired in/
(e.g., Ridgell and Lounsbury 2004), student involvement (e.g., Astin 
1993); university actions (e.g., Pascarella, Terenzini and Wolf 1986); 
problem-solving skills (e.g., Le, et al. 2005), and self-efficacy, effort 
regulation, and outcome expectations (e.g., Myers 2004).
Are They Really “Not Cognitive”?
As the above section details, clearly a great deal of variability exists 
in the constructs identified as “non-cognitive,” but as the list is 
considered, the appropriateness of their categorization as “non-
cognitive” becomes dubious.


| FALL 2011 JOURNAL OF COLLEGE ADMISSION
20
WWW.NACACNET.ORG
From the Latin cognoscere, which means "to know" or "to recognize," 
cognition is defined as, “The mental process of knowing, including 
aspects such as awareness, perception, reasoning, and judgment.” 
(The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language 2000). 
As such, cognitive processes refer to how people process information, in-
cluding how they perceive, learn and consider new facts or experiences. 
Now, certainly there are some constructs included under the um-
brella of “non-cognitive” factors that truly appear to fall outside its 
definition: constructs such as personality, having an available sup-
port person, and university actions. Aside from this short list, the 
majority of the remaining constructs are undeniably dependent on 
cognitive processes. 
For example, the ability to set long-term goals is one construct that 
has received a great deal of support as an essential characteris-
tic of successful college students (e.g., Mischel and Ayduk 2004). 
This construct, which is a direct manifestation of human executive 
functioning abilities seated in the prefrontal cortex, must certainly 
be considered a cognitive process; not only does it rely on an estab-
lished awareness of consequences, but also requires the capacity 
to perceive how actions affect outcomes, and the ability to choose 
to delay immediate gratification in favor of greater benefits in the 
long run. 
Similarly, constructs such as adaptability, understanding and deal-
ing with racism and problem-solving skills all require students to be 
able to analyze a situation, identify the relevant factors, and make 
choices based on reasoned logic rather than initial reactions—all 
of which fall under the purview of cognitive processes. Given this, 
the term “non-cognitive” hardly seems the appropriate choice for 
capturing this highly variable domain of inquiry, as it is not only 
phenomenologically incorrect, but unnecessarily vague as well. 
Furthermore, by mislabeling these factors as “non-cognitive” schol-
ars have succeeded in compromising the application of their own 
work, contributing to the confusion about what makes a student 
ready for college and undermining possible avenues of intervention. 
Implications of Definitional Vagueness
Since their initial introduction, research on the “non-cognitive” 
factors in college readiness and success has steadily grown, with 
associated implications for college programming and resource al-
location. For example, a 2000 article in the Chronicle of Higher 
Education about the Gates Millennium Scholars Program, a schol-
arship program for minority youth, proclaimed that “The $1-billion 
scholarship program—the largest in higher education—amounts to 
an unprecedented, large-scale experiment” because of its reliance 
on “non-cognitive” variables such as “community service, demon-
strable leadership skills, the ability to cope with racism, and other 
hard-to-quantify characteristics” rather than traditional college ad-
mission criteria (Pulley 2000, A41). 
That a scholarship program with this many resources and of this 
caliber would choose to base its decisions on “non-cognitive” 
characteristics is evidence of the scope and caliber of research on 
the topic, with publications numbering in the hundreds (Thomas, 
Kuncel and Credé 2007). However, despite the prolific research and 
the fact that “non-cognitive” factors have begun being integrated 
into college admission decisions at institutions such as Louisiana 
State University Medical School (LA), North Carolina State 
University (NC), and Muhlenberg College (PA) (Sedlacek 2004), 
critiques persist, particularly because of the varying amounts of 
support that different “non-cognitive” constructs have garnered, 
and the widely disparate predictive validity of those constructs 
(Thomas, et al. 2007).
For example, in a study that examined the validity of non-cognitive 
factors in predicting the academic performance of African-American 
college students, Nasim and colleagues (2005) found that predic-
tors varied in their utility across contexts. So whereas the academic 
performance of African-American students attending a predomi-
nantly white institution was associated with whether they had an 
academic support person available, their capacity to understand 
and deal with racism, and their espousal of humanist attitudes, the 
achievement of African-American students attending Historically 
Black Colleges or Universities was only influenced by their degree of 
positive academic self-concept. 
The authors of the Noncognitive Questionnaire, the measure most 
commonly used to assess “non-cognitive” factors in the research 
literature, similarly found differences in the predictive validity of 
constructs across groups. In their initial construct validation study, 
they found that of the six non-cognitive factors that were supported 
From the Latin cognoscere, which 
means "to know" or "to recognize," 
cognition is defined as, “The mental 
process of knowing, including aspects 
such as awareness, perception, 
reasoning, and judgment.”


FALL 2011 JOURNAL OF COLLEGE ADMISSION |
21
WWW.NACACNET.ORG
by their factor analysis (i.e., leadership, recognizing racism, long-term 
goal orientation, realistic self-appraisal, support for college plans, and 
self-confidence), only self-confidence, long-term goal orientation and 
realistic self-appraisal were predictive of white students’ first semester 
GPA, and only positive self-concept and realistic self-appraisal were 
predictive of GPA in African-American students. 
Findings like those outlined above have been replicated in a variety 
of others studies (e.g., Ancis and Sedlacek 1997, Fuertes, Sed-
lacek and Liu 1994), indicating differential predictive validity of 
“non-cognitive” constructs. Despite this, scholars persist in writ-
ing broadly of the importance of “non-cognitive” factors in college 
readiness. As a result, claims that “non-cognitive” factors, overall, 
are essential for college readiness have been challenged, accompa-
nied by calls for more psychometrically sound measures and greater 
definitional clarity on the whole. 
In response to these critiques, the author argues for a semantic 
switch—a movement away from the broad, undefined category of 
“non-cognitive” to nomenclature that allows for greater conceptual 
clarity. By categorizing important factors of college readiness as 
“academic” v. “non-academic,” a more apparent distinction can be 
made between that which is based on formal education (i.e., grades, 
subject matter knowledge, etc.) and those additional factors that af-
fect a student’s ability to adapt to and meet the varying demands of 
a college environment. The category of “non-academic” could then 
be broken down into appropriate subgroups, such as dispositions, 
executive functioning abilities, habits of mind, external resources, 
and college knowledge (see Table 1), that more specifically capture 
the different domains of integral variables.
Changing the Language: Implications of the Semantic Switch on 
Research and Interventions
Even if it may seem a trivial adjustment, making the linguistic 
switch from “non-cognitive” to “non-academic” signals a deeper, 
meaningful change in the area of college readiness. Ever since factors 
outside of GPA and standardized test scores were initially considered 
as potentially meaningful in the collegiate experiences of students, 
Factor
Definition
examples
Academic Factors
Factors explicitly targeted in formal education.
Subject matter knowledge, high school grades, standardized test scores, etc.
Non-Academic Factors
Dispositions
Internal characteristics that distinguish a person’s 
predominant outlook or characteristic attitude.
Personality (Ridgell and Lounsbury 2004)
Temperament
Values
Attitudes (Owens et al. 1976)
Habits of Mind
“Habits of thought and action that help people 
manage uncertain or challenging situations… 
[supporting] thoughtful and intelligent action” 
(Costa and Kallick 2000, 4).
Metacognitive skills (Zeegers 2001)
Creative thinking (Owens 1976)
Study attitudes (Zimmerman, et al. 1977)
Outcome expectations (Myers 2004) 
Intellectual curiosity (Owens 1976)
Appreciation for diversity (Sedlacek 1993)
Leadership (Owens 1976)
Positive self-concept (Sedlacek 1993)
Executive Functioning 
Abilities
Foundational skills that allow individuals to 
effectively navigate daily tasks, including the ability 
to “orient, plan, program responses, and verify and 
modify performances” (Denckla 1996, 263).
Study habits
Reasoning (Le, et al. 2005)
Long-term goal setting (Sedlacek 1993)
Realistic self-appraisal (Sedlacek 1993)
Decision making
Self-control (Myers 2004)
Goal commitment
External Resources
External factors that the individual may be able to 
access to support college readiness/success.
University fit (Nasim, et al. 2005)
Financial stability
Family beliefs about education
Institution intervention (Pascarella, et al. 1986)
Support person (Sedlacek 1993)
College Knowledge
Explicit and implicit knowledge required for college 
success; essentially knowing how to “do” college.
Knowledge of college requirements, placement test policies, and tuition costs 
(Conley 2005)
Understanding of the structure of college
Ability to recognize the systemic requirements and norms
Table 1: Factors in College Readiness and Success


| FALL 2011 JOURNAL OF COLLEGE ADMISSION
22
WWW.NACACNET.ORG
Ancis, J. R., and Sedlacek,W. E. (1997). Pre-
dicting the academic achievement of female 
students using the SAT and noncognitive 
variables. College and University, 72, 2-8.
Astin. A. W (1993). What matters in college" 
Four critical years revisited. San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass.
Bontekoe, J. (1992). The ACT as a predic-
tor of college success at Trinity Christian 
College. (ERIC Document Reproduction 
Service No. ED 355 258).
Bridgeman, B., McCamley-Jenkins, L., and 
Ervin, N. (2000). Predictions of freshman 
grade point average from the revised and 
recentered SAT I: Reasoning Test (College 
Board Rep. No. 2000-1). New York: College 
Entrance Examination Board.
Conley, D. (2005). College knowledge: What 
it takes students to succeed and what we 
can do to get them ready. San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass.
Crede´, M., and Kuncel, N. R. (2008). Study 
habits, skills, and attitudes: The third pil-
lar supporting collegiate academic per-
formance. Perspectives on Psychological 
Science, 3, 425–453.
Fuertes, J. N., Sedlacek, W. E., and Liu, W. 
M. (1994). Using the SAT and noncogni-
tive variables to predict the grades and 
retention of Asian-American university 
students. Measurement and Evaluation in 
Counseling and Development, 27, 74-84.
Kuncel, N. R., Credé, M., Thomas, L. L., 
Seiler, S. N., Klieger, D. M., and Woo, S. E. 
(2005).A meta-analysis of the Pharmacy 
College Admission Test (PCAT) and grade 
predictors of pharmacy student success. 
American Journal of Pharmaceutical Educa-
tion, 69, 339-347.
Kuncel, N. R., Hezlett, S. A., and Ones, D. S. 
(2001). A comprehensive meta-analysis of 
the predictive validity of the Graduate Re-
cord Examinations: Implications for gradu-
ate student selection and performance. 
Psychological Bulletin, 127, 162-181.
Le, H., Casillas, A., Robbins, S. B., and 
Langley, R. (2005). Motivational and skills, 
social, and self-management predictors of 
college outcomes: Constructing the Stu-
dent Readiness Inventory. Educational and 
Psychological Measurement, 65, 482-508.
Lotkowski, V.A., Robbins, S.B., and No-
eth, R.J. (2004). The role of academic and 
non-academic factors in improving college 
retention: ACT policy report. 
Linn, R.L. (1990). Hispanics’ education and 
background: Predictors of college achieve-
ment. New York: College Entrance Exami-
nation Board.
Melancon, J. G. (2002). Reliability, struc-
ture, and correlates of Learning and Study 
Strategies Inventory scores. Educational and 
Psychological Measurement, 62, 1020–1027.
Milem, J. F., and Berger, J. B. (1997). A 
modified model of college student persis-
tence: Exploring the relationship between 
Astin's theory of involvement and Tinto's 
theory of student departure. Journal of Col-
lege Student Development, 38, 387-400.
Mischel,W., and Ayduk, O. (2004). Willpower 
in a cognitive-affective processing system: 
The dynamics of delay of gratification. In R. F. 
Baumeister and K. D. Vohs (Eds.), Handbook 
of self-regulation: Research, theory, and ap-
plications (pp. 99-129). New York: Guilford.
Mouw, J., and Khanna, R. (1993). Predic-
tion of academic success: A review of the 
literature and some recommendations. 
College Student Journal. 27, 328-336.
Mumford, M. D., and Owens, W. A. (1987). 
Methodology review: Principles, proce-
dures, and findings in the application of 
background data measures. Applied Psy-
chological Measurement, 11, 1–31.
Myers, D. G. (2004). Psychology (rev. ed.). 
New York: Worth.
Nasim, A., Roberts, A., Harrell, J.P., and 
Young, H. (2005). Non-cognitive predic-
tors of academic achievement for African 
Americans across cultural contexts. The 
Journal of Negro Education, 74(4), 344-358. 
Noble, J. P. (1991). Predicting college 
grades from ACT assessment scores and 
high school course work and grade infor-
mation (Rep. No. ACT-RR-91-3). Iowa City, 
IA: American College Testing Program. 
(ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. 
ED344943)
Pascarella, E. T., Terenzini, P, and Wolf, L. 
(1986). Orientation to college and freshman 
year persistence/withdrawal decisions. 
Journal of Higher Education, 57, 155-175
Pulley, J.L. (2000, June 23). A $1-billion 
experiment seeks a new way to identify 
talented minority students. The Chronicle 
of Higher Education, pp. A41. 
Ridgell, S., and Lounsbury, J. W. (2004). 
Predicting collegiate academic success: 
General intelligence, “Big Five” personal-
ity traits, and work drive. College Student 
Journal, 38, 607–618.
Sedlacek, W. E. (1993). Employing non-
cognitive variables in admissions and 
retention in higher education. In Achiev-
ing diversity: Issues in the recruitment and 
retention of underrepresented racial/ethnic 
students in higher education. (pp. 33-39). 
Alexandria VA: National Association of Col-
lege Admission Counselors.
Sedlacek, W.E. (2004). Beyond the Big Test: 
Noncognitive assessment in higher educa-
tion. San Francisco, CA: Jossey Bass. 
Sedlacek, W.E., and Brooks, G.C., Jr. (1976). 
Racism in American education: A model for 
change. Chicago: Nelson-Hall.
The American Heritage Dictionary of the 
English Language. (2009) (4th ed). Boston, 
MA: Houghton Mifflin Company.
Thomas, L.L., Kuncel, N.R., and Credé, M. 
(2007). Noncognitive variables in college 
admissions: The case of the Non-Cognitive 
Questionnaire. Educational and Psychologi-
cal Measurement, 67, 635-657. 
Tinto, V. (1993). Leaving College: Rethink-
ing the Causes and Cures of Student At-
trition (2nd ed.). Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Young, B., and Sowa, C. (1992). Predictors 
of academic success for Black student 
athletes. Journal of College Student Devel-
opment, 33, 318-324.
Young, J.W. (1993). Grade adjustment 
methods. Review of Educational Research, 
63, 151-165.
Young, J.W. and Koplow, S.L. (1997). The 
validity of two questionnaires for predict-
ing minority students’ college grades. The 
Journal of General Education, 46(1), 45-55.
Zeegers, P. (2001). Approaches to learning 
in science: A longitudinal study. British Jour-
nal of Educational Psychology, 71, 115–132.
Zimmerman, W. S., Parks, H., Gray, K., and 
Michael, W. B. (1977). The validity of tradi-
tional cognitive measures and of scales of 
the Study Attitudes and Methods Survey in 
the prediction of the academic success of 
Educational Opportunity Program students. 
Educational and Psychological Measurement, 
37, 465–470.
REFERENCES
AMANDA SoMMeRFelD, Ph.D. is an assistant 
clinical faculty member at Boston University (MA). 
Her current research focuses on examining the role of 
economic, social and cultural capital in educational 
advancement and college success for urban youth. 
She is currently teaching classes in the areas of 
counseling theory and cross-cultural perspectives.
research on the topic has faced (oftentimes justified) criticisms for 
its lack of clarity and rigor, as well as for overgeneralizing its findings. 
By virtue of changing the language around the constructs of interest, 
researchers can indicate an even greater attention to conceptual 
clarity and an intention to pursue continued research on which non-
academic variables impact college success and how they do so. 
Furthermore, by delineating a categorization scheme that explicitly 
recognizes the variability in non-academic factors, researchers will 
be better positioned to inform interventions both within and outside 
of schools. For by more carefully delineating the different domains 
of non-academic factors, practitioners and educators could be 
provided with more explicit recommendations about how particular 
non-academic factors affect college preparation and persistence, 
and thereby how we might better prepare our students for their 
postsecondary school years.