“Move fast and break things.” It’s a common mantra in the world of tech, but in recent years things have been moving fast–and perhaps sometimes breaking–in the world of college admissions, too. For students with disabilities and the professionals who support them, these rapid-fire changes can be challenging to navigate.
PANDEMIC IMPACTS
One of the most notable changes in the admission process, of course, has been the test-optional movement, which was greatly accelerated by the pandemic. While a few universities have returned to requiring standardized test scores in applications, overall it appears that test-optional, and in some cases test-free, policies are here to stay.
Jed Applerouth, Founder and President of the test-prep/tutoring company Applerouth, feels that a test-optional environment “benefits certain students with disabilities who struggle with standardized assessments.” But for those who choose to test, he adds, “Students with disabilities are more likely to gain access to accommodations in the present climate, the admissions tests are now shorter than they have ever been–which is a boon to students with attentional challenges–and many of the accommodations are directly built into the testing platforms, empowering students to manage their assessments with greater autonomy.”
Others are concerned that the implementation of the new digital tests has been uneven, however. Jonah Fishel, Owner-Operator of Next Step Prep, argues that “The rollout of the digital SAT and ACT was bumpy, and there were many schools where tech issues meant that the test didn’t happen at all. For example, there was a nationwide bug on the digital SAT that meant the test was auto-turned in early for many students, especially those on the West Coast. This issue hit students with extra time much harder than students with standard time, since a greater portion of the time they expected to have to test was lost.”
While the option to eschew testing altogether may make it easier for certain students to gain admission to college, there are potential downsides to consider. As Emily Raclaw, Director of the On Your Marq Neurodiversity Support Program at Marquette University, notes, “The move away from standardized testing has removed a significant barrier for many disabled students, but it can also lead to students being admitted into programs that may not be the best academic or executive functioning fit. Transcripts and essays often don’t reflect the accommodations or modifications that supported a student’s success in high school, making it harder to assess what kind of environment will actually work for them in college.” Clearly, it’s important to help students determine not simply where they might be admitted without a test score, but where they are likely to thrive.
Remote or hybrid learning also proliferated during the pandemic. While many students and professionals bemoaned this development, it proved to be a boon for some students with disabilities, making learning more accessible to them. In-person classrooms are sometimes inaccessible to those with mobility difficulties, while those with social anxiety or sensory sensitivities can find them overwhelming. The ability to access recorded lectures asynchronously, add captioning and employ other assistive technology (e.g., screen readers) can be enormously helpful. It will be vital for institutions to continually seek out ways to keep content accessible.
COLLEGE DISABILITY SUPPORT
Many professionals are encouraged by the opportunities available today for students with disabilities. “Students today have more postsecondary options than ever, which is exciting—but it also makes it harder to navigate what’s truly a good fit,” says Alexander Morris-Wood, Head of School at Franklin Academy and the Co-Leader of the NACAC Disabilities and Neurodiversity SIG.
Michelle R. Bracken, Assistant Vice President Enrollment Management and Dean of Admission at Curry College, likewise observes that “More and more colleges are developing comprehensive supports at the college level, both academic and non-academic based. Years ago, there were only a handful of colleges that families could choose from, but now there are so many more options! Admission professionals are realizing that college is not one-size-fits-all, and it is important to create admission policies that are more inclusive and welcoming to those who are very college-capable despite any learning challenges.”
But will the resources students need remain available? Annie Tulkin, CEO and Founder of Accessible College, expressed concern about widespread budget reductions: “There are a few important changes impacting the college experience for students with disabilities: cuts to diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility (DEIA) resulting in fewer disability related programs, cuts to disability support offices and the administration’s gutting of the Office of Civil Rights (OCR), which would have investigated allegations of disability-related discrimination on campus. leaves students with disabilities more vulnerable. Students with disabilities are feeling concerned about their ability to receive accommodations and be included on campus.” Tulkin adds, “With funding and resources being cut, will students receive the same support next year that they receive today? Professionals are being asked to do more with less, and that means that students will fall through the cracks.”
Julie Loppacher, Founder & Executive Director of Rising Tide Educators, voices similar sentiments: “With recent shifts in federal education policy, we may see a decline in available support for students with disabilities in K–12 settings—potentially impacting not only their academic preparation but also their confidence and motivation to pursue higher education. This is definitely a time where we will continue to see shifts in the landscape that impact these students more so than their non-disabled or neurotypical classmates.”
While the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) guarantees students the right to reasonable accommodations, some colleges offer services above and beyond basic accommodations (e.g., comprehensive learning support programs). Julie A. Scaff, Director of Student Disability Services at St. Mary’s College of California, speculates that “students may feel uncertainty about what supports may be in place at the college they have chosen or are looking to attend–will the support services they see available now be available by the time the student starts and in place during their time at the college, or will funding cuts or changes in policies remove support they were depending on?” Unfortunately, we can’t easily predict such developments, but we can guide students in finding other options and resources in the event of program closures.
COLLEGE READINESS
Of course, the availability of support services in college is only one factor influencing students’ potential for success. Those of us guiding students with disabilities have perennial concerns about their preparedness for college–not only in terms of academic skills, but also in areas such as self-advocacy and independent living skills. These issues are even more salient in the post-pandemic era. Scaff of St. Mary’s College has noticed “a delay in the student practicing self-advocacy skills, in being the one to ask college staff directly their questions and receive answers. The parents have increasingly become a go-between on questions for administrators about their student, during the pre-enrollment and admitted student stage, which may become difficult when the student starts college in the fall and the administration conducts all of its communication directly to the student. I also see this becoming difficult for staff who are spending more time and resources in having conversations with parents and then duplicating conversations with the student.”
If you’re working with high school students, Scaff continues, you have a golden opportunity to “help students be self-advocates, to use this time now before starting college to be the one to ask questions, get clarification, share concerns, etc.–not to have the parent be the spokesperson. The main skill I feel students need to be successful in college is to be able to ask for help. If they can do that–ask for help, let someone know they are struggling–college administrators can connect them to the right resources.”
DISABILITY AND DEI
After decades of developing DEI and affirmative action programs, colleges across the country are rolling back these initiatives, much to the dismay of equity-minded professionals. What are the implications for disabled students?
Loppacher from Rising Tide Educators suggests that “While DEI initiatives in college applications are theoretically intended to support students with disabilities, in practice they have often prioritized other aspects of identity. As a result, it’s unclear how recent changes to these initiatives will meaningfully impact this population.”
Many disabled students have multiple intersecting identities, however, so cuts to programs supporting other marginalized groups may make the road ahead more challenging for these students in any case. Raclaw from Marquette University expresses this well: “For disabled students and staff who are also BIPOC, LGBTQ+, first-gen, or low-income, the barriers aren’t just layered, they’re compounded. At many institutions, navigating admissions can be especially difficult when you’re also trying to figure out when and how to disclose, and if you’ll be safe, understood, or even welcomed. Many students don’t know what questions to ask during the admissions process because they’ve never had access to systems that affirmed or supported their full identities. That lack of exposure means they may not realize what information they need to make informed choices.”
ADVICE FOR COLLEGE ADMISSIONS PROFESSIONALS
There are many stages in applying and transitioning to college where counselors can make a difference. Raclaw advises: “Recognize that many students, especially those who are disabled, may not know what questions to ask, because they’ve never done this before. Don’t wait for them to disclose or self-advocate; proactively offer information about supports, campus culture, and how to access disability services to all students. Help them understand not just how to get in, but how to assess whether a school is the right fit for their needs. The goal isn’t just access, it’s informed, empowered choice.”
It’s critical for students that college readiness remains a key consideration. Higher education lacks the curriculum modification that high school students are sometimes accustomed to receiving through special ed plans in high school, so Elizabeth C. Hamblet, author of 7 Steps to College Success: A Pathway for Students with Disabilities (3rd ed.), notes that “The best preparation continues to be taking classes in the general education setting and utilizing the kinds of accommodations that will likely be available to students in college.”
If students will be applying for disability accommodations in college, they should become familiar with the documentation requirements as well as which accommodations are typical in a college setting. As Hamblet says, “Students must look at the documentation requirements for their specific college and know what they need. People are still telling students that no matter where they’re going, they need testing that’s less than three years old, and that is just simply not true. Is it true in some places? Yes. But they have to look at the individual college’s requirements. And parents are telling other parents, oh, you’ve got to have a neuropsychological evaluation, or a neuropsych is better, but a lot of schools don’t require a neuropsych.”
Scaff from St. Mary’s College believes that families need to dig into a college’s fiscal situation as well: “I’d say to encourage students to ask questions about college resources and see if they can find out what the long-term plan is to ensure the program and resources are available throughout a student’s time there. Is a resource or program available now going to be available to the student during their entire time at the college? Finding out how programs are funded can help; if privately funded (for example through a private donor) it may have less of a chance of being cut back or cut altogether. If federally funded, those programs may be more at risk.”
When helping students select colleges, Morris-Wood of Franklin Academy recommends, “Stay curious and current. The higher ed landscape—especially in disability support—can change dramatically from year to year, so avoid relying on outdated lists and lean into ongoing, first-hand research to find the best fit for each student.” [Note: the Top College Consultants database of neurodiversity-friendly colleges is regularly updated.]
For students planning to take standardized tests, Applerouth advises: “Encourage your students to apply for accommodations early in their testing process. Students will have to apply directly for accommodations on a specific ACT test date, and more broadly for accommodations on all tests for the College Board. Students should always practice for official tests under the same conditions in which they will test. Practice with your accommodations and become acclimated to them before facing an official test. Encourage students to consider both the SAT and the ACT and have students take practice baseline tests to determine their optimal testing path. Students should develop a testing plan that includes three official tests and should request accommodations well in advance of the initiation of that plan. Start early.”
For those on the college side, Loppacher of Rising Tide Educators urges staff to “regularly review and evaluate your policies and procedures through the lens of inclusion. Ask whether every applicant has a meaningful opportunity to showcase their full range of strengths and potential contributions to your institution. Commit to holistic review practices that truly consider the diverse ways students demonstrate promise, even if those strengths fall outside traditional measures like test scores and GPAs. Stay open to the reality that brilliance and potential don’t always show up in standardized ways. Many inspired and capable students—especially those with learning differences—bring unique assets that can enrich your campus community.”
While the particular changes we’re facing may seem unprecedented, it’s useful to remind ourselves that the field has always been changing, and that many of us may have already weathered a number of significant transitions. We have each other, and collectively we represent a rich wellspring of ideas and resources. We can navigate these changes together–helping the students we serve do the same–and potentially emerge stronger than ever.
AUTHOR’S NOTE
A version of this article was originally published in the NACAC Journal of College Admission. Copyright © 2026 Eric Endlich.