The Federal Employee Health Benefits (FEHB) Program provides health insurance coverage to millions of federal employees, retirees, and their dependents. The U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) reports that 8.3 million individuals are covered by FEHB, which includes individuals covered through the Postal Service Health Benefits (PSHB) Program. Covered individuals include current federal employees, retirees, and dependents of both groups.
On January 28, 2025, President Trump issued Executive Order 14187, “Protecting Children from Chemical and Surgical Mutilation,” which prohibits the use of federal funds for gender-affirming care for people under 19 years of age. Executive Order 14187 explicitly directs OPM to exclude coverage for “pediatric transgender surgeries or hormone treatments” under the FEHB and PSHB. In response to this directive, on January 31, 2025, the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) issued Letter Number 2025-01A, Addendum to Call Letter for Plan Year 2026, which ordered FEHB and PSHB providers to comply with the President’s executive orders related to gender-affirming care. OPM issued a second letter on August 15, 2025, which expanded the exclusion of gender-affirming treatments to FEHB enrollees of all ages. As a result, many transgender individuals enrolled in FEHB no longer have access to insurance coverage for gender-affirming care. In this brief, we estimate that at least 39,400 transgender individuals are covered by FEHB and subject to policy changes regarding gender-affirming care.
Findings
There is no data source that directly provides the number of transgender people covered by FEHB. We estimate this number using three different models, drawing on different data sources for each model. The first model relies on the number of current FEHB enrollees (8.3 million) and current estimates of the percentage of the U.S. population that identifies as transgender. The second model relies on the current number of federal employees (2.6 million), a recent estimate of federal retirees (2.2 million), and findings from the Federal Employee Viewpoint Survey. The third model relies on findings from the 2022 U.S. Trans Survey, which is the largest survey of transgender people in the U.S. to date. The three models and their results are described in this section.
Certain data sources are common across models. A Congressional Research Service report analyzing 2015 OPM data estimated the composition of FEHB enrollees as follows: 25% of FEHB-covered individuals were current employees, 25% were retirees, and 50% were dependents of both groups. We use this estimate in all three of our models. In Models 2 and 3, we also rely on the percentage of current employees (85%) and federal retirees (90%) that participate in FEHB, as described in the same CRS report. We assume these percentages remain true for the FEHB program today.
Model 1: Applying population estimates of those who identify as transgender in the United States to FEHB-covered individuals
In this model, we estimate the number of transgender individuals covered by FEHB by utilizing known estimates of the percentage of the U.S. population that identifies as transgender and applying those percentages to the current number of FEHB-covered individuals (8.3 million) in four categories: current employees, dependents of current employees, retirees, and dependents of retirees. In 2025, using data from the CDC’s Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) and the Youth Risk Behavior Survey (YRBS), we estimated that 0.8% of all U.S. adults and 0.3% of those aged 65 and older identify as transgender. The average age of current federal workers was around 47 in 2024, and the average age when federal workers retire was around 62 in 2023. To estimate the number of transgender current federal employees covered by FEHB, we utilize the percentage of all U.S. adults (aged 18 and older) who identify as transgender (0.8%). For retirees covered by the FEHB, we utilize the percentage of those aged 65 and older in the U.S. who identify as transgender (0.3%).
We do not know how many dependents covered by FEHB are dependents of current employees versus dependents of retirees. Here, we assume that dependents are split evenly between current employees and retirees. This is a conservative assumption because the actual number of dependents of retirees is likely much smaller than the number of dependents of current employees, and we will apply the smaller percentage for those aged 65 and older who identify as transgender (0.3%) for both retirees and their dependents. For dependents of current employees, we apply the 0.8% population percentage for adults who identify as transgender in the U.S. This is likely a conservative approach because dependents of current employees include spouses and children aged 26 and younger. Younger age groups are more likely to identify as transgender compared to older age groups, so we may underestimate the number of transgender dependents of current federal employees if these dependents are younger overall.
Table 1 describes the results of our calculations. Starting with the overall figure of 8.3 million individuals who are covered by FEHB, we divide this figure into the four categories of covered individuals, 25% to each category, or 2,075,000 individuals. We multiply 2,075,000 by 0.8% to estimate the number of employees who identify as transgender and, separately, the number of employees’ dependents who identify as transgender. This yields 16,600 in each of those categories. We multiply 2,075,000 by 0.3% to estimate the number of retirees who identify as transgender and, separately, the number of retirees’ dependents who identify as transgender. This yields 6,225 in each of those categories.