Medicaid beneficiaries must renew their eligibility, usually every 12 months, to continue receiving health 
insurance. When renewals are not completed on time, beneficiaries experience a period of uninsurance 
and may delay getting needed care. Interruptions in eligibility also cause more work for agencies, as 
people usually reapply after losing coverage. Increasing the rate of successful and timely renewals ensures 
continuity of care for beneficiaries and decreases the burden of reapplications.  
Federal regulations require a streamlined Medicaid renewal process. Agencies must: 
• Review data sources before requesting forms or information from the beneficiaries. If an agency can 
determine that the beneficiary remains eligible, it must conduct an ex parte renewal, which means 
renewing coverage without requiring the beneficiary to submit any forms or documents.   
• Conduct ex parte renewals for cases using modified adjusted gross income (MAGI) budgeting and for 
non-MAGI cases. 
• Apply correct reasonable compatibility policy: the beneficiary’s attestation (at renewal, the attestation 
is the current income information the agency has about the household) and income data available to 
the agency such as quarterly wages are reasonably compatible if both are under the applicable 
income threshold (regardless of how far apart they are). 
• If a case can’t be renewed through ex parte review, agencies must send a renewal form to the 
beneficiary. Agencies must: 
› Use a renewal form pre-populated with information such as the beneficiary’s name, household 
members, and most recently reported income. Beneficiaries should be asked to report any 
changes. 
› Provide the beneficiary 30 days to return the form and any required verification. 
› Permit beneficiaries to submit their renewal online, by telephone, by mail, or in person. 
› If the beneficiary’s case is closed for failing to return the renewal form, but the beneficiary 
contacts the agency within 90 days after the case is closed, reopen the case without requiring a 
new application. 
Improving SNAP and Medicaid Access: Medicaid 
Renewals 
  
 
 


 
 
Additional strategies to increase the success rate of Medicaid renewals: 
• Use all available databases to verify income, for example, state unemployment insurance information, 
quarterly wage data, Equifax Work Number, IRS data, and income that has been verified for other 
programs like SNAP.  
• Automate the ex parte process through the eligibility system so caseworkers don’t have to manually 
review cases at renewal.   
• If sending a pre-populated renewal form to a beneficiary, ensure the form is written in plain language 
and in the beneficiary’s preferred language, and contains clear instructions on the steps the 
beneficiary must take. 
• Require the beneficiary to only address eligibility factors likely to change. For example, don’t ask 
beneficiaries to re-attest to or re-verify citizenship status or immigration status. 
• If a beneficiary is also receiving SNAP or cash benefits, conduct an ex parte Medicaid renewal 
whenever completing an application, change report, or renewal for those programs. Those programs 
often require more frequent agency contact than Medicaid, and by renewing and extending Medicaid 
eligibility each time the case is touched, a Medicaid renewal may never come due.  
• Use targeted enrollment strategies (including Express Lane Eligibility and the state plan option) that 
allow states to automatically renew Medicaid eligibility based on beneficiaries’ enrollment in other 
programs such as SNAP. 
• Use the National Change of Address database to keep case addresses current so renewal forms go to 
the correct address. 
• Notify beneficiaries through e-notices, texts, or robocalls that their Medicaid cases are due for 
renewal. 
• Program the eligibility system to leave a case open if the renewal form has been recorded as received 
but not yet processed. This prevents inaccurate auto-closures when beneficiaries return renewal forms 
on time, but eligibility workers are behind in processing. 
State Spotlight 
Washington State’s Automated Ex Parte Renewal System 
Washington’s Medicaid eligibility system automatically compares active MAGI cases to data sources, including the Federal 
Data Services Hub and state quarterly wage data, about 60 days before the end of the certification period. If the system can 
automatically verify that the beneficiary is still eligible for Medicaid, it notifies the beneficiary that the case will be renewed, 
provides the information the state used, and advises the beneficiary to contact the agency to report any inaccurate 
information. If the system is unable to automatically verify continued eligibility, it sends a pre-populated notice to the 
beneficiary and instructs them to provide any required documentation. Beneficiaries can upload the information through their 
online account, mail it in, or phone a call center for assistance. Washington renews over 70 percent of Medicaid beneficiaries 
through this automated process. 
Jane Wishner et al., “Medicaid Real-Time Eligibility Determinations and Automated Renewals,” Urban Institute, August 2018. 


 
 
Look Out! 
• The ex parte renewal process is usually programmed into the eligibility 
system. Therefore, in addition to reviewing renewal policy, evaluate design 
documents, which include the rules and logic on how the eligibility system 
processes ex parte renewals.   
 
Key Data Points to Consider 
• Number (and percent) of Medicaid renewals completed ex parte each month. 
• Reasons renewals can’t be completed through the automated ex parte process (e.g., unable to verify 
income). 
• Number (and percent) of cases closed each month because the renewal form was not submitted. 
› Of these, number of beneficiaries who reapply for Medicaid within a short period of time (e.g., 
within three months). 
• Number (and percent) of cases closed each month where renewal forms were submitted but 
verification documents were not returned. 
› Of these, number of beneficiaries who reapply for Medicaid within a short period of time (e.g., 
within three months). 
For More Information: 
• Code of Federal Regulations, 42 CFR §435.916 
• Opportunities for States to Coordinate Medicaid and SNAP Renewals, CBPP, February 5, 2016. 
• Reasonable Compatibility Policy Presents an Opportunity to Streamline Medicaid Determinations, 
CBPP, August 16, 2016. 
• Dear State Medicaid Director Letter, CMS, August 31, 2015 (expanding Targeted Enrollment strategies 
to include a new state plan option). 
• Medicaid and CHIP Eligibility, Enrollment, Renewal and Cost Sharing Policies as of January 2018: 
Findings from a 50-State Survey (Table 13), Kaiser Family Foundation, March 21, 2018. 
 
Advancing Strategies to Align Programs (ASAP) 
Advancing Strategies to Align Programs (ASAP) is a joint CLASP-CBPP project designed to assist states with improvements to 
the administration of SNAP and Medicaid through policy and operational changes at the state and local level. As part of a 
toolkit highlighting lessons from the project, we’re examining key points in the eligibility and enrollment processes and 
promising practices to improve program access and efficiency. 
To view other briefs in this toolkit, visit www.cbpp.org/asap or www.clasp.org/asap.