1 
 
 
  
  
  
The Business Impact  
of LGBT-Supportive  
Workplace Policies
M.V. Lee Badgett, Laura E. Durso, Angeliki Kastanis  
& Christy Mallory
May 2013
Made possible with grants from


 
1 
 
 
The Business Impact of 
LGBT-Supportive Sexual Orientation 
And Gender Identity Policies 
M.V. Lee Badgett, Laura E. Durso, Angeliki Kastanis & Christy Mallory 
                      May 2013 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
Today’s workforce is increasingly diverse in terms of personal characteristics such as race, 
ethnicity, gender, national origin, religion, gender identity, and sexual orientation.  The “business 
case for diversity” suggests that such diversity in the workplace will lead to lower costs and/or 
higher revenues, improving the bottom line.  Not surprisingly, employers have considered the 
economic benefits of adding lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT)-supportive policies, 
including sexual orientation and gender-identity nondiscrimination policies and domestic partner 
benefits policies.   
 
The present review identifies and evaluates all published research evaluating the impact of 
LGBT-supportive employment policies and workplace climates on business outcomes in order to 
answer two primary questions:  1.) Does research show that LGBT-supportive policies bring 
about the specific benefits mentioned by private companies that enact them, or are they 
associated with other similar economic benefits that may have an impact on the bottom line?; 2.) 
If LGBT-supportive policies bring about certain benefits, does research show that these benefits 
actually have an impact on the bottom line, and if so, is it possible to estimate that effect in 
quantitative terms?    
 
In total, this study reviews 36 research studies that include findings related to the impact of 
LGBT-supportive policies or workplace climates on business outcomes.  We conclude that this 
body of research supports the existence of many positive links between LGBT-supportive 
policies or workplace climates and outcomes that will benefit employers.  However, none of the 
studies provides direct quantitative estimates of the impact on the bottom line. 
 
More specifically, the existing set of studies demonstrates that LGBT-supportive policies and 
workplace climates are linked to greater job commitment, improved workplace relationships, 
increased job satisfaction, and improved health outcomes among LGBT employees.  
Furthermore, LGBT-supportive policies and workplace climates are also linked to less 
discrimination against LGBT employees and more openness about being LGBT.  Less 
discrimination and more openness, in turn, are also linked to greater job commitment, improved 
workplace relationships, increased job satisfaction, improved health outcomes, and increased 
productivity among LGBT employees. 
 
Figure 1 presents the number of studies finding that employers’ LGBT-supportive policies and 
workplace climates lead to positive business outcomes compared to the number of studies that 
find a negative relationship or no relationship to business outcomes.   As shown in the figure, 


 
 
2 
 
most studies find a positive relationship between LGBT-supportive policies or workplace 
climates and business-related outcomes, while few or none find a negative or no relationship.    
 
Figure 1: Number of studies showing relationship between LGBT-supportive policies or 
workplace climates and economic outcomes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We assess the strength of each of the proposed associations between LGBT-supportive policies 
or climate to workplace outcomes by taking into account the number of studies supporting a 
particular link, the quality of studies supporting the link, and number of studies that did not 
support the link.  These findings are also summarized in Figure 2. 
 
• Strongest finding: LGBT-supportive policies or workplace climates are most strongly 
linked to more openness about being LGBT.  
• Fairly strong findings:  We see fairly strong links between LGBT-supportive policies and 
workplace climates to less discrimination, improved health outcomes, increased job 
satisfaction, and greater job commitment. 
• Findings from a small number of studies: Other possible links between LGBT-supportive 
policies or workplace climates and improved workplace relationships, health insurance 
costs, creativity, and stock prices are not yet strong due to the small number of studies 
that assess these relationships. 
• No studies: We have found no studies assessing possible links between LGBT-supportive 
policies or workplace climates and falling litigation costs, increased public sector 
customers, more individual consumers, and improved recruitment and retention. 
• Connection to other research on business outcomes:  Other research finds that these 
business outcomes, which are influenced by LGBT-supportive policies or workplace 
1 
3 
3 
8 
11 
14 
16 
1 
1 
3 
2 
4 
1 
1 
1 
Increased 
productivity 
Less discrimination 
Improved workplace 
relationships 
More openness 
about being LGBT 
Increased job 
satisfaction 
Improved health 
outcomes 
Greater job 
commitment 
Positive business relationship 
No business relationship 
Negative business relationship 


 
 
3 
 
outcomes, lead to higher productivity and lower costs for employers, which in turn would 
enhance business profitability. 
 
  Figure 2:  Strength of relationships in the research 
 
We make several recommendations about 
directions for future research:  
• Recruit more racially and ethnically 
diverse samples of LGBT people.  
• Recruit larger samples of bisexual 
men and women and transgender 
employees.   
• Use more direct measures of business 
outcomes, such as productivity and 
profit measures.   
• Employ a wider range of sampling 
methods and research designs.  
Finally, researchers and business officials should 
collaborate to fully utilize data collected by 
employers and to make findings available to 
policymakers, the public, and other businesses. 
 
Strong Associations with: 
Greater Disclosure in the 
Workplace 
 
Fairly Strong Associations with: 
Less Discrimination at Work 
Better Health 
Higher Job Satisfaction 
Higher Job Commitment 
 
Possible Associations with: 
Organizational Citizenship 
Behaviors 
Improved Co-worker Relationships 
Lower Insurance Costs 
Increased Creativity & Innovation 
Improved Stock Prices 
 
Unknown Associations with: 
Lower Litigation Costs 
Increased Customer Base 
Greater Recruitment 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
A well-motivated and productive set of employees is essential for business success.  Today, 
businesses’ employees are increasingly diverse in terms of race, ethnicity, sex, national origin, 
religion, gender identity, and sexual orientation, among other characteristics.  The impact of that 
diversity is much discussed in the global economy, and the “business case for diversity” has 
become a modern business mantra.  In short, the business case posits that a diverse workforce (or 
in more nuanced versions, a well-managed diverse workforce) will lead to lower costs and/or 
higher revenues, improving the corporate bottom line.  If the business case is correct, then 
employers have economic incentives to take actions that will create and maintain a diverse 
workforce.  This briefing paper assesses the research-based evidence related to the business case 
for diversity related to sexual orientation, and to a lesser extent, gender identity.  
 
The roots of the business case for diversity hypothesis can be found in policies in the United 
States that were designed to eliminate discrimination and, in effect, to diversify the race and 
gender composition of the corporate workforce. Kelly and Dobbin (1998) argue that diversity 
management rhetoric emerged as government pressure on companies to comply with 
nondiscrimination laws and affirmative action diminished in the 1980’s.  During earlier 
enforcement periods, companies had hired human resources professionals who developed 


 
 
4 
 
managerial expertise in practices that would result in more diverse workforces.  As enforcement 
pressure lessened, those managers then became champions of retaining practices and internal 
policies that promote racial, ethnic, and gender diversity, using the argument that those practices 
were essential to creating a diverse workforce that had become a competitive necessity.   
 
More recently, pressure from LGBT employees and, in some cases, policymakers and unions has 
pushed employers to end discriminatory practices against LGBT workers (Badgett, 2001; 
Raeburn, 2004). Those stakeholders often apply the business case for diversity to this newer 
territory, although the focus is less on increasing representation of LGBT people and more on 
equal treatment of LGBT employees.  Voluntarily enacted sexual orientation and gender identity 
nondiscrimination policies, domestic partner benefits, transition-related health care benefits, and 
other related policies are said to be sound business decisions, in addition to be the fair or right 
thing to do.   
 
Those efforts have been successful, as we see by the rapid growth in the number of corporations 
adopting LGBT-supportive policies.  In 1999, 72% of Fortune 500 companies included sexual 
orientation in their nondiscrimination policies, and only a handful included gender identity 
(Human Rights Campaign, 1999). By 2009, 87% of such companies included sexual orientation 
and 41% included gender identity in their nondiscrimination policies (Luther, 2009). Over the 
same time period, the percentage of Fortune 500 companies offering domestic partner benefits 
increased from 14% to 59% (Human Rights Campaign, 1999; Luther, 2009). 
 
A 2011 Williams Institute study found evidence that the business case for diversity motivates 
employers to take those actions (Sears & Mallory, 2011).  The study found that almost all of the 
top 50 Fortune 500 companies and the top 50 federal government contractors (92%) state that, in 
general, diversity policies and generous benefit packages are good for their business.  In 
addition, the majority of those companies (53%) have specifically linked policies prohibiting 
sexual orientation and gender identity discrimination or a decision to extend domestic partner 
benefits to their employees to improving their bottom line. 
 
The question remains about how well the reality matches the rhetoric.  An enormous amount of 
research over the last few decades has assessed the validity of the business case for diversity 
related to race, sex, age, experience, and other dimensions of employment diversity.  Reviews of 
those studies have found that support for the business case for diversity is not straightforward 
(Jackson et al., 2003). Some studies find positive effects of diversity on firms’ outcomes, but 
others find no effect or even a negative impact of diversity on business-related outcomes.  One 
set of influential and highly detailed studies of diversity within particular firms found little direct 
effect of diversity, positive or negative, on team processes or on team and individual 
performance measures (Kochan et al., 2003).  The “business case” has, instead, increasingly 
focused on the management of diversity, with an emphasis on cultural competency, training in 
group process skills, and efforts toward full inclusion of employees from varying social groups 
as a way to create value from a diverse workforce.  
 
The business case for diversity-respecting policies related to LGBT people has been somewhat 
different, with a focus on the impact of policies rather than on the sexual orientation and gender 
identity diversity of an employer’s workforce per se.  As we discuss in the next section, policies 


 
 
5 
 
that equalize compensation or improve the workplace climate might have a direct impact on 
LGBT employees.  
 
As a framework for our review, the next section outlines processes occurring within and outside 
an organization that could generate positive changes in business outcomes.  After that discussion, 
the bulk of the report addresses our primary questions:  Does research show that LGBT-
supportive policies bring about the specific benefits mentioned by private companies, or other 
similar economic benefits that may have an impact on the bottom line?  If LGBT-supportive 
policies bring about certain benefits, does research show that these benefits actually have an 
impact on the bottom line, and if so, is it possible to estimate that effect in quantitative terms?  
Various stakeholders and employers have suggested that LGBT-supportive policies would bring 
about the following specific benefits that would have a positive impact on the corporate bottom 
line (Sears & Mallory, 2011): 
• Improved recruitment and retention of talented employees 
• New ideas and innovations generated by drawing on a workforce with a wide range of 
characteristics and experiences 
• Attracting and better serving a diverse customer base 
• Increasing employee productivity 
• Securing business with public sector clients that require employment nondiscrimination 
or domestic partner benefits policies 
• Boosting morale and employee relations by responding favorably to requests from 
employees or unions  
 
To answer those questions, we summarize the findings of 36 research studies that assess links 
between diversity-respecting policies and outcomes.  We find that existing research supports the 
existence of many of those links at a qualitative level.  LGBT-supportive employment policies 
lead to outcomes that will benefit employers.  However, some proposed linkages have not yet 
been the subject of research, and none of the studies provides appropriate and generalizable 
quantitative estimates of the impact.  Also, most of the studies we found focus in particular on 
lesbian and gay employees, with less research conducted with samples of bisexual and 
transgender employees.  Below, we first evaluate research conducted with LGBT people as a 
group, LGB people, or only with lesbian and gay employees.  The next two sections focus on 
findings based only upon bisexual and transgender employees.  Because most of the policies 
discussed could include protection for bisexual and transgender employees, we use “LGBT-
supportive” to describe these policies throughout the report, but distinguish the research 
populations studied.  
 
Finally, we discuss other limitations of the existing research and make some preliminary 
recommendations for productive directions for future research.  
 
POTENTIAL LINKS BETWEEN POLICIES AND BUSINESS OUTCOMES 
 
The business case implies a causal relationship between diversity-respecting policies and 
employers’ competitiveness in their product markets.  To put it simply, for improved 
competitiveness and rising profits, either the costs of doing business fall or revenues rise.    
Unfortunately, no existing study uses any direct measures of costs or revenues as an outcome 


 
 
6 
 
measure.  Therefore, we first look for links between workplace policies and individual LGBT 
worker outcomes and organizational outcomes.  We identify two primary possible individual 
outcomes, and eleven other secondary possible individual and organizational outcomes that have 
been suggested in the academic literature and in corporate discussions. Below we identify those 
outcomes with a lower-case letter.  Since those outcomes are not measured in dollar terms of 
costs and revenue, the basic determinants of profit, we next look for evidence that the outcomes 
would have implications for costs and revenue.    
 
Diversity-respecting policies: Prior studies have evaluated different diversity policies, including 
LGBT-supportive policies, and measures of workplace climate.   In this report, we focus on the 
effect of sexual orientation and gender identity nondiscrimination policies, domestic partner 
benefits, or some more general measure of the workplace climate for LGBT people.   
 
Individual outcomes: LGBT-supportive policies and workplace climates might have several 
important effects on LGBT employees that will increase their productivity levels or retention 
rates (effects that would reduce employer costs and increase profits).  At the most immediate 
level, these policies could result in (a) less discrimination and (b) increased openness (or less 
concealment) in the workplace about being LGBT.  Concealment of sexual orientation is 
associated with increased psychological distress (Pachankis, 2007) and poor immune functioning 
(Cole, Kemeny, et al., 1996; Cole, Taylor, et al., 1996), suggesting its importance as an outcome 
variable of interest.  Those immediate primary effects, in turn, could have secondary effects on 
workplace-related outcomes through: 
c) Improved health outcomes 
d) Increased job satisfaction 
e) Improved relationships with co-workers and supervisors 
f) Greater commitment and other positive workplace behaviors and attitudes 
Those secondary effects are more closely related to potential reductions in employer costs.  Job 
satisfaction, better health outcomes, and improved relationships could increase productivity.  All 
four secondary effects could reduce turnover.   
 
Organizational outcomes:  Diversity-enhancing policies also have organizational effects that 
could improve profits, both through lower costs and higher revenue, including:   
g) Lower health insurance costs (through c) 
h) Lower legal costs from litigation related to discrimination (through a) 
i) Greater access to new customers, such as public sector entities that require contractors to 
have nondiscrimination policies or domestic partner benefits 
j) More business from individual consumers who want to do business with socially 
responsible companies 
k) More effective recruiting of LGBT and non-LGBT employees who want to work for an 
employer that values diversity 
l) Increased creativity among employees that could lead to better ideas and innovations 
m) Greater demand for company stock because of expected benefits of diversity policies 
 
Confounding factors:  It is important to note that other aspects of an employer’s environment 
might also influence how the policies result in changes in individual or organizational outcome 
measures.  For example, firm size might matter, since larger firms might have more effective 


 
 
7 
 
human resource departments.  Industry could matter, since if competitors also have LGBT-
supportive policies, prospective employees might have other good options for employment, 
reducing the benefits of the diversity policies by lowering their value as a unique workplace 
incentive.  There are many other potential factors, including the employer’s location, the 
existence of state or local nondiscrimination laws, and employee awareness of policies, that 
should be taken into account in studies that ask whether policies lead to better business 
outcomes.   
 
In the next two sections, we look for evidence of these 13 potential links between policies and 
business-related outcomes for individuals and organizations.   
 
IMMEDIATE EFFECTS ON EMPLOYEES 
 
(a) Less discrimination 
 
Figure 3:  Number of studies showing relationship between LGBT-supportive policies or 
workplace climates and discrimination 
LGBT-supportive policies Less discrimination 
 
Research suggests that LGBT employees experience less discrimination when their employer has 
a nondiscrimination policy that includes sexual orientation and gender identity.  For example, a 
2001 survey of gay men and lesbians from 31 states and the District of Columbia found that 
employees covered by a sexual orientation workplace nondiscrimination policy were 
significantly less likely to have experienced discrimination than those who were not covered by a 
policy (Button, 2001).  Additionally, a national survey of LGB employees reported less 
workplace discrimination if their company had a nondiscrimination or domestic partnership 
benefits policy in place, or if they lived in a state with legislation prohibiting discrimination on 
the basis of sexual orientation (Ragins & Cornwell, 2001).  Having these types of policies at the 
organizational level was more strongly related to perceived workplace discrimination than 
having state-level legislation.  One survey, which asked about discriminatory workplace 
treatment more specifically, found that employees who were covered by a nondiscrimination 
policy were less likely to have experienced each type of discrimination asked about than those 
who were not covered (Human Rights Campaign, 2009).   
 
However, at least two studies suggest that LGBT-supportive workplace policies do not make it 
any less likely that employees will experience discrimination.  A 1999 survey of LGB employees 
found that LGBT-inclusive nondiscrimination policies were unrelated to experiences of 
discrimination in the workplace (Waldo, 1999).  Additionally, a 2006 study of gay men found 
3 
1 
1 
Policy/climate → 
less discrimination 
Positive business relationship 
No business relationship 
Negative business relationship 


 
 
8 
 
that workers who were covered by a LGBT-inclusive nondiscrimination policy rated their 
employers as significantly more hostile than workers who were not covered by a policy (Tejeda, 
2006).  The latter study included a small number of respondents (65) and was not able to separate 
out the possibility that gay men covered by a LGBT-inclusive nondiscrimination policy may 
have been more likely to report workplace hostility, as they may have felt protected from 
retaliation in reporting inappropriate behavior.  In addition, though not finding a direct link 
between the existence of LGBT-supportive policies and incidents of discrimination, Waldo 
(1999) did find that LGBT-supportive workplace climates were significantly related to lower 
heterosexism in the workplace.  In his analysis, Waldo used a measure of workplace climate that 
asked participants to rate how their workplace would respond to complaints about anti-LGBT 
behavior, a potential proxy measure for workplace procedures to address discrimination under 
corporate policies.  Given these points, we conclude that these studies do not outweigh the 
conclusion drawn from the previous paragraph that LGBT-supportive policies appear to reduce 
discrimination.  
 
(b) Increased openness (or less hiding) in the workplace about being LGBT 
 
Figure 4:  Number of studies showing relationship between LGBT-supportive policies or 
workplace climates and openness about being LGBT 
LGBT-supportive policies Increased openness about being LGBT 
 
Research indicates that LGBT-supportive policies can create a workplace climate where 
employees feel comfortable enough to disclose their sexual orientation and gender identity.    
Four studies have found that LGB people are more likely to disclose their sexual orientation 
when their employer has an LGBT-inclusive nondiscrimination policy or a domestic partner 
benefits policy (Badgett, 2001; Rostosky & Riggle, 2002; Tejada, 2006; Ragins & Cornwell, 
2007).  One of these studies also found that having a partner who was covered by an LGBT 
nondiscrimination policy increased the likelihood of an employee himself or herself being out in 
the workplace (Rostosky & Riggle, 2002).   In total, these studies surveyed over 800 gay men 
and lesbians and people in same-sex couples across the country.   
 
However, at least one survey has found that the presence of LGBT-supportive policies does not 
make it more likely that LGBT employees are out at work.  The Human Rights Campaign’s 
(2009) nationally representative survey of LGBT employees found that employees who were not 
covered by an LGBT-inclusive nondiscrimination policy were about as likely to be out as those 
who were covered.  Though diverging from the literature reviewed above, these findings do not 
suggest that LGBT employees are less likely to be out at work when LGBT-supportive policies 
8 
1 
Policy/climate → 
more openness 
Positive business relationship 
No business relationship 
Negative business relationship 


 
 
9 
 
are in place.  Thus at worst, these policies are not a deterrent to disclosure in the workplace and 
at best may support employees in coming out. 
 
LGBT-supportive workplace climate Increased openness about being LGBT 
 
Research has also found that employees are more likely to be out if they perceive their workplace 
to be supportive of LGBT people.  Workplace support is measured differently in these studies, 
but generally it is broader than whether the company has a nondiscrimination or domestic partner 
benefits policy.  Three studies conducted in the last ten years that together surveyed almost 2,000 
people showed that employees are more likely to be out if they perceive their workplaces to 
supportive of LGBT people (Griffith & Hebl, 2002; Human Rights Campaign, 2009; Ragins, 
Singh, & Cornwell, 2007).  The most recent of these surveys, the Human Rights Campaign’s 
2009 survey, found that employees were more likely to be out to everyone at work when they 
perceived their workplace climate to be supportive of LGBT people (29% compared to 9%).  A 
1996 study of lesbian employees also found that supportive workplace climates are significantly 
related to an employee’s openness about his or her sexual orientation at work (Driscoll, Kelley, 
& Fassinger, 1996).  
 
SECONDARY EFFECTS FOR INDIVIDUALS IN THE WORKPLACE 
 
(c) Improved health and well-being outcomes 
 
Figure 5:  Number of studies showing relationship between LGBT-supportive policies or 
workplace climates and health outcomes 
LGBT-supportive policies Improved health and well-being outcomes 
 
Several studies have found that employees covered by LGBT-supportive policies are 
psychologically healthier than those who are not covered by these policies.  Studies show that 
these policies can have broader effects on employees’ well-being outside of the workplace, as 
well as work-specific effects.  A 2009 survey of LGBT employees (Human Rights Campaign, 
2009) found that those who were covered by a nondiscrimination policy were less likely to feel 
depressed than those who were not covered by such a policy (26% compared to 42%); were less 
6 
5 
5 
2 
1 
1 
More openness → 
improved health outcomes 
Less discrimination → 
improved health outcomes 
Policy/climate → 
improved health outcomes 
Positive business relationship 
No business relationship 
Negative business relationship 


 
 
10 
 
likely to feel distracted (24% compared to 31%); and less likely to feel exhausted (20% 
compared to 25%).  Similar results were found when looking at the impact of domestic partner 
benefits policies. For example, a 2007 study based on a national survey of LGB employees found 
that those who were offered domestic partner benefits through their employer reported 
significantly more organization-based self-esteem (Ragins & Cornwell, 2007).   A 2000 study of 
lesbians and gay men in the Midwest found lower rates of work-home conflict among lesbian 
and gay employees whose workplaces had nondiscrimination policies in place (Day & 
Schoenrade, 2000).  The study also found less job stress among employees who were covered by 
a nondiscrimination policy than those who were not, however the difference was not statistically 
significant. 
 
LGBT-supportive workplace climate Improved health and well-being outcomes 
 
Other studies have found that LGB people who perceive their workplaces to be generally 
supportive of LGBT people are psychologically healthier than employees who work in 
unsupportive workplace climates (Driscoll, Kelley, & Fassinger, 1996; Waldo, 1999).  A 2005 
study based on a survey of lesbians and gay men found that the supportiveness of LGBT people 
in workplace climates was significantly related to lower job stress, however, this relationship 
was eliminated when taking into account perceived discrimination (Munoz, 2005).  Other results 
from this study indicated that LGBT-supportive workplace climates had significant and positive 
effects on job-related variables such as turnover intentions, which suggests an overall beneficial 
effect of LGBT-supportive workplace climates on the well-being of LGBT employees. 
 
Increased openness about being LGBT Improved health and well-being outcomes 
 
Generally, research has shown that LGBT employees who are out at work also report being 
psychologically healthier than those who conceal their sexual orientation or gender identity.  For 
example, the Human Rights Campaign (2009) survey found that employees who were out in the 
workplace were less likely to feel depressed than those who were not out (26% compared to 
44%); less likely to feel distracted (25% compared to 31%); less likely to feel exhausted (12% 
compared to 30%); and less likely to avoid social events (18% compared to 29%).  Other studies 
show similar differences between employees who are out at work and those who are not, 
including less anxiousness and higher self-esteem reported by those who are out (Griffith & 
Hebl, 2002; Jordan & Deluty, 1998; Smith & Ingram, 2004).  A 2006 study of Dutch lesbians 
and gay men found similar results for gay men (Sandford, Bos, & Vet, 2006). 
 
Qualitative studies also suggest that LGB employees who are out at work are psychologically 
healthier.  For example, an analysis of responses to a 1995 survey of Harvard Business School 
alumni found that employees who were not out at work reported higher stress, more discomfort 
with socializing, and lower self-esteem (Friskopp & Silverstein, 1996).  Similar experiences have 
been described in other qualitative studies (Boatwright, Gilbert, Forrest, & Ketzenberger, 1996). 
 
Two national studies, Driscoll, Kelley, and Fassinger (1996) and Ragins, Singh, and Cornwell 
(2007), indicate that being out in the workplace is not directly related to psychological well-
being.  However, other findings from these studies support the theoretical relationship between 
disclosure and improved health and well-being.  Ragins et al. (2007) show that concealment of 
sexual orientation was associated with greater psychological distress, indicating that the inability 


 
 
11 
 
to disclose one’s sexual orientation in the workplace is associated with negative outcomes.  This 
suggests that policies which support disclosure, thus reducing the need to conceal, may lower the 
risk of experiencing this distress.  Driscoll and colleagues show a significant positive relationship 
between disclosure and lesbian employees’ perceptions of a supportive work environment, 
suggesting that disclosure has an indirect and positive effect on stress levels through workplace 
climate.  Thus overall, these studies suggest that supporting disclosure of sexual orientation in 
the workplace has the net effect of improving the health and well-being of LGBT employees.  
 
Less discrimination Improved health and well-being outcomes 
 
Research also shows that experiencing discrimination can affect an individual’s mental and 
physical health (Williams, 2003).  Munoz (2005) found that greater perceived workplace 
discrimination was associated with higher job-related stress among gay men and lesbians, 
whereas LGBT-supportive workplace climates were linked to lower job-related stress.  Similarly, 
Waldo (1999) found poorer health outcomes among employees who had experienced direct 
heterosexism. 
 
Other research shows that employees need not have experienced discrimination to feel similar 
negative effects.  Those who work in environments that cause them to fear discrimination also 
report negative health outcomes (Ragins, Singh, & Cornwell, 2007; Sandfort, Bos, & Vet, 2006; 
Smith & Ingram, 2004).   
 
(d) Increased job satisfaction 
 
Figure 6:  Number of studies showing relationship between LGBT-supportive policies or 
workplace climates and job satisfaction 
LGBT-supportive policies Increased job satisfaction 
 
Studies have found that LGB employees who are covered by a nondiscrimination policy are 
more satisfied with their jobs than employees who are not covered by a policy.  For example, 
Day and Schoenrade (2000) found that job satisfaction was significantly higher among 
employees working for organizations that had LGBT nondiscrimination policies in place.  
1 
4 
6 
3 
1 
More openness → 
increased job satisfaction 
Less discrimination → 
increased job satisfaction 
Policy/climate → 
increased job satisfaction 
Positive business relationship 
No business relationship 
Negative business relationship 


 
 
12 
 
Similarly, Tejeda (2006) found that employees who were covered by a nondiscrimination policy 
reported significantly higher levels of job satisfaction than those who were not covered. 
 
LGBT-supportive workplace climate Increased job satisfaction 
 
Research has also found that LGB people who perceive their workplace climates to be supportive 
of LGBT employees are more likely to have positive attitudes about their jobs than people who 
see their workplaces as unsupportive.  For example, Munoz (2005) found that LGBT-supportive 
workplace climates were associated with higher levels of career satisfaction.  Additionally, 
Waldo (1999) found that employees who perceived their work environment to be heterosexist 
were significantly less satisfied with their jobs. 
 
Some studies have indicated that overall supportiveness of LGBT people in the workplace may 
be more relevant to job satisfaction than just the presence of an LGBT-supportive policy.  For 
example, a 2008 study of LGB employees found that informal types of general support from 
supervisors and work colleagues (rather than organization-level support) predicted job 
satisfaction and life satisfaction (Huffman, Watrous-Rodriguez, & King, 2008).  Similarly, 
Griffith and Hebl (2002) found that the presence of a written workplace nondiscrimination policy 
was unrelated to job satisfaction once the researchers accounted for LGBT social support within 
the organization. 
 
Increased openness about being LGBT Increased job satisfaction 
 
We were able to find only one study that showed that employees who are open about their sexual 
orientation are more satisfied with their jobs than employees who are not open.  A nationally 
representative survey of heterosexual and LGBT white-collar employees found that out 
employees were 31% less likely to feel stalled in their careers and 25% more likely to be 
satisfied with their rate of advancement or promotion (64% compared to 48%; Hewlett & 
Sumberg, 2011).  The study also found that senior management positions held by LGBT people 
were much more likely to be held by an out LGBT person (71% compared to 28%).  
 
Conversely, at least three studies have found that disclosure of sexual orientation is not 
predictive of job satisfaction (Day & Schoenrade, 2000; Driscoll, Kelley, & Fassinger, 1996; 
Tejeda, 2006).  It may be the case that LGBT employees do not evaluate their job satisfaction 
based on whether or not they have disclosed their sexual orientation.  In the context of other 
findings that link LGBT-supportive policies and workplace climates to increased job satisfaction, 
it is likely that perceptions of the workplace climate are more significantly related to an LGBT 
employee’s satisfaction on the job than to his or her personal decision to come out.   
 
Less discrimination Increased job satisfaction 
 
Research has found that LGB employees who have not experienced discrimination are more 
satisfied with their jobs.  For example, Button (2001) found that employees who did not 
experience discriminatory treatment were significantly more satisfied with their jobs than those 
who had.  Similarly, Munoz (2005) found that those respondents who perceived more workplace 
discrimination were significantly less satisfied with their jobs and careers.  Ragins, Singh, and 
Cornwell (2007) also found less job satisfaction and less satisfaction with opportunities for 


 
 
13 
 
promotion among those employees who were not out and who feared discrimination.  Research 
out of Australia and the Netherlands has reached similar conclusions (Sandford, Bos, & Vet, 
2006; Trau & Härtel, 2007).    
 
However, Tejeda (2006) found that workplace hostility was unrelated to satisfaction with work.  
This sample only included 65 gay men who on average reported few incidents of workplace 
hostility and thus analyses may not have been able to detect relationships among these variables. 
 
(e) Improved relationships with co-workers and supervisors 
 
Figure 7:  Number of studies showing relationship between LGBT-supportive policies or 
workplace climates and relationships with co-workers and supervisors 
LGBT-supportive policies Improved relationships with co-workers and supervisors 
 
Research has shown that LGB employees who are covered by LGBT-supportive policies are 
more likely to be socially and altruistically engaged in the workplace.  For example, studies 
show that gay and lesbian employees who are covered by nondiscrimination policies report 
higher levels of organizational citizenship behaviors (OCBs) than employees who are not 
covered (Brenner, Lyons, & Fassinger, 2010; Tejeda, 2006).  These behaviors relate directly to 
relationships with coworkers and supervisors.  OCBs are “Good Samaritan” behaviors that are 
not necessarily part of an employee’s job duties, but nevertheless positively contribute to the 
workplace environment (Organ, Podsakoff, & MacKenzie, 2006).   Researchers who study OCBs 
look at the extent to which employees exhibit behaviors that benefit other employees or the 
company, such as altruism, courtesy, conscientiousness, civic virtue, sportsmanship, 
peacekeeping, cheerleading, helping, and loyalty, among others (Podsakoff, Whiting, Podsakoff, 
& Blume, 2009). 
 
Increased openness about being LGBT Improved relationships with co-workers and 
supervisors 
 
One additional factor that has been shown to be associated with improved interpersonal 
engagement in the workplace is disclosure of sexual orientation.  Ragins, Singh, and Cornwell 
(2007) reported that greater disclosure was associated with greater participation with others in 
1 
1 
2 
Improved relationships → 
increased productivity 
More openness → 
improved relationships 
Policy/climate → 
improved relationships 
Positive business relationship 
No business relationship 
Negative business relationship 


 
 
14 
 
the work environment.  To our knowledge, this is the only study linking disclosure to workplace 
engagement or improved interpersonal relationships, and thus additional research is necessary to 
test the validity of this finding. 
 
Improved relationships with co-workers and supervisors Greater commitment and 
other positive behaviors and attitudes 
 
Research has also shown that higher levels of OCBs are related to lower degrees of turnover 
intentions and lower actual turnover rates.  Researchers have hypothesized that turnover is less 
likely in organizations where employees report high levels of OCBs because helping and 
supporting behaviors, measured by OCBs, are likely to boost the attractiveness of the job.  For 
example, a 2009 meta-analysis of 168 studies of employee OCBs, a majority of which asked 
about job withdrawal behaviors, found that employees who exhibited higher levels of OCBs 
were less likely to say they intended to leave their job, and were less likely to actually have left 
jobs (Podsakoff, Whiting, Podsakoff, & Blume, 2009).  This finding will require replication 
among a sample of LGBT employees to assess whether the relationship between these variables 
exists within this population. 
 
Improved relationships with co-workers and supervisors Increased productivity 
 
Research has shown that employees who exhibit higher levels of OCBs are more productive in 
the workplace.  Podsakoff et al.’s (2009) meta-analysis included seven studies which specifically 
measured productivity and found that workplaces whose employees exhibited higher levels of 
OCBs were significantly more productive than workplaces characterized by lower levels of 
OCBs.  Higher organization-level OBCs were also significantly related to increased workplace 
efficiency and reduced costs.  In addition, individual level OBCs were positively related to 
managers’ evaluations of their employees’ job performance.  Using a sample of gay and lesbian 
employees, Brenner, Lyons, and Fassinger (2010) found that OCBs were reported to have a 
strong relationship with organizational performance, accounting for 18% to 38% of the variance 
in organizational performance.   
 
Additionally, Podsakoff et al. (2009) looked at 199 studies that measured employee engagement 
using a different model than the OCB model, and those studies also found that employee 
engagement was related to business performance outcomes.  The study found small but 
significant correlations between levels of employee engagement and the main outcome variables 
– customer loyalty, profitability, productivity, turnover, safety incidents, absenteeism, lost 
merchandise, patient safety incidents, and product quality.  As is the case with the relationship 
between OCBs and turnover intentions, these studies will need to be replicated using additional 
samples of LGBT employees. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
15 
 
(f) Greater commitment and other positive workplace behaviors and attitudes 
 
Figure 8:  Number of studies showing relationship between LGBT-supportive policies or 
workplace climates and job commitment and other positive workplace behaviors and attitudes 
LGBT-supportive policies Greater commitment and other positive workplace 
behaviors and attitudes 
 
Studies have found that LGBT employees are more loyal to employers that have LGBT-
supportive policies.  For example, Ragins and Cornwell (2001) found that gay and lesbian 
employees who were covered by LGBT-supportive policies were significantly more committed 
to their employers and their careers, and significantly less likely to report that they planned to 
leave their jobs, than those who were not covered by a policy.  This pattern of relationships was 
found regardless of whether employees had disclosed their sexual orientation, indicating that 
these policies can have a positive impact on all gay and lesbian employees.  Further, the 
relationship between organizational policies and an employee’s organizational commitment and 
turnover intentions was shown to occur independently of perceived workplace discrimination, 
again suggesting that the positive impact of these policies extends to all gay and lesbian 
employees, not only individuals who might have used the policies. 
 
Other surveys of LGBT employees have found that employees who were covered by LGBT-
supportive policies report higher emotional commitment to their employers (Day & Schoenrade, 
2000), less intent to leave their jobs (Ragins & Cornwell, 2007), and are less likely to have 
searched for a new job within the past year (Human Rights Campaign, 2009), than those 
employees who were not covered. 
 
However, at least one study suggests that a nondiscrimination policy may not have an effect on 
retention of gay male employees.  Tejeda (2006) found that employees who were covered by a 
nondiscrimination policy were as likely to report turnover intentions as those who were not 
covered by a nondiscrimination policy.  Given the small sample size of this study, there is 
presently greater empirical support for the existence of a relationship between LGBT-supportive 
workplace policies and organizational commitment. 
 
 
1 
3 
6 
7 
2 
1 
1 
Improved relationships → 
greater job commitment 
More openness → 
greater job commitment 
Less discrimination → 
greater job commitment 
Policy/climate → 
greater job commitment 
Positive business relationship 
No business relationship 
Negative business relationship 


 
 
16 
 
LGBT-supportive workplace climate Greater commitment and other positive 
workplace behaviors and attitudes 
 
Research has also found that LGB people who perceive their workplace climates to be LGBT-
supportive are more likely to have positive attitudes about their jobs than LGB people who see 
their workplaces as unsupportive.  For example, Munoz (2005) found that LGBT-supportive 
organizational climates were significantly related to higher organizational commitment and 
lower turnover intentions.  At least one other quantitative study (Driscoll, Kelley & Fassinger, 
1996) has also found a positive relationship between LGBT-supportive climates and turnover 
intentions or job commitment.  Individual employee responses in a qualitative analysis from the 
U.K. indicated that the employees felt a sense of loyalty to their employers when they perceived 
their workplace climates to be LGBT-supportive (Guasp & Balfour, 2008). 
 
Increased openness about being LGBT Greater commitment and other positive 
workplace behaviors and attitudes 
 
Studies have also found that LGBT employees who are open about their sexual orientation in the 
workplace report fewer turnover intentions than those who are not open.   Hewlett and Sumburg 
(2011) found that out employees were more likely to be satisfied with their rate of advancement 
or promotion compared to employees who had not disclosed their sexual orientation (64% 
compared to 48%). Those who were unsatisfied were at least three times more likely to plan to 
leave their companies within the next year.  Similarly, Day and Schoenrade (2000) found that out 
employees reported more commitment to their employers. 
 
Published qualitative evidence supports these statistics.  For example, a qualitative analysis of 
responses to a 1995 survey of Harvard Business School alumni found that employees who had 
not disclosed their sexual orientation at work reported reservations about their long-term 
prospects with the company and less loyalty than employees who had disclosed.  A few of the 
alumni reported that they had left a job, or were thinking about leaving a job, in order to work for 
a company where they felt comfortable being out (Friskopp & Silverstein, 1996). 
 
Only one paper we identified presents data suggesting the opposite conclusion— that disclosure 
in the workplace is related to greater turnover.  In a sample of gay men, Tejeda (2006) found that 
employees who were open about their sexual orientation reported greater turnover intentions than 
employees who were not open.  It may be that disclosing one’s sexual orientation or gender 
identity in the workplace increases the vulnerability of an LGBT employee to discrimination, and 
experiencing these acts may increase turnover intentions.  In this case, policies that lessen the 
occurrence of discrimination (as in Button, 2001; Human Rights Campaign, 2009), and provide 
employees with recourse in the event of discrimination, provide a remedy that may also reduce 
the desire to leave one’s company.  
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
17 
 
Less discrimination Greater commitment and other positive workplace behaviors and 
attitudes 
 
Additionally, research has shown that employees who do not fear discrimination or have not 
experienced discrimination report fewer turnover intentions and higher levels of commitment to 
their employers.  For example, a 2007 nationally representative survey of people who had quit or 
been laid off within the five years prior to the survey found that gay and lesbian employees said 
they left a job only because of workplace unfairness almost twice as often as heterosexual 
Caucasian men (5.6% compared to 3.0%; Level Playing Field Institute, 2007).  Almost half of 
those gay and lesbian employees said they would have stayed at their job had their employer 
offered more or better benefits.  Additionally, Munoz (2005) found that those respondents who 
perceived more workplace discrimination reported significantly lower levels of job commitment 
and significantly higher levels of turnover intentions.  Button (2001), Ragins, Singh, and 
Cornwell (2007), and Trau and Härtel (2007) found a similar relationship between discrimination 
and job commitment or turnover intentions. 
 
Similarly, a review of literature related to the vocational decision-making of lesbians, highlights 
that the career decisions of lesbian women may be highly influenced by the perception of the 
safety of a work environment.  The belief that she may be more likely to face discrimination in a 
certain occupation or be unsupported by the management of an individual company, may cause a 
lesbian woman to choose alternate career paths or work less hard toward promotions or salary 
increases in order to shield herself from negative repercussions of being out at work (Hook & 
Bowman, 2008). 
 
INDIVIDUAL EFFECTS: TRANSGENDER RESPONDENTS 
 
Only four of the 36 research studies discussed in this report included transgender people in their 
study samples.  Two of those studies, Hewlett and Sumburg (2011) and Harris 
Interactive/Witeck-Combs Communication (2006), did not report the number of transgender 
people included in their samples. Hewlett and Sumburg (2011) did note, however, that they 
could not separately analyze the responses of transgender people because there were too few of 
them.  Two studies, Law et al. (2011) and Human Rights Campaign (2009), separately analyzed 
responses of transgender employees.  These studies suggest that LGBT-supportive policies and 
workplace climates might have the same effects on transgender employees that they have on 
LGB employees, which, in turn, have a positive impact on workplace-related outcomes. 
 
LGBT-supportive workplace climate Increased job satisfaction; Greater commitment 
& other positive behaviors & attitudes; Improved health and well-being 
outcomes 
 
In a survey of 88 transgender employees, Law et al. (2011) found that transgender respondents 
who reported more workplace support were more satisfied with their jobs, reported higher levels 
of affective and normative commitment, and reported lower levels of job anxiety (although this 
finding was not significant).  Workplace support, however, was not related to turnover 
intentions. 
 


 
 
18 
 
Affective commitment refers to an employee’s desire to stay with an organization because he or 
she likes working there. Normative commitment refers to an employee’s desire to stay at a job 
due to feelings of obligation to the organization.   
 
Figure 9:  Number of studies focused on transgender employees showing relationship between 
LGBT-supportive policies or workplace climates and economic outcomes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Increased openness about being LGBT Increased job satisfaction; Greater 
commitment & other positive behaviors & attitudes; Improved health and well-
being outcomes 
 
Law et al. (2011) found that transgender respondents who had disclosed their transgender status 
at work were more satisfied with their jobs and reported higher levels of affective commitment 
than those who had not disclosed.  The study also found that transgender respondents who had 
disclosed their gender identity at work experienced less job anxiety.  Disclosure was not found to 
be related to normative commitment.   
 
Figure 10:  Number of studies focused on transgender employees showing relationship between 
more openness about being transgender and economic outcomes 
Additionally, in a survey of LGBT people that included 23 transgender employees, the Human 
Rights Campaign (2009) found that many transgender respondents concealed their transgender 
1 
1 
1 
1 
More openness →  
improved health outcomes 
More openness → 
greater job commitment 
More openness → 
increased job satisfaction 
Positive business relationship 
No business relationship 
Negative business relationship 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Policy/climate → 
improved health outcomes 
Policy/climate → 
greater job commitment 
Policy/climate → 
increased job satisfaction 
Positive business relationship 
No business relationship 
Negative business relationship 


 
 
19 
 
status at work out of safety concerns or fear of being fired.  Forty-percent of transgender 
respondents reported that fear was the reason they were not out at work, compared to 20% of gay 
men (the next more likely group to report fear as the reason they were not out at work).  
Transgender people were also more likely to fear that they would be fired if they were open 
about their LGBT-identity at work (42% of transgender people compared to 22% of gay men, the 
next most likely group to report this fear).  As described above, fear of discrimination can have a 
negative impact on employees’ health and well-being, job satisfaction, job commitment, and 
other workplace attitudes and behaviors.   
 
INDIVIDUAL EFFECTS: BISEXUAL RESPONDENTS 
 
Research specifically about the workplace attitudes of bisexual people is also lacking. Only 11 of 
the 36 studies we reviewed included bisexual respondents, and only the Human Rights Campaign 
(2009) study provided any information about just bisexual respondents.  The Human Rights 
Campaign study does not provide enough information about bisexual respondents to show a 
relationship between the impact of LGBT-supportive policies or workplace climates on bisexual 
employees, specifically, and workplace-related outcomes. However, the study indicates that 
bisexual employees might experience discrimination or fear discrimination at higher levels than 
gay and lesbian employees.  As described above, experiences of discrimination and fear of 
discrimination can have a negative impact on employees’ health and well-being, job satisfaction, 
job commitment, and other workplace attitudes and behaviors.    
 
Specifically, the Human Rights Campaign (2009) study found that bisexual respondents were 
less likely than gay and lesbian respondents to have co-workers acknowledge their sexual 
orientation in a positive way (7% of bisexual respondents, compared to 27% of gay men and 
31% of lesbians).  Bisexual respondents were also less likely than gay and lesbian respondents to 
report that they would disclose their sexual orientation on an anonymous, confidential human 
resources survey (59% compared to 79% of gay men and 77% of lesbians).  They were also less 
likely than gay and lesbian respondents to report that they would feel comfortable providing 
feedback about the LGBT workplace climate to human resources (59% of bisexuals compared to 
83% of gay men and 80% of lesbians).  
 
Among all of the 36 studies we reviewed for this report, the studies described above are the only 
ones that included bisexual and transgender people’s responses.  The lack of data on transgender 
and bisexual employees is a significant limitation of the current research on the impact of LGBT-
supportive workplace policies. 
 
EFFECTS ON ORGANIZATIONAL OUTCOMES 
 
In previous sections, we reviewed evidence that LGBT-supportive policies and workplace 
climates are associated with positive changes for LGBT employees, including increased job 
satisfaction, better psychological health, and greater engagement with coworkers.  We next 
consider the impact of these policies on higher-level organizational change.  It is important to 
note that little research exists directly relating LGBT-supportive policies to macro-level 
organizational change.  However, in an effort to provide a more comprehensive review of the 


 
 
20 
 
potential costs and benefits of adopting such policies, we outline several proposed theoretical 
relationships. 
 
(g) Changes in health insurance costs (through (c) above, and direct changes) 
 
Extending benefits to the same-sex partners of LGBT employees, such as health insurance 
coverage, will likely result in higher health insurance costs for companies enacting these 
policies, but that effect is relatively small.  Domestic partner benefits for same-sex partners 
would raise health care costs by well under 1% for the typical firm (Ash & Badgett, 2006).  An 
estimate of the cost of extending healthcare coverage to same-sex spouses suggested that 96% of 
U.S. firms would see no additional costs, and that approximately 190,000 out of 5 million U.S. 
firms would have only one new spouse covered by its health benefit programs (Badgett & Gates, 
2006). 
 
Where realized, this increase in healthcare expenditures is likely to be at least partially offset by 
savings in overall healthcare costs and increased productivity resulting from the improved health 
of LGBT employees, as mentioned earlier.  In the general population, lack of health insurance is 
associated with decreased utilization of preventative services and delays in care among those 
with chronic poor health, which can lead to an increased likelihood of premature death, poorer 
quality of life, and greater functional impairment, including reduced work productivity (Institute 
of Medicine, 2009).  As increased coverage can yield improvements in the health of an LGBT 
employee or their same-sex partner, LGBT employees may show more engagement in the 
workplace and higher levels of productivity.  These direct physical health benefits can be 
coupled with the psychological benefits of reducing discrimination in the workplace, reviewed 
earlier, including possible reduction of the use of sick days (Huebner & Davis, 2007). 
 
As part of a set of policies to enhance and support a diverse workforce, employers may provide 
health benefits that cover transition-related care.  Transition-related care includes medically 
necessary treatments or procedures for an individual to transition to a gender different from the 
one assigned to that individual at birth.1  As the transgender population in the United States is 
quite small (Gates, 2011), the number of transgender employees seeking this type of coverage is 
also likely to be small.  One known estimate comes from the City and County of San Francisco, 
which reported that over the course of five years (2001-2006), 37 employees filed claims for 
transition-related care, out of a total of 80,000 insurance plan members (Harmon, 2006).  The 
total expenditures ($383,000) were significantly less than had been anticipated (Harmon, 2006).  
Emerging social science research suggests that transition-related care results in significant 
improvements in the mental health of transgender persons (e.g. Ainsworth & Spigel, 2010; 
Dhejne, Lichtenstein, Boman, et al., 2011; Monstrey et al., 2007; Murad, Elamin, Garcia, et al., 
2010), which may reduce healthcare costs associated with not providing these types of benefits. 
 
 
 
                                                 
1 Transition-related healthcare encompasses a number of procedures and interventions that are deemed medically 
necessary in order to treat gender dysphoria and help transgender and gender non-conforming people achieve 
“lasting personal comfort with their gendered selves, in order to maximize their overall health, psychological well-
being, and self-fulfillment” (Coleman et al., 2011, p. 166). 


 
 
21 
 
(h) Lower legal costs from litigation related to discrimination (through (a), above) 
 
The implementation of LGBT-supportive policies may serve to bring a company in-line with 
existing federal or state regulations or local ordinances.  In doing so, a company may shield itself 
from legal costs associated with compliance lawsuits, an issue of concern to many employers.  
However, estimating the costs of addressing compliance issues is challenging and we were 
unable to find data or studies related to sexual orientation and gender identity. 
 
(i) Greater access to new customers, such as public sector entities that require 
contractors to have nondiscrimination policies or domestic partner benefits 
 
A number of states and localities require employers to adopt LGBT-supportive policies in order 
to bid on government contracts.  A 2011 study identified 68 local governments that have laws 
requiring their contractors to have LGBT-supportive nondiscrimination policies, affirmative 
action policies, or to offer equal benefits to employees’ domestic partners (Mallory & Sears, 
2011).  Some states have adopted similar laws (e.g. Cal. Pub. Cont. Code § 10295.3(a)(1), 
(e)(1)).  By adopting LGBT-supportive policies, employers can qualify for potentially lucrative 
government contracts with these public sector entities.  However, no studies have looked directly 
at the extent to which having the policies increases the likelihood of securing government 
contracts.   
 
(j) More business from individual consumers who want to do business with socially 
responsible companies 
 
A possible outcome of adopting LGBT-supportive workplace policies is a change in the way a 
company is viewed by those external to the organization, most notably customers and potential 
new employees.  To the extent that state and local governments require contractors to have 
LGBT-inclusive nondiscrimination polices or to offer domestic partnership benefits, enacting 
LGBT-supportive policies may provide a company with greater access to new customers. An 
organization’s customer base may also expand due to consumer preferences for supporting 
companies that value diversity.  For example, an experimental study by Tuten (2005) evaluated 
consumers’ reactions to a company that was described as having “gay-friendly” policies, and to a 
company that was described as lacking “gay-friendly” policies. Both LGBT and heterosexual 
participants had significantly more positive reactions to the “gay-friendly” company than to the 
non-gay friendly company (Tuten, 2005).  This finding is complicated, however, by the 
concurrent result that heterosexual participants reported significantly higher brand commitment 
to the non-“gay friendly” company than to the “gay-friendly” company.  Taken together, these 
findings suggest that LGBT-supportive policies are only one of a number of factors contributing 
to customer assessments of existing brands, but also that LGBT-supportive companies are 
viewed positively by some potential customers. 
 
In addition to directly changing the external perceptions of a given company, LGBT-supportive 
policies might also indirectly lead to improved customer satisfaction through increased employee 
engagement.  For example, Walz and Niehoff (2000) found that restaurants where employees 
exhibited higher levels of OCBs (a form of employee engagement) were rated higher in customer 
satisfaction and received fewer customer complaints.  Recent meta-analyses support this 


 
 
22 
 
contention, demonstrating a significant correlation between employee engagement and customer 
loyalty and satisfaction (Harter, Schmidt, Killham, & Agrawal, 2009; Podsakoff, Whiting, 
Podsakoff, & Blume, 2009). 
 
(k) More effective recruiting of LGBT and non-LGBT employees who want to work for 
an employer that values diversity 
 
LGBT-supportive policies More effective recruiting of LGBT and non-LGBT employees 
 
Survey data from opinion polls suggest the importance of LGBT-supportive policies to LGBT 
people when they are considering where to work.  Results from a 2006 national poll conducted 
by Harris Interactive/Witeck-Combs Communication indicated that 89% of LGBT respondents 
said it was important that they work for a company that has a written nondiscrimination policy 
that includes race, ethnicity, sex, religion, age, sexual orientation and disability (Out & Equal, 
Harris Interactive, & Witeck Combs Communications, 2006).  An even greater percentage of 
LGBT respondents (91%) said it was important that they work for a company that offers equal 
benefits. Research conducted among LGB employees in the United Kingdom reports similar 
findings, with respondents seeking out LGB-inclusive organizations for employment 
opportunities while steering away from companies they believed were not supportive of the LGB 
community (Guasp & Balfour, 2008).  Company policies such as nondiscrimination protections 
and domestic partnership benefits were signals to LGB employees that they would be supported 
in the workplace. 
 
Having LGBT-supportive policies may have a similarly positive impact on the recruitment of 
non-LGBT employees.  In the 2006 Harris poll, 72% of non-LGBT respondents said that, when 
deciding where to work, it was important that an employer have an LGBT-inclusive 
nondiscrimination policy, and 79% said that it was important that an employer offer equal 
benefits (Out & Equal, Harris Interactive, & Witeck Combs Communications, 2006).   
 
Less discrimination More effective recruiting of LGBT employees  
 
Other research suggests another recruitment-related business concern arising from 
discrimination—that employers limit their available talent pool by discriminating against 
qualified applicants because of their sexual orientation.  For example, a 2011 study that sent out 
“matched resumes” of two equally qualified job applicants to employers, with the only difference 
being that one applicant was identifiably gay, found that employers were 40% more likely to 
callback the heterosexual applicant.  Though the difference in callback rates varied by 
geographic region, gay men were less likely than non-gay men to be called back in every state 
included in the study, but discrimination was less in cities and states with nondiscrimination laws 
(Tilcsik, 2011).  If this finding extends to voluntarily adopted company-level nondiscrimination 
policies, then employers who have rejected highly qualified LGBT applicants in the past might 
reduce their rejection of qualified applicants.  
 
 
 


 
 
23 
 
(l) Increased creativity among employees that could lead to better ideas and 
innovations 
 
Though conclusions about the impact of a diverse workforce on business outcomes are varied 
and the challenges of conducting research in this area complex, there is some evidence to suggest 
that diversity in the workplace is related to increased innovation (Kochan et al., 2003).  We 
located one qualitative study of LGB employees from 21 public and private sector companies in 
the U.K. that addressed a related question (Guasp & Balfour, 2008).  Employees indicated that 
having to conceal their sexual orientation at work reduced their levels of creativity and 
innovation, while being out at work increased their confidence in sharing new ideas (Guasp & 
Balfour, 2008).    
 
(m) Greater demand for company stock because of expected benefits of diversity 
policies 
 
Based on our review, two published studies have looked at whether implementing LGBT-
supportive policies affects stock prices.  A 2008 study examined stock prices of 203 companies 
before and after the release of the Human Rights Campaign’s Corporate Equality Index (CEI) to 
determine if perceptions of LGBT-friendliness would boost companies’ stock market 
performance.  (The CEI rates companies on their LGBT-friendliness, including whether they 
have nondiscrimination and domestic partner benefits policies.)  The study found an initial 
increase in firm value on the day the CEI was released but no net impact over the three-day 
analysis period (Johnson & Malina 2008).  A later study found that the more robust a company’s 
LGBT-friendly policies, the better its stock performed over the course of four years (2002-2006), 
compared to other companies in the same industry over the same period of time (Wang & 
Schwarz, 2010).  The construction of the stock price variable in that study does not allow for 
assessing the amount of change in the actual stock price, however.   
 
EVALUATION OF EVIDENCE AND LIMITATIONS 
 
In a previous review of literature related to the vocational behavior of gay men, lesbians, and 
bisexual men and women, Croteau (1996) outlined methodological limitations among empirical 
articles published on the topic between 1980 and 1995.  He noted that across the nine studies, all 
used convenience samples of predominantly white, well-educated, self-identified sexual 
minorities recruited through connections with the LGBT community.  These studies also used 
measurement tools that had not been previously validated and conducted largely descriptive 
analyses of the survey data.  Though research published since then has improved in the use of 
validated instruments, such as the Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgendered Climate Inventory 
(Liddle, Luzzo, Hauenstein, & Schuck, 2004), and the use of more complex statistical analyses, 
such as path analyses, the limitations related to study design, methodology, and sampling remain 
largely the same. 
 
The majority of studies reviewed in this report are cross-sectional studies using convenience 
samples of gay men and lesbians, with a smaller number of studies that are inclusive of bisexual 
men and women and transgender men and women.  No study identified in this review presented 
longitudinal data to assess whether adding supportive policies in one period is associated with 


 
 
24 
 
better outcomes in later periods, which would provide stronger evidence that there is a causal 
relationship between policies and outcomes.  In addition, samples were predominantly white and 
well-educated, and had higher incomes than the general population, limiting the generalizability 
of reported findings.   
 
Effect sizes found among the current set of studies were generally small and the presence of 
LGBT-supportive policies accounted for only a limited amount of the variance in outcome 
measures.  This indicates that there are likely other factors impacting employee attitudes, 
employee behaviors, and a company’s bottom line, and that LGBT-supportive policies such as 
nondiscrimination and benefits policies are only part of what influences the work experiences of 
LGBT employees.  
 
The challenges of sampling LGBT populations have been reviewed elsewhere and as has been 
previously noted in the literature, the studies reviewed here used samples predominantly 
recruited from LGBT-related organizations, including member lists of LGBT rights 
organizations (e.g. Day & Schoerade, 2000) and LGBT affinity groups (e.g. Sandfort, Bos, & 
Vet, 2006).  This sampling strategy has implications for the conclusions that can be drawn from 
existing studies, in that what is largely known about LGBT employees is a set of findings about a 
specific subsample of LGBT people— those who are connected to the LGBT community and 
willing to self-identify as such.  One set of studies identified in this review used a stratified 
sampling technique to obtain equal numbers of men and women from the same geographic 
regions (Ragins & Cornwell, 2001; Ragins & Cornwell, 2007; Ragins, Singh, & Cornwell, 
2007), however, these participants were recruited from the membership of national LGBT rights 
organizations.  This again limits the findings to a description of LGBT people who may be more 
likely to have disclosed their sexual orientation at work, who may be more likely to seek out 
employers who provide domestic partnership benefits or offer protections from discrimination, or 
other characteristics of individuals who actively affiliate with LGBT political or advocacy 
organizations. 
 
Another limitation among the studies reviewed for this report is the use of self-report 
questionnaires as the most frequently used method of assessment.  While the use of self-report 
questionnaires is common to much of social science research and may adequately measure 
constructs such as work-related attitudes, research on LGBT-supportive workplace policies using 
this type of methodology relies on participants’ accurate knowledge of the presence of these 
policies.  Importantly, between 9.1% and 18% of participants in studies assessing the presence of 
nondiscrimination policies and/or domestic partnership benefits either did not know or were not 
sure of whether such policies existed at their organization, a finding which calls into question the 
reliability of some of the data collected.  In addition, this result suggests that for some proportion 
of LGBT employees, there is no relationship between the presence of LGBT-supportive 
workplace policies and employee-level outcomes simply because these individuals are unaware 
that such policies even exist.       
 
Finally, the studies outlined in this review measure a wide variety of constructs, which provides 
greater breadth than depth of the findings.  Among the challenges faced by researchers exploring 
workplace outcomes is the selection not only of the variables of interest, but of variables which 
may confound results or better explain the relationships between LGBT-supportive policies, 


 
 
25 
 
employee attitudes and behaviors, and company productivity.  For example, studies that assess 
the degree to which an organizational climate is supportive of LGBT individuals may also wish 
to include assessments of an organization’s general support for diversity in order to understand 
the unique contribution of LGBT-affirmative company environments on LGBT workers.  
Similarly, a limitation of the published studies is that none have taken into account other types of 
diversity, such as age, race/ethnicity, or gender, when examining the relationship between 
workplace policies and outcomes.  There may be meaningful differences among LGBT workers 
who face discrimination based on multiple factors; for example, among lesbian employees who 
already experience wage discrimination based on their gender.  The interaction of different 
dimensions of diversity will be an important area for further research. 
 
RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
Based on the present review, there are number of ways in which research on the effects of 
LGBT-supportive policies could be expanded and improved.  As noted in the limitations section, 
future work in this area would benefit from recruiting more diverse samples of LGBT people.  
Literature published to-date represents a small subsample of this population and additional 
research is needed on LGBT people of different racial and ethnic backgrounds, educational 
attainment, and occupations.  Studying the interaction of these different dimensions of diversity 
will be an important area for future research.  Further, the existing literature base predominantly 
reports on the experiences and beliefs of lesbian and gay employees, and special attention should 
be paid to recruiting larger samples of bisexual men and women and transgender employees.  
Care should also be taken to consider the effects of workplace policies related to sexual 
orientation separate from policies related to gender identity or expression.  This is particularly 
true since a greater number of U.S. states protect employees from discrimination based on sexual 
orientation than protect them from discrimination based on gender identity (National Gay and 
Lesbian Task Force, 2012). 
 
In addition to diversifying the characteristics of study participants, future research should employ 
a greater number of sampling methods and research designs, particularly so that firmer 
conclusions can be drawn about the relationship between the presence of LGBT-supportive 
policies and business outcomes.  The use of probability samples would allow for greater 
generalization of study findings, and using time-series, quasi-experimental, and experimental 
designs would allow researchers to test hypotheses about causal relationships among workplace 
policies, organizational climate, and outcomes of interest.  For example, larger companies with 
businesses across multiple states provide an opportunity to conduct natural experiments that test 
the impact of local laws and social climates on LGBT employees, as well as more downstream 
targets like productivity, customer base, and profitability.  It will also be important to include 
comparison and control groups to assess whether changes in diversity-respecting workplace 
practices differentially affect subsets of employees.  Companies that have existing methods of 
collecting data on their employees and workplace outcomes, such job satisfaction and work-life 
balance, already have the infrastructure to support asking specific questions about diversity 
practices that are supportive of LGBT people.  Doing so would allow for greater control of firm-
level factors that might confound the results of these earlier studies, such as organization size, 
climate, and existing diversity practices.  Researchers and company officials should collaborate 
to fully utilize such data and to make findings available to policymakers and the public.   


 
 
26 
 
 
Finally, future research should use additional and more direct measures of business outcomes, 
such as productivity and profit measures.  As shown in this report, a number of factors appear to 
mediate the relationship between the existence of LGBT-supportive policies and business 
outcomes, such as disclosure of sexual orientation in the workplace, office climate, and job 
satisfaction and engagement, and more work needs to be done to connect these mediating factors 
to organization-level costs and benefits. 
 
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 
 
On a qualitative level, we find support in the social science research for links between LGBT-
supportive policies and outcomes that will benefit employers.  Although the number of available 
studies was small, we are able to draw some tentative conclusions: 
• Having LGBT-supportive policies in the workplace is associated with reduced incidence 
of discrimination, and less discrimination is associated with better psychological health 
and increased job satisfaction among LGBT employees. 
• A supportive workplace climate – which includes both LGBT-supportive policies and 
more broad support from co-workers and supervisory staff – is associated with a greater 
likelihood that LGBT employees will feel comfortable disclosing their sexual orientation 
at work.  In turn, increased disclosure of sexual orientation is related to improved 
psychological health outcomes among LGBT employees. 
• LGBT employees report more satisfaction with their jobs when covered by LGBT-
supportive policies and working in positive climates. 
• The presence of LGBT-supportive policies and workplace climates are associated with 
improved relationships among LGBT employees and their co-workers and supervisors.  
In addition, LGBT employees are more engaged in the workplace, are more likely to go 
above-and-beyond their job description to contribute to the work environment, and report 
greater commitment to their jobs. 
• Although there may be initial costs to enacting LGBT-supportive policies, such as 
extending health benefits to same-sex partners of LGBT employees, we find that these 
costs are likely negligible and could be offset by cost savings in other areas.  Healthier, 
more committed LGBT employees are likely to make greater contributions to the 
workplace. 
• Among consumers and job-seekers who value LGBT-inclusive diversity practices, 
businesses with LGBT-supportive policies may be seen as better companies from which 
to buy products or for whom to work, thereby increasing their customer base and pool of 
prospective employees. 
 
Most research in this area supports the contention that in the workplace context, feeling 
comfortable disclosing one’s sexual orientation or gender identity and being shielded from 
discrimination based on those characteristics are two mediating factors for the other relationships 
reported in the literature.  These may be important mechanisms to explain how LGBT-supportive 
policies result in better business outcomes.  Thus current research suggests that companies who 
wish to leverage their commitment to diversity to improve their bottom line ought to consider 
ways in which they can create and sustain LGBT-inclusive workplace climates and foster the 
safety and wellbeing of their LGBT employees.


 
 
27 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Ainsworth, T.A., & Spigel, J.H. (2010). Quality of life of individuals with and without facial 
feminization surgery or gender reassignment surgery. Quality of Life Research, 19, 1019-
1024 
 
Ash, M. A. & Badgett, M. V. L.  (2006). Separate and Unequal:  The Effect of Unequal Access 
to Employment-Based Health Insurance on Same-sex and Unmarried Different-Sex 
Couples. Contemporary Economic Policy, 24, 582-599.  
 
Badgett, M.V.L., & Gates, G.J. (2006). The effect of marriage equality and domestic partnership 
on business and the economy. Retrieved from The Williams Institute website: 
http://www.law.ucla.edu/williamsinstitute/publications/MarriageEqualityontheEconomy.
pdf 
 
Badgett, M. V. L. (2001). Money, myths, and change: The economic lives of lesbians and gay 
men. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
 
Boatwright, K.J., Gilbert, M.S., Forrest, L., & Ketzenberger, K. (1996). Impact of identity 
development upon career trajectory: Listening to the voices of lesbian women. Journal of 
Vocational Behavior, 48, 210-228. 
 
Bowling, N. A. (2007). Is the job satisfaction-job performance relationship spurious? A meta-
analytic examination. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 71, 167–185. 
 
Brenner, B.R., Lyons, H.Z., & Fassinger, R.E. (2010). Can heterosexism harm organizations? 
Predicting the perceived organizational citizenship behaviors of gay and lesbian 
employees. The Career Development Quarterly, 58, 321-335. 
 
Button, S.B. (2001). Organizational efforts to affirm sexual diversity: A cross-level examination. 
Journal of Applied Psychology, 86, 17-28.  
 
Cole, S. W., Kemeny, M. E., Taylor, S. E., & Visscher, B. R.  (1996). Elevated physical health 
risk among gay men who conceal their homosexual identity.  Health Psychology, 15, 
243-251. 
 
Cole, S. W., Kemeny, M. E., Taylor, S. E., Visscher, B. R., & Fahey, J. L.  (1996).  Accelerated 
course of human immunodeficiency virus infection in gay men who conceal their 
homosexual identity.  Psychosomatic Medicine, 58, 219-231. 
 
Coleman, E. Bockting, W., Botzer, M., Cohen-Kettenis, P., DeCuypere, G., Feldman, J., … 
Zucker, K  (2011). Standards of care for the health of transsexual, transgender, and 
gender-nonconforming people, version 7. International Journal of Transgenderism, 13, 
165–232. 
 
 


 
 
28 
 
 
Croteau, J.M. (1996). Research on the work experiences of lesbian, gay, and bisexual people: An 
integrative review of methodology and findings. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 48, 
195-209. 
 
Crow, S.M., Fok, L.Y., & Hartman, S.J. (1988). Who is at greatest risk of work-related 
discrimination—women, blacks, or homosexuals? Employee Responsibilities and Rights 
Journal, 11, 15-26.  
 
Currie, J., Madrian, B.C., (1999). Health, health insurance and the labor market. In: O. 
Ashenfelter, & D. Card (Eds.), Handbook of a Labor Economics, Vol. 3 (pp. 3309-3407). 
Amsterdam: Elsevier. 
 
Day, N.E. & Schoenrade, P. (2000). The relationship among reported disclosure of sexual 
orientation, anti-discrimination policies, top management support and work attitudes of 
gay and lesbian employees. Personnel Review, 29, 346-363. 
 
Dhejne, C., Lichtenstein, P., Boman, M., Johansson, A.L.V., Långström, N., et al., (2011). Long-
term follow-up of transsexual persons undergoing sex reassignment surgery: Cohort 
study in Sweden.  PLoS ONE, 6, e16885- e16885. 
 
Driscoll, J.M., Kelley, F.A., & Fassinger, R.E. (1996). Lesbian identity and disclosure in the 
workplace: Relation to occupational stress and satisfaction. Journal of Vocational 
Behavior, 48, 229-242. 
 
Friskopp, A., & Silverstein, S. (1996). Straight jobs, gay lives: Gay and lesbian professionals, 
the Harvard Business School, and the American workplace. New York: Touchstone. 
 
Gates, G. J. (2011). How many people are lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender? Retrieved 
from The Williams Institute website: http://williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/wp-
content/uploads/Gates-How-Many-People-LGBT-Apr-2011.pdf.  
 
Goldberg, Ramos, & Badgett, M.V.L. (2008). The fiscal impact of extending federal benefits to 
same-sex domestic partners. Retrieved from The Williams Institute website 
http://williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/wp-content/uploads/Badgett-Goldberg-Ramos-
S2521FiscalAnalysis-Sept-2008.pdf 
 
Griffith, K.H., & Hebl, M.R. (2002). The disclosure dilemma for gay men and lesbians: “Coming 
out” at work. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87, 1191-1199. 
 
Guasp, A., & Balfour, J. (2008). Peak performance: Gay people and productivity. Retrived from 
Stonewall website: http://www.stonewall.org.uk/documents/peak_performance.pdf. 
 
Harmon, V. (2006). San Francisco city and county transgender health benefits. San Francisco: 
Human Rights Commission. 
 


 
 
29 
 
Harter, J.K, Schmidt, F.L., Asplund, J.W., Killham, E.A., Agrawal, S. (2010). Causal impact of 
employee work perceptions on the bottom line of organizations. Perspectives on 
Psychological Science, 5, 378-389. 
 
Harter, J.K., Schmidt, F.L., Killham, E.A., & Agrawal, S. (2009). Q12 meta-analysis: The 
relationship between engagement at work and organizational outcomes (Technical paper). 
Omaha, NE: Gallup. 
 
Hebl, M.R., Foster, J.B., Mannix, L.M., & Dovidio, J.F. (2002). Formal and interpersonal 
discrimination: A field study of bias toward homosexual applicants. Personality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 815-825. 
 
Hewlett, S.A., & Sumberg, K. (2011, June). The power of out. Center for Work-Life Policy. 
 
Huebner, D.M., & Davis, M.C. (2007). Perceived antigay discrimination and physical health 
outcomes. Health Psychology, 26, 627-634. 
 
Hook, M.K., & Bowman, S. (2008). Working for a living: The vocational decision making of 
lesbians. Journal of Lesbian Studies, 12, 85-95. 
 
Horvath, M., & Ryan, A.M. (2003). Antecedents and potential moderators of the relationship 
between attitudes and hiring discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. Sex Roles, 
48, 115-130. 
 
Huffman, A. H., Watrous-Rodriguez, K. M., & King, E. B. (2008). Supporting a diverse 
workforce: What type of support is most meaningful for lesbian and gay employees? 
Human Resource Management, 47, 237-253. 
 
Human Rights Campaign (2009). Degrees of equality: A national study examining workplace 
climate for LGBT employees. Retrieved from Human Rights Campaign Web site: 
http://www.hrc.org/files/assets/resources/DegreesOfEquality_2009.pdf. 
 
Human Rights Campaign (1999). State of the Workplace for Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and 
Transgendered Americans.  Retrieved from http://www.hrc.org/documents/sotw1999.pdf. 
 
Iaffaldano, M.T., & Muchinsky, P.M. (1985). Job satisfaction and job performance: A meta-
analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 97, 251-273. 
 
IOM (Institute of Medicine). (2009). America’s Uninsured Crisis: Consequences for Health and 
Health Care. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. 
 
Jackson, S.E., Joshi, A., & Erhardt, N.L. (2003). Recent research on team and organizational 
diversity: SWOT analysis and implications. Journal of Management, 29, 801-830. 
 
Johnston, D., & Malina, M.A. (2008). Managing sexual orientation diversity: The impact on firm 
value. Group and Organization Management, 33, 602-625. 


 
 
30 
 
 
Jordan, K.M., & Deluty, R.H. (2008). Coming out for lesbian women. Journal of Homosexuality, 
35, 41-63. 
 
Kelly, E., & Dobbin, F. (1998). How affirmative action became diversity management: 
Employer response to antidiscrimination law, 1961 to 1996. American Behavioral 
Scientist, 41, 960-984. 
 
Kochan, T., Bezrukova, K., Ely, R., Jackson, S., Joshi, A., Jehn, K., Leonard, J., Levine, D., & 
Thomas, D. (2003). The effects of diversity on business performance: Report of the 
Diversity Research Network. Human Resource Management, 42, 3-21. 
 
Law, C.L., Martinez, L.R., Ruggs, E.N., Hebl, M.R., Akers, E. (2011). Trans-parency in the 
workplace: How the experiences of transsexual employees can be improved. Journal of 
Vocational Behavior, 79, 710-723. 
 
Level Playing Field Institute (2007). The cost of employee turnover due solely to unfairness in 
the workplace. Retrieved from Level Playing Field Institute website: 
http://www.lpfi.org/sites/default/files/corporate-leavers-survey.pdf. 
 
Liddle, B.J., Luzzo, D.A., Hauenstein, A.L., & Schuck, K. (2004). Construction and validation of 
the lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgendered climate inventory. Journal of Career 
Assessment, 12, 33-50. 
 
Mallory, C., & Sears, B. (2011). An evaluation of local laws requiring government contractors to 
adopt LGBT-related workplace policies. Albany Government Law Review, 5, 478-551. 
 
Monstrey, S., De Cuypere, G., & Ettner, R. (2004). Surgery: General principles. Principles of 
Transgender Medicine and Surgery (pp. 89–104). The Haworth Press. 
 
Munoz, C.S. (2005). A multi-level examination of career barriers for sexual minority employees. 
Unpublished doctoral dissertation. 
 
Murad, M. H., Elamin, M. B., Garcia, M. Z., Mullan, R. J., Murad, A., Erwin, P. J. and Montori, 
V. M. (2010). Hormonal therapy and sex reassignment: a systematic review and meta-
analysis of quality of life and psychosocial outcomes. Clinical Endocrinology, 72, 214–
231. 
 
National Gay and Lesbian Task Force (2012, January). Nondiscrimination laws map. Retrieved 
from The National Gay and Lesbian Task Force website: 
http://www.thetaskforce.org/downloads/reports/issue_maps/non_discrimination_1_12_co
lor.pdf. 
 
Organ, D.W., Podsakoff, P.M., & MacKenzie, S.B. (2006). Organizational citizenship behavior: 
Its nature, antecedents, and consequences. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
 


 
 
31 
 
Out & Equal, Harris Interactive, & Witeck Combs Communications (2006). Majority of 
Americans: Companies not government should decide benefits offered to same-sex 
employees (Press release). Retrieved from Out & Equal website: 
http://outandequal.org/documents/2006_Workplace_Survey052306.pdf 
 
Pachankis, J. E.  (2007).  The psychological implications of concealing a stigma: A cognitive-
affective-behavioral model.  Psychological Bulletin, 133, 328-345. 
 
Podsakoff, N.P., Whiting, S.W., Podsakoff, P.M., & Blume, B.D. Individual- and organizational-
level consequences of organizational citizenship behaviors: A meta-analysis. Journal of 
Applied Psychology, 94, 122-141. 
 
Raeburn, N.C. (2004). Changing corporate America from inside out: Lesbian and gay workplace 
rights. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
 
Ragins, B.R., & Cornwell, J.M. (2001). Pink triangles: Antecedents and consequences of 
perceived workplace discrimination against gay and lesbian employees. Journal of 
Applied Psychology, 86, 1244-1261. 
 
Ragins, B.R., & Cornwell, J.M. (2007). We are family: The influence of gay family-friendly 
policies on gay, lesbian, and bisexual employees. In M.V.L. Badgett & J. Frank (Eds.) 
Sexual Orientation Discrimination: An International Perspective (pp. 105-117). New 
York: Routledge. 
 
Ragins, B.R, Singh, R., & Cornwell, J.M. (2007). Making the invisible visible: Fear and 
disclosure of sexual orientation at work. Journal of Applied Psychology, 92, 1103-1118. 
 
Rostosky, S.S., & Riggle, E.D.B. (2002). out at work: The relations of actor and partner 
workplace policy and internalized homophobia to disclosure status. Journal of 
Counseling Psychology, 49, 411-419. 
 
Samir Luther. (Sept. 21, 2009). How Fortune-ranked companies stack up on LGBT workplace 
policies [Web log post].  Retrieved from http://www.hrcbackstory.org/2009/09/how-
fortune-ranked-companies-stack-up-on-lgbt-workplace-policies/ 
 
Sandfort, T.G.M., Bos, H., & Vet, R. (2006). Lesbians and gay men at work: Consequences of 
being out. In A.M. Omoto & H.S. Kurtzman (Eds.) Sexual Orientation and Mental 
Health: Examining Identity and Development in Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual People (pp. 
225-244).  Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association.  
 
Sears, B., & Mallory, C. (2011). Economic motives for adopting LGBT-related workplace 
policies. Retrived from The Williams Institute website: 
http://williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/wp-content/uploads/Mallory-Sears-Corp-Statements-
Oct2011.pdf. 
 


 
 
32 
 
Smith, N.G., & Ingram, K.M. (2004). Workplace heterosexism and adjustment among lesbian, 
gay, and bisexual individuals: The role of unsupportive social interactions. Journal of 
Counseling Psychology, 51, 57-67. 
 
Tejeda, M.J. (2006). Nondiscrimination policies and sexual identity disclosure: Do they make a 
difference in employee outcomes? Employee Responsibilities and Rights Journal, 18, 45-
59. 
 
Tilscik, A. (2011). Pride and prejudice: Employment discrimination against openly gay men in 
the United States. Journal of Sociology, 117, 586-626. 
 
Trau, R.N.C., & Härtel, C.E.J. (2007). Contextual factors affecting quality of work life and 
career attitudes of gay men.  Employee Responsibilities and Rights Journal, 19, 207-219. 
 
Tuten, T.L. (2005). The effect of gay-friendly and non-gay-friendly cues on brand attitudes: A 
comparison of heterosexual and gay/lesbian reactions. Journal of Marketing 
Management, 21, 441-461. 
 
Walz, S.M., & Niehoff, B.P. (2000). Organizational citizenship behaviors: Their relationship to 
organizational effectiveness. Journal of Hospitality and Tourism Research, 24, 301-319. 
 
Waldo, C.R. (1999). Working in a majority context: A structural model of heterosexism as 
minority stress in the workplace. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 46, 218-232. 
 
Wang, P., & Schwarz, J.L. (2010). Stock price reactions to GLBT nondiscrimination policies. 
Human Resource Management, 49, 195– 216. 
 
Williams, D.R., Neighbors, H.W., & Jackson, J.S. (2003). Racial/ethnic discrimination and 
health: Findings from community studies. American Journal of Public Health, 93, 200-
2008. 
 
 


 
 
33 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
 
M.V. Lee Badgett is the Research Director at the Williams Institute, UCLA School of Law, and 
Director of the Center for Public Policy and Administration & Professor of Economics at the 
University of Massachusetts Amherst. 
 
Laura E. Durso is a Public Policy Fellow at the Williams Institute, UCLA School of Law. 
 
Angeliki Kastanis is a Public Policy Fellow at the Williams Institute, UCLA School of Law. 
 
Christy Mallory is the Reid Rasmussen Fellow of Law & Policy at the Williams Institute, 
UCLA School of Law. 
 
 
ABOUT THE WILLIAMS INSTITUTE 
 
The Williams Institute on Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Law and Public Policy at 
UCLA School of Law advances law and public policy through rigorous, independent research 
and scholarship, and disseminates its work through a variety of education programs and media to 
judges, legislators, lawyers, other policymakers and the public. These studies can be accessed at 
the Williams Institute website. 
 
 
 
FOR MORE INFORMATION 
 
The Williams Institute, UCLA School of Law 
Box 951476 
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1476 
(310)267-4382 
williamsinstitute@law.ucla.edu 
www.law.ucla.edu/williamsinstitute 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
34 
 
APPENDIX A 
 
Methodology 
 
Studies included in our analysis were identified using several methods.  First, we collected 
relevant materials that were cited in previous Williams Institute reports on this topic, including 
Documented Evidence of Employment Discrimination & Its Effects on LGBT People (Sears & 
Mallory, 2011) and internal memos (on file with the author).  Second, we gathered all of the 
scholarship cited in those materials.  Third, we conducted computerized searches between 
January 16, 2012 and April l, 2013 using Google Scholar and the UCLA Library article search 
function which gathers relevant scholarship from several databases including EBSCOhost, 
JSTOR, and LexisNexis, among others.  We searched these sources using systematic 
combinations of the following words:  
 
Sexual orientation, gender identity, LGBT, LGB, gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgender, 
transsexual, homosexual, domestic partner, same-sex partner, benefits, discrimination, 
discriminate, discriminated, employ, employee, employer, employed, employment, work, works, 
worked, 
workplace, 
worker, 
company, 
corporate, 
business, 
anti-discrimination, 
nondiscrimination, discrimination, policy, policies, environment, climate, out, outness, disclose, 
disclosure, OCBs, organizational citizenship behaviors, health, well-being, stress, meta-analysis, 
recruit, recruitment, retain, retains, retained, retention, quit, quitting, satisfied, satisfaction, 
creative, creativity, innovate, innovation, innovations, idea, ideas, customer, customers, 
customer service, customer satisfaction, productive, productivity, better, performance, contract, 
contractor, ordinance, morale, profit, profitability, bottom line, benefit, economic. 
 
Fourth, we gathered relevant scholarship cited in the materials identified in the database search.  
Finally, we used systematic combinations of the terms above to search the Internet (using the 
Google search engine) for relevant materials produced by research organizations and non-profits 
focused on LGBT issues or workplace issues.  Our research method yielded 33 relevant 
published articles, books, book chapters, and other written materials produced by research and 
non-profit organizations that are included in this report. 
 
In addition to compiling relevant written materials, we singled out a set of study characteristics 
that helped us determine the overall methodological strength of each paper included in this 
report. Although we did not use a formal rating system, the findings reported in this document 
were done so in a manner that considered overall study strength. The set of study characteristics 
included in our detailed review (Table 1) are as follows: 1) sample size 2) LGBT populations 
included 3) gender 4) race/ethnicity of participants 5) education level of participants 6) response 
rate 7) recruitment strategy 8) use of validated measures.  
 
 


 
 
35 
 
Table 1.        Study Characteristics for LGBT Employee Outcomes 
Author (Year) 
Sample 
Size 
LGBT  
% 
Female 
%  
White 
% 
College 
Degree 
Response 
Rate 
Recruitment 
Strategy 
Qualitative 
or 
Quantitative 
Validated 
Outcome 
Measures 
Sample 
Reliability 
Coefficients  
Validated 
Disclosure 
Measure  
Boatwright et al. 
(1996) 
10 
L 
100% 
90% 
70% 
 
100% 
Convenience 
Sample 
Qualitative 
+ 
+ 
+ 
Brenner, Lyons & 
Fassinger 
(2010) 
606 
L,G 
55% 
 89% 
   75% 
- 
Convenience 
Sample 
Quantitative 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Button 
(2001) 
537 
L,G 
34% 
 90% 
   - 
    42% 
Convenience 
Sample, 
Snowball 
Sampling 
Quantitative 
Yes 
Yes 
+ 
Day & Schoenrade 
(2000) 
744 
L,G 
35% 
- 
- 
   29% 
Convenience 
Sample 
Quantitative 
Yes 
No 
No 
Driscoll, Kelley & 
Fassinger 
(1996) 
123 
L 
100% 
85% 
- 
 69% 
Convenience 
Sample, 
Snowball 
Sampling 
Quantitative 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Griffith & Hebl 
(2002) 
379 
L,G 
  42% 
   82% 
    69% 
- 
Convenience 
Sample 
Quantitative 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Guasp & Balfour 
(2008) 
107 
L,G,B 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Qualitative 
+ 
+ 
+ 
Hewlett & Sumberg 
(2011) 
2,593 
L,G,B,
T,H* 
- 
- 
100% 
- 
Random 
Sample 
Quantitative, 
Qualitative 
No 
No 
No 
Horvath & Ryan 
(2003) 
236 
- 
77% 
85% 
- 
- 
Convenience 
Sample 
Quantitative 
Yes 
Yes 
+ 
Huffman, Watrous-
Rodriguez & King 
(2008) 
99 
L,G,B 
38% 
84% 
79% 
90% 
Convenience 
Sample 
Quantitative 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Human Rights 
Campaign 
(2009) 
831 
LGBT 
46% 
63% 
37% 
- 
Random 
Sample from 
Panel, 
Outreach  
Qualitative, 
Quantitative 
No 
No 
No 
Jordan & Deluty 
(1998) 
499 
L 
100% 
83% 
95% 
33% 
Convenience 
Sample, 
Snowball 
Sampling 
Quantitative 
Yes 
No 
Yes 


 
 
36 
 
Author (Year) 
Sample 
Size 
LGBT  
% 
Female 
%  
White 
% 
College 
Degree 
Response 
Rate 
Recruitment 
Strategy 
Qualitative 
or 
Quantitative 
Validated 
Outcome 
Measures 
Sample 
Reliability 
Coefficients  
Validated 
Disclosure 
Measure  
Law, et. al. 
(2011) 
114 
T 
54%++ 
81% 
- 
- 
Convenience 
Sample, 
Snowball 
Sampling 
Quantitative 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Level Playing Field 
Institute 
(2007) 
1780 
(100  
L,G) 
L,G 
- 
- 
- 
88% 
Random Digit 
Dialing  
Quantitative 
No 
No 
No 
Munoz 
(2005) 
346 
L,G,H 
34% 
89% 
90% 
- 
Convenience 
Sample, 
Snowball 
Sampling 
Quantitative 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Out & Equal 
(2006) 
2,501 
(270 
LGBT) 
L,G,B,
T, H 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Convenience 
Sample 
Quantitative 
- 
- 
- 
Ragins & Cornwell 
(2001) 
534 
L,G,B 
32% 
68% 
85% 
30% 
Convenience 
Sample 
Quantitative 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Ragins & Cornwell 
(2007) 
* 
* 
* 
* 
same 
as 
above 
* 
* 
* 
* 
Ragins, Singh & 
Cornwell (2007) 
* 
* 
* 
* 
same 
as 
above 
* 
* 
* 
* 
Rostosky & Riggle 
(2002) 
261 
- 
54% 
86% 
60% 
68% 
Convenience 
Sample 
Quantitative 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Sandfort, Bos & Vet 
(2006) 
320 
L,G,B 
52% 
- 
60% 
24% 
Network, 
Random 
Sample from 
Panel 
Quantitative 
Yes 
No 
No 
Smith & Ingram 
(2004) 
97 
L,G,B 
41% 
82% 
66% 
- 
Convenience 
Sample, 
Snowball 
Sampling 
Quantitative 
Yes 
No 
 
No 
 
Tejeda 
(2006) 
65 
G 
0% 
100% 
81% 
36% 
Convenience 
Sample 
Quantitative 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Trau & Härtel 
(2007) 
581 
G 
0% 
- 
55% 
- 
Convenience 
Sample 
Quantitative 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Waldo 
(1999) 
287 
L,G,B 
41% 
91% 
More 
than half 
55% 
Convenience 
Sample 
Quantitative 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
*  H: Heterosexual                               +  Not Applicable 
-  Information not provided                   ++ 54% transwomen, 24% transmen, 22% did not identify a gender identity