@lynch5_ / Instagram
What You Need to Know About LGBTQ+ Workplace Harassment — And How to Fight It
 
"Can we, as queer people, use Title VII to fight queer discrimination and harassment in the workplace? As of today, some of us can."
The workplace can be unsafe for queer people. According to the 2008 General Social Survey and the Williams Institute at UCLA School of Law, 27% of lesbian, gay, and bisexual persons have experienced some form of harassment or discrimination at the office. For transgender workers, the number is 78%. Between 11% and 28% of LGB workers report losing a promotion because of their sexual orientation. Between 8% and 17% report being fired because of it. Again, transgender workers face higher rates of discrimination based on their gender expression.
Queer harassment and discrimination, then, is a persistent feature of the workplace. After all, in many states, anti-gay harassment is perfectly legal. Only 20 states prohibit employers from creating a hostile environment for queer employees or discriminating on the bases sexual orientation and gender identity. Two more states prohibit sexual orientation discrimination only. And traditionally, the federal law on this issue, commonly known as Title VII, was read to permit anti-queer discrimination. That, however, is starting to change.
At a moment when women are, finally, stepping forward to document and resist the culture of sexual harassment they have faced since entering the workforce, queer survivors of sexual harassment and discrimination must step forward, too. In order to do so, we must educate ourselves on the types of discrimination and harassment that exist in the workplace, as well as what can we do about them.
Queer sexual harassment can take many forms, but it usually falls into one of four categories. The first is when queer people work in environments where others use derogatory, threatening, or taunting language in general conversation. We’ve all heard “that’s so gay” or “what a faggot” used in common conversation. It may not have even been directed at us, but even still, it makes the environment hostile.
A second type of queer harassment involves targeted slurs or comments, usually about a gay person’s sexual orientation or any queer person’s gender expression. This can range from calling someone “flamboyant” or a “dyke” to far worse words and phrases. Directed slurs are rarer, but nonetheless prevalent in all types of workplaces.
Sexual harassment can also involve unwanted, inappropriate touching. This behavior often gets dismissed as “oh, that’s just him. He’s like that with everyone.” Or people ignore it because “boys will be boys.” Senior managers may also use inappropriate sexual contact to assert dominance and display power as often, if not more so, than to exercise actual sexual interest.
And some survivors face what lawyers call quid pro quo harassment, or when an employer demands sexual favors in exchange for getting hired, promoted, or not getting fired.
Women face all of these types of harassment, too. That’s why Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibits discrimination, including hostile environment and quid pro quo harassment, “because of sex.” At its core, this means that employers cannot treat women any differently than they treat men. They can’t promote men based on merit but only promote women if they have sex with the boss or dress or behave a certain way. They can’t allow men to talk about treating women as sex objects, or allow men to post pictures of pornography that make women uncomfortable. The list goes on.
Can we, as queer people, use Title VII to fight queer discrimination and harassment in the workplace? As of today, some of us can.
Title VII started coming around to protect queer employees in 1989, when the Supreme Court decided, in Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins, that employers could not evaluate female employees for promotion based on how well they fit into some preconceived notion of the proper behavior of women. Ann Hopkins had effectively been denied promotion to partner even though she was a productive and successful employee, facts that were reflected in her evaluations. But some of her co-workers reacted negatively to her personality because she wasn’t sufficiently feminine. She was called “macho” and was advised to take “a course in charm school.” One partner said she is “a lady using foul language.” Another said she was a “tough-talking masculine hard-nosed” manager, rather than an appealing candidate with ladylike manners. Hopkins was, therefore, a victim of sex stereotyping; she was denied a partnership because her behavior didn’t conform to how the partners felt women should behave. Had she been a man, this type of “macho” or “hard-nosed” behavior would have been seen as an asset. Because she was a woman, those attributes were held against her. That’s discrimination “because of sex”: treating men different from women.
Price Waterhouse was a watershed moment for transgender workers. The case dealt with gender stereotyping, which is a particularly common form of workplace harassment and discrimination faced by workers whose gender expression is different from traditional perceptions related to their biological sex.
Nine years later, Title VII took another big step toward protecting queer workers in a decision written by the notoriously anti-queer Antonin Scalia. Oncale v. Sundowner involved an oil rig worker who had been physically and verbally sexually harassed by his other male co-workers. The victim sued under Title VII, arguing that he had faced discrimination because of his sex; his attackers’ jokes, threats, and forcible assault were sexual in nature. The judge ruled against him because up until that date, everyone assumed that Title VII only covered opposite-sex harassment. The Supreme Court sided with Oncale: sex-based discrimination was actionable as long as it placed its victim in a hostile working environment regardless of the victim’s sex or gender.
The connection between sexual orientation, gender identity, and sex or gender came up again in the marriage equality movement. Some scholars and advocates argued that laws prohibiting same-sex couples from marrying were examples of sex- or gender-based discrimination. Winning that argument made sense for same-sex marriage advocates: gender discrimination gets what constitutional lawyers call “heightened scrutiny” at the courts, making it harder for a law to pass constitutional muster.
The argument was simple. Say, for example, that Josephine and Rebecca, two women, want to marry. Before marriage equality, they couldn’t. But if Josephine were a man, she could have married Rebecca. Since she was a woman, she couldn’t. That treats men and women differently and is, therefore, sex discrimination.
The related Title VII argument started gaining more steam. In a 2012 decision holding that Title VII bars discrimination based on gender identity and transgender status, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), the federal administrative body that hears and investigates workplace civil rights claims, cited Scalia’s opinion in Oncale. So, too, did the landmark decision in the Chicago-based Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals, Hively v. Ivy Tech Community College. Kim Hively, a lesbian, was denied full time employment at the college because of her sexual orientation. Based on Price Waterhouse, Oncale, the EEOC’s 2012 order, and the sex discrimination arguments from the marriage equality fight, Hively sued, arguing that Title VII’s ban on sex discrimination necessarily included sexual orientation discrimination. In an 8-3 decision, the Seventh Circuit agreed. Had Hively been a man married to a woman, she would not have been fired; that she was fired for being a woman married to a woman is treating men different from women. That, again, is sex discrimination.
The Seventh Circuit added a further point. Price Waterhouse held that Title VII prohibits employers from discriminating against someone for failing to conform to gender norms. As a lesbian, the court noted, “Hively represents the ultimate case of failure to conform to the female stereotype (at least as understood in a place such as modern America, which views heterosexuality as the norm and other forms of sexuality as exceptional): she is not a heterosexual.” More recently, on February 26, the New York-based Second Circuit Court of Appeals came to a similar conclusion on similar reasoning in Zarda v. Altitude Express.
There are several notable implications of these rulings.
First, for those of us that live in states covered by the Second and Seventh Circuits (New York, Connecticut, Vermont, Indiana, Illinois, and Wisconsin), federal law prohibits our employers from firing us just because of our sexual orientation. Plus, since the EEOC’s jurisdiction is nationwide, one could argue that this protection extends to workers in all other states, as well.
Second, elections matter. During the Zarda case, which spanned the transition from the pro-equality Obama Administration to the more hostile current administration, the Trump Justice Department filed a stereotype-laden brief that argued that employers should be allowed to fire gay people. Plus, the Eleventh Circuit, which covers Florida, Alabama, and Georgia, and is dominated by Republican-appointees, has held that Title VII does not protect queer workers. If we want to add to the list of pro-equality jurisdictions, we need to vote for pro-equality candidates at the state and federal levels, and we need to get our allies engaged in the politics of judicial appointments. Conservatives have been doing this aggressively for years, tilting the federal bench to the right. We cannot sit this one out.
Third, the law is changing, but change in the law is slow. Even though marriage equality seemed like it arrived in an instant, the law normally takes its time. Cases move slowly through the federal court system, briefings and hearings can take years, decisions can take months. But the change is unmistakable. Today, queer workers are winning many Title VII cases. And although the Supreme Court has yet to say explicitly that Title VII prohibits sexual orientation discrimination, the momentum of history, law, and logic are on our side.
This makes today the perfect time to start telling our stories of queer workplace harassment. #MeToo’s power rests in its pervasive narrative: most women have at least one story of workplace harassment. Such stories are no less common, no less powerful, and no less oppressive in queer populations. The law is finally behind us. This fight is long overdue.
Ari Ezra Waldman is an Associate Professor of Law and Director of the Innovation Center for Law and Technology at New York Law School. Waldman is also an affiliate scholar at Princeton University’s Center for Information Technology Policy.