MESSAGE FROM THE DIRECTOR
The overrepresentation of women 
with mental illness in jails has 
tragic consequences for children 
and families. It is important that the 
criminal justice field understands 
how mental illness, trauma, and 
other disorders are related to women 
becoming involved in the criminal 
justice system. The information from 
the Women’s Pathways to Jail study 
can help to develop strategies that 
address and respond to these issues. 
This information can also help to 
determine how these issues are related 
to jail overcrowding, increased 
pharmacological costs, and increased 
stress for correctional personnel who 
Women’s Pathways to Jail: 
Examining Mental Health, Trauma, 
and Substance Use 
By Shannon M. Lynch, Ph.D., Idaho State University; Dana D. DeHart, Ph.D., 
University of South Carolina; Joanne Belknap, Ph.D., University of Colorado; Bonnie 
L. Green, Ph.D., Georgetown University
Study Introduction
The rate of incarceration of women has increased substantially in recent decades, with 
a 31 percent increase between 2000 and 2011 (Minton, 2012). Female offenders 
appear to have different risk factors for offending than do male offenders. In particular, 
female offenders report greater incidence of mental health problems and serious 
mental illness (SMI) than do male offenders (James and Glaze, 2006; Steadman et al., 
2009). Female offenders also report higher rates of substance dependence as well as 
greater incidence of past physical and sexual abuse (James and Glaze, 2006). Other 
researchers also have noted elevated rates of experiences of interpersonal trauma, 
substance dependence, and associated symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder 
(PTSD) in female offenders (Green et al., 2005; Lynch et al., 2012). 
This multisite study addresses critical gaps in the literature by assessing the 
prevalence of SMI, PTSD, and substance use disorders (SUD) in women in jail, and 
the pathways to jail for women with and without SMI.
Methods
Using a randomly selected sample (N = 491) from rural and urban jails, this 
study employed the Composite International Diagnostic Interview (World Health 
Organization, 1990)—a structured diagnostic interview—to assess current and 
lifetime prevalence of SMI (including major depression and bipolar and psychotic 
spectrum disorders), PTSD, and SUD of women in jail. Women’s prior access to 
treatment and their level of functional impairment in the past 12 months were also 
assessed to better inform the understanding of their current treatment needs.
Next, qualitative Life History Calendar interviews were conducted with a subset of 
the sample (N = 115) to explore women’s pathways to jail to examine how onset 
of different types of criminal activity and delinquency vary as a function of mental 
health status and trauma exposure. 
Finally, project investigators interviewed corrections staff members at participating 
jail sites to better assess the staff members’ beliefs about the prevalence of mental 
health difficulties in women in jail as well as their perceptions about women’s 
pathways to jail.
KEY POINTS
• Trauma and mental health issues 
were associated with the onset of 
crime.
• A majority of women in jail had at 
least one of the assessed mental 
health disorders in their lifetime. 
One in four women met criteria for 
lifetime serious mental illness (SMI), 
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), 
and substance use disorders (SUD).
U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Assistance
NCJ 241045 • MARCH 2013
continued on p. 2
continued on p. 2


2 • Policy Brief
Results
Part I: The Structured Diagnostic Interviews (N = 491)
Notably, 43 percent of participants met criteria for lifetime SMI, and 32 percent 
met criteria for SMI in the past 12 months. SUDs were the most commonly occurring 
disorders; 82 percent of the sample met lifetime criteria for drug or alcohol abuse or 
dependence. Similarly, PTSD rates were high; just over half of the sample (53 percent) 
met criteria for lifetime PTSD. Women also met criteria for multiple lifetime disorders at 
high rates (see figure). 
Finally, 30–45 percent of individuals who met criteria for a current disorder reported 
severely impaired functioning associated with SMI, PTSD, or SUD in the past year. 
The majority (78–84 percent) of the participants who met criteria for an SMI such as 
major depressive or bipolar disorders had talked with a mental health professional, 
and most indicated it was effective. In contrast, closer to half of the individuals with 
PTSD or substance-related problems indicated that they had talked with mental health 
professionals about these difficulties.
Women with SMI reported significantly more victimization and more extensive offending 
histories than women who did not meet criteria for lifetime SMI. For example, more 
women with SMI reported childhood physical abuse (53 percent vs. 32 percent), 
childhood sexual abuse (60 percent vs. 37 percent), witnessing violence as children (77 
percent vs. 60 percent), adult partner violence (75 percent vs. 60 percent), and adult 
sexual assaults (56 percent vs. 37 percent) than women who did not meet criteria for 
SMI. In addition, women with SMI reported an average of five prior convictions and 50 
percent had committed three or more crimes, whereas women without SMI reported an 
average of three prior convictions and 50 percent had committed two or more crimes. In 
addition, individuals with SMI were more likely to be charged with or have committed a 
violent crime than women without SMI. 
Utilizing structural equation modeling (SEM), the study found that childhood trauma and 
adversity significantly predicted both adult victimization experiences and mental health 
issues. However, neither childhood nor adult victimization were directly associated with 
offending. Instead, both forms of victimization significantly predicted mental health, 
which in turn was the only significant predictor of offending. Mental health was also the 
only significant predictor of treatment; women who reported poor mental health were 75 
percent more likely to report using treatment services. 
In sum, although childhood victimization, adult trauma, and service utilization were 
each correlated with offending, they were not significant predictors when mental health 
was in the model. Instead, childhood victimization and adult trauma increased the risk 
of poor mental health, and poor mental health predicted a greater offending history.
Part II: Life History Calendar Interviews (N = 115)
SMI demonstrated significant effects or trends in risk for onset of substance use, drug 
dealing/charges, property crime, fighting/assault, and running away. In addition, 
experiences of victimization predicted risk of offending. Specifically, intimate partner 
violence contributed to risk for commercial sex work/trading sex and drug dealing/
charges. Witnessing violence contributed to risk for property offenses, fighting/assault, 
and using weapons. Finally, caregiver violence contributed to risk for running away.
Part III: Staff Interviews (N = 37)
Corrections staff (including supervisors, health practitioners, and corrections officers/
deputies) indicated a general recognition that women’s experiences of victimization 
were linked with their entry into the criminal justice system. Furthermore, many staff 
were aware of women’s mental health difficulties. In particular, they expressed concern 
that there were limited resources in jail for women with mental illness, and that women 
were then released from jail with little to no assistance (e.g., housing or programs) to 
support their attempts to change behavior and lifestyle.
MESSAGE (cont.)
may not be trained to address mental 
illness. Furthermore, the findings from 
this study can help to enhance mental 
health screening at jails as well as 
gender-responsive programming for 
primary prevention, rehabilitation, and 
reentry into the community.
KEY POINTS (cont.)
• Many women met criteria for SMI, 
PTSD, and/or SUD in the past 
12 months, and 25 percent reported 
severe functional impairment in the
past year.
• Half of the women received treatment 
for substance use or mental health 
issues prior to incarceration.
• Most of the women in jail experienced 
multiple types of adversity and 
interpersonal violence in their lives.
• Women with SMI were more likely to 
have experienced trauma, to be repeat 
offenders, and to have earlier onset of 
substance use and running away.


 Policy Brief • 3
Discussion
This national sample of women in jails demonstrated high rates of mental health 
problems, with a majority of the participants meeting diagnostic criteria for lifetime SMI, 
PTSD, and/or SUD.
Similar to Steadman and colleagues’ (2009) finding that 31 percent of female offenders 
residing in northeastern jails met criteria for a current SMI, this multisite study found 
that 32 percent of participants met criteria for an SMI in the past year. Furthermore, 
the number of women meeting criteria for multiple lifetime and current disorders was 
high. The prevalence of SMI, PTSD, and SUD—as well as high rates for co-occurring 
disorders—suggests that female offenders enter (or reenter) jail with substantial and 
often multiple mental health concerns and subsequently have complex treatment needs.
Although more than half of the participants indicated prior access to treatment, a 
significant portion of female offenders did not appear to have accessed treatment that 
addressed their problems or helped them to improve their basic level of functioning. The 
levels of reported impairment—combined with the frequency of SMI, PTSD, and SUD 
rates—suggest the critical need for additional resources for mental health assessment 
and treatment of this population.
The women with SMI reported significantly greater frequency of all forms of victimization 
and more extensive criminal histories. As was demonstrated in the SEM analyses, 
women’s experiences of child and adult trauma were significant predictors of their 
overall mental health. Results of the SEM analyses also suggest that whereas child 
and adult victimization related directly to women’s mental health, victimization did 
not directly predict offending history—only mental health was directly associated with 
women’s offending histories.
In addition to identifying this clear link between mental illness and offending history, the 
data provided via the indepth Life History Calendar interviews demonstrate how SMI 
is associated with increased risk of the onset of a number of offending behaviors and 
how this is exacerbated by experiences of victimization and drug use. Women with SMI 
were at higher risk for numerous forms of offending, including running away, substance 
use, and drug dealing/charges. In addition to the increased risk associated with SMI, 
various forms of traumatic victimization predicted the onset of offending.
Understanding female offenders’ pathways to offending, including both risk for onset 
and risk for continued offending, helps elucidate the complexity of this population’s 
experiences and identify key factors and intervening variables that may ameliorate or 
exacerbate risk. Research in this area is critical to the development of gender-responsive 
programming (Hills et al., 2004), alternatives to incarceration, and problem-solving 
court initiatives.
Lifetime Prevalence of Serious Mental Illness, Post-traumatic Stress Disorder, and Substance Use Disorder, by States 


4 • Policy Brief
References
Green, B.L., Miranda, J., Daroowalla, A., and Siddique, J. (2005). Trauma exposure, 
mental health functioning and program needs of women in jail. Crime and Delinquency, 
51, 133–151.
Hills, H., Siegfried, C., and Ickowitz, A. (2004). Effective Prison Mental Health Services: 
Guidelines To Expand and Improve Treatment. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of 
Justice, National Institute of Corrections.
James, D., and Glaze, L. (2006). Mental Health Problems of Prison and Jail Inmates. 
Special Report. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics.
Lynch, S., Fritch, A., and Heath, N. (2012). Looking beneath the surface: The nature 
of incarcerated women’s experiences of interpersonal violence, treatment needs, and 
mental health. Feminist Criminology, 7, 381–400.
Minton, T.D. (2012). Jail Inmates at Midyear 2011—Statistical tables. Washington, DC: 
U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics.
Steadman, H.J., Osher, F.C., Robbins, P.C., Case, B., and Samuels, S. (2009). 
Prevalence of serious mental illness among jail inmates. Psychiatric Services, 60 (6), 
761–765.
World Health Organization. (1990). Composite International Diagnostic Interview. 
Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization.
CONTACT US
Bureau of Justice Assistance
Office of Justice Programs
810 Seventh Street NW.
Fourth Floor
Washington, DC 20531
202–616–6500
E-mail: www.bja.gov/contactus.aspx
Web site: www.bja.gov
Childhood and adult 
victimization appears 
to increase the risk of 
experiencing mental health 
problems, which in turn is 
related to increased likelihood 
of criminal offending.
About the Authors
Shannon M. Lynch, Ph.D., is Professor of Psychology at Idaho State University. 
Her research interests include consequences of exposure to interpersonal violence 
and survivors’ use of resources to cope with and recover from traumatic events. For 
the past several years, her research team has conducted a series of quantitative 
and qualitative projects examining incarcerated women’s trauma exposure, mental 
health, and treatment needs.
Dana D. DeHart, Ph.D., is on the research faculty of the University of South 
Carolina’s College of Social Work. She has been Principal Investigator on 
grants and contracts addressing victimization and survivor services, the impacts 
of incarceration, the gendered pathways to adult and juvenile offending, and 
predatory sexual behavior. Dr. DeHart has expertise in a range of qualitative and 
quantitative methods. 
Joanne Belknap, Ph.D., is Professor of Sociology at the University of Colorado–
Boulder. She is the author of numerous articles and the book, The Invisible Woman: 
Gender, Crime, and Justice, now in its third edition. Dr. Belknap is the 2014 
President-Elect of the American Society of Criminology.
Bonnie L. Green, Ph.D., is Professor and Vice Chair for Research in the Department 
of Psychiatry and Associate Dean for Faculty Development at Georgetown 
University Medical School in Washington, D.C. She has studied the consequences 
of traumatic events for several decades. Her current research focuses on the mental 
health needs of uninsured populations and delivering mental health interventions in 
primary care.
For a copy of the full report, go to www.bja.gov/Publications/Women_
Pathways_to_Jail.pdf.  
For more information about this study, contact Dr. Shannon Lynch at lyncshan@isu.edu or 
208–282–2110.
For information about BJA technical assistance in this area, contact Ms. Danica Binkley, 
BJA Policy Advisor, at danica.binkley@usdoj.gov or 202–305–7418. 
*NCJ~241045*