OMB No. 1122-0020 
Approval Expires: 6/30/2028 
 
 
Office on Violence Against Women:  
FY 2026 Transitional Housing Assistance 
Grants for Victims of Domestic Violence, 
Dating Violence, Sexual Assault, and 
Stalking 
 
   
Grants.gov Funding Opportunity Number: O-OVW-2026-172624 
Application Deadlines in Eastern Time (ET): 
1: Complete SF-424 and Submit in Grants.gov: July 14, 2026, by 11:59 PM ET 
2: Submit full application in JustGrants: July 16, 2026, by 4:59 PM ET  
 
 
 
 
 


OVW FY 2026 Transitional Housing Assistance Grant Program 
U.S. Department of Justice | Office on Violence Against Women | 2 
Contents 
1. Basic Information ........................................................... 3 
2. Eligibility ......................................................................... 4 
3. Program Description ...................................................... 5 
4. Application Contents and Format ................................ 6 
5. Submission Requirements and Deadlines ................ 10 
6. Application Review information ................................. 10 
7. Award Notices .............................................................. 10 
8. Post-Award Requirements & Administration ............ 10 
9. Questions? ................................................................... 10 
 
 
 


OVW FY 2026 Transitional Housing Assistance Grant Program 
U.S. Department of Justice | Office on Violence Against Women | 3 
1. BASIC INFORMATION  
Purpose of the Funding 
The Office on Violence Against Women (OVW) is a component of the United States 
Department of Justice. OVW administers Violence Against Women Act (VAWA) grants 
designed to prevent and respond to domestic/dating violence, sexual assault, and 
stalking (VAWA crimes).  
This is a notice of funding opportunity (NOFO) for the Transitional Housing 
Assistance Grants for Victims of Domestic Violence, Dating Violence, Sexual 
Assault, and Stalking Program (Transitional Housing Program). Per 34 U.S.C. § 
12351, this program funds transitional housing and support services for victims who are 
homeless or in need of transitional housing or other housing assistance because of 
domestic/dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking. Eligible applicants are Tribal, state, 
and local governments and organizations with a documented history of effective work 
concerning VAWA crimes. See Eligibility and Program Description for details.  
Funding Details 
Announcement Type 
Initial 
Assistance Listing Number 
16.736 
Statutory Authority 
34 U.S.C. § 12351 
Grants.gov Opportunity Number 
O-OVW-2026-172624 
Expected Total Amount of Funding $48.5 million  
Anticipated Number of Awards  
80  
Award Type 
Grant 
Anticipated Award Amount 
Up to $600,000  
Expected Award Period 
48 months starting on October 1, 2026 
 
Key Dates and Times 
NOFO Release Date 
June 3, 2026  
SAM.gov Registration/Renewal Start the process at least 30 days before deadlines 
Step 1: Grants.gov Deadline 
11:59 p.m. ET on July 14, 2026 
Step 2: JustGrants Deadline 
4:59 p.m. ET on July 16, 2026 
Anticipated Notification Date 
By September 30, 2026 
See Questions? at the end of this NOFO for agency contact information. 


OVW FY 2026 Transitional Housing Assistance Grant Program 
U.S. Department of Justice | Office on Violence Against Women | 4 
2. ELIGIBILITY 
Eligible Applicants 
The types of entities that are eligible to apply are: 
Government Entities 
• State governments1 
• Federally recognized Indian Tribes2 
• Units of local government3  
State and local government applicants must partner with a victim service provider.4 
Nonprofit Entities 
• Organizations that have a documented history of effective work concerning 
domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking5 
Recipients with grants ending by September 30, 2026 may apply but are unlikely to be 
funded if they have enough funds to carry the project through September 30, 2027. 
Faith-based organizations that meet the eligibility requirements for this program are 
eligible to apply (more information is in the Application Companion Guide). 
Cost sharing and application limit: This NOFO does not require cost sharing 
(match). You may submit more than one application under this NOFO if each application 
proposes a different project in a different service area. If you submit multiple versions of 
the same application, only the most recent system-validated version will be reviewed. 
Additional Eligibility Factors 
Required partnership: States, territories, and local governments must partner with a 
victim service provider. Tribes with a victim services division are not required to partner.6 
Disqualifying factors: Factors that may result in removal during the review process are 
described on the OVW website. In addition, any nonprofit organization that holds money 
in offshore accounts for the purpose of avoiding the tax described in section 511(a) of 
the Internal Revenue Code is ineligible.7 
 
1 Including territories see 34 U.S.C. § 12291(a)(37). 
2 See 34 U.S.C. § 12291(a)(22). 
3 Defined as county, city, or township governments, as well as any town, borough, parish, village, or other 
general purpose political subdivision of a state, see 34 U.S.C. § 12291(a)(47). 
4 Defined as a nonprofit, nongovernmental or Tribal organization or rape crisis center, including a state or 
Tribal coalition, that assists or advocates for domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or 
stalking victims, including domestic violence shelters, faith-based organizations, and other organizations, 
with a documented history of effective work concerning domestic violence, dating violence, sexual 
assault, or stalking, see 34 U.S.C. § 12291(a)(50). 
5 With or without 501(c)(3) status and defined as synonymous with “victim service provider,” see id. 
6 See supra n. 4 (defining “victim service provider” to include a Tribal organization that assists or 
advocates for victims); see also 34 U.S.C. § 12291(a)(45) (defining “Tribal organization” to include both 
governmental and nongovernmental entities that meet certain criteria). 
7 See 34 U.S.C. § 12291(b)(15)(B)(ii). 


OVW FY 2026 Transitional Housing Assistance Grant Program 
U.S. Department of Justice | Office on Violence Against Women | 5 
3. PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 
Statutory Authority/Program Goals and Objectives  
Per 34 U.S.C. § 12351, funds must be used for the following purposes: 
1. Transitional housing, including funding for the operating expenses of newly 
developed or existing transitional housing. 
2. Short-term housing assistance, including rental or utilities payments 
assistance and assistance with related expenses such as payment of security 
deposits and other costs incidental to relocation to transitional housing. 
3. Support services designed to enable a minor, an adult, or a dependent of such 
minor or adult, who is fleeing domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, 
or stalking to:   
o Locate and secure permanent housing;   
o Secure employment, including obtaining employment counseling, 
occupational training, job retention counseling, and counseling concerning 
re-entry into the workforce; and   
o Integrate into a community by providing that minor, adult, or dependent 
with services, such as transportation, counseling, childcare services, case 
management, and other assistance. 
The term “transitional housing” is used in this NOFO to refer to both purposes 1 and 2 
above. Transitional housing is temporary housing assistance offered for up to 24 
months that helps victims transition into permanent housing. Recipients also may 
provide a six-month extension to victims who have made a good-faith effort to acquire 
permanent housing but have been unable to do so.8 
Proposals must provide both transitional housing and support services. All support 
services must be voluntary and not a condition of receiving housing assistance.9 For 
more information on housing models, support services, and fee structures, go here. 
Expected outcomes: OVW will measure success by reviewing a recipient’s submission 
of performance reports and data and the extent to which project implementation reflects 
progress toward the goals and objectives of this NOFO. See the VAWA Measuring 
Effectiveness Initiative for more information. 
Unallowable activities: For information on program-specific unallowable activities and 
costs to help you develop your application and budget consistent with program 
requirements, see the Application Companion Guide and Budget section of this NOFO  
 
8 See 34 U.S.C. § 12351(c). 
9 See 34 U.S.C. § 12351(b)(3)(C). 


OVW FY 2026 Transitional Housing Assistance Grant Program 
U.S. Department of Justice | Office on Violence Against Women | 6 
Statutory Funding Priorities 
OVW will give priority to projects developed under subsection (b) of the Transitional 
Housing Program statute10 as required by 34 U.S.C. § 12351(g)(2)(C)(ii).  
Agency Funding Priorities 
OVW may give priority consideration to applicants that propose (as applicable within the 
scope of this NOFO) projects designed to advance these goals: 
1. Combatting human trafficking and transnational crime, particularly crimes linked 
to illegal immigration, transnational criminal organizations, and cartel operations, 
including projects that strengthen law enforcement investigation and prosecution 
while supporting safety and justice for trafficking victims who have also suffered 
domestic/dating violence, sexual assault, and/or stalking. 
2. Projects dedicated to direct victim services, particularly in small towns and rural, 
remote, and Tribal communities. 
Note: Addressing these priorities is one of many factors that OVW considers in making 
funding decisions. Receiving priority consideration does not guarantee funding. 
4. APPLICATION CONTENTS AND FORMAT 
Application Contents List 
OVW will only consider applications that contain parts marked *REQUIRED* below. 
Refer to the DOJ Grant Application Submission Checklist for application instructions. All 
supporting documents and resources for this program are on the OVW website. 
Application Item  
Submission Type 
Step 1: Grants.gov 
 
Application for Federal Assistance: SF-424 *REQUIRED* 
Online Form 
Step 2: JustGrants 
 
Standard Applicant Information *REQUIRED* 
Online Form 
Proposal Abstract  
Text Box 
Data Requested with Application 
• Pre-award Risk Assessment  
Online Form 
Proposal Narrative *REQUIRED* 
Attachment 
Budget *REQUIRED*  
Attachment 
 
10 34 U.S.C. § 12351(b). See also 34 U.S.C. § 12291(a)(46). 


OVW FY 2026 Transitional Housing Assistance Grant Program 
U.S. Department of Justice | Office on Violence Against Women | 7 
Application Item  
Submission Type 
Financial Attachments 
• Indirect Cost Rate Agreement (if applicable) 
• Applicant Financial Capability Questionnaire (if applicable) 
• Executive Compensation Disclosure (if applicable) 
Attachment 
Memorandum of Understanding *REQUIRED if applicable* 
Attachment 
Additional Application Components 
• Certification regarding out-of-scope activities 
• Summary Data Sheet 
• Confidentiality Notice Form 
• Delivery of Legal Assistance Certification (if applicable) 
Attachment 
 
Standard Applicant Information *REQUIRED* 
Review and edit as needed the information imported from the SF-424 submitted in 
Grants.gov and add ZIP codes for areas affected by the project. 
Proposal Abstract 
In JustGrants, enter a proposal abstract (limited to 2,000 characters) summarizing the 
proposed project. See example here. As abstracts for funded projects are public, do not 
include any personally identifying information (e.g., staff names). 
Data Requested with Application: Pre-award Risk Assessment  
Complete this questionnaire in JustGrants. The questions are available here. 
Proposal Narrative *REQUIRED* 
Format of the Proposal Narrative 
Use the Proposal Narrative Template on the OVW website. It must be: 
• No longer than 10 pages, single-spaced 
• In a font no smaller than 11-point 
• On correctly numbered pages with one-inch margins 
• In a file format openable in Microsoft Word or Adobe Reader 
• In a table format or use headings and subheadings that correspond to the 
sections listed below 
• Written in plain language 
If you do not follow this format, OVW may reduce the score/ranking of the application.  
Sections of the Proposal Narrative 
The Proposal Narrative must include the three sections listed below. If you want priority 
consideration, the Proposal Narrative must state which priority(ies) your project will 
advance and describe how it will do so. 


OVW FY 2026 Transitional Housing Assistance Grant Program 
U.S. Department of Justice | Office on Violence Against Women | 8 
For NOFOs that require a memorandum of understanding (MOU) or letters of support 
from project partners, they are reviewed in conjunction with the Proposal Narrative.  
1. Purpose of the Project (weighted at 30%) 
• Say why you are applying for the grant. 
• Identify the project’s goals/objectives. Summarize why the goals/objectives were 
selected, e.g., how the project complements other services, improves services, 
fills service gaps, and/or responds to a need. 
• Describe the communities that will be served. 
2. What Will Be Done (weighted at 35%) 
• For each project goal, describe: 
o Activities and who is responsible for them; 
o How the applicant will ensure victim safety, privacy, and confidentiality; and 
o Outcomes for knowing the goal was achieved, and how these outcomes 
will be tracked. 
• Describe how transitional housing services and voluntary support services will be 
accessible to anyone who may need them. 
3. Who Will Implement the Project (weighted at 20%) 
• Identify the people who will implement the project. Provide for each person their 
name, agency/organization, position/title, role in the proposed project activities, 
and a description of their relevant experience. 
• Describe anticipated coordination and collaboration among project partners 
and/or others and how working together will advance the project’s goals. 
Budget and Associated Documentation  
Budget (weighted at 15%) *REQUIRED*  
Use the Sample Budget Narrative (attach file in JustGrants) to submit the budget. Refer 
to Budget Information and the Creating a Budget webinar for more information:  
• List each cost needed to implement the project under the appropriate cost 
category. Total funding requested for 48 months must be no more than $600,000. 
• Clearly name and describe each cost.  
• Show the computation of each cost (e.g., cost per unit, number of units, and total 
cost).  
• Enter narrative, as needed, to explain the cost calculations and connection to 
your project goals, objectives, and activities. 
• Include only costs that are reasonable, allocable, and necessary to implement 
the project. They must be allowable under the funding statute and agency 
requirements.11 
 
11 See 2 C.F.R. Part 200, Subpart E and the DOJ Grants Financial Guide. Read information on 
unallowable costs here. 


OVW FY 2026 Transitional Housing Assistance Grant Program 
U.S. Department of Justice | Office on Violence Against Women | 9 
• Fairly and reasonably compensate project partners, unless a reason not to is 
explained in a memorandum of understanding. 
• Distinguish clearly between subawards and contracts in allocating any grant 
funds to other entities.12 
• Set aside funds on the Travel line to participate in training and technical 
assistance: $3,000 for applicants located in the 48 contiguous states and $5,000 
for applicants located in the territories, Hawaii, and Alaska. 
Budget/Financial Attachments 
• Indirect Cost Rate Agreement (if applicable): If the budget includes indirect 
costs, upload your current, federally approved indirect cost rate agreement.  
• Applicant Financial Capability Questionnaire (if applicable): Nonprofit, 
nongovernmental organizations that have not previously (or within the last three 
years) received funding from OVW must complete and upload this form. 
• Disclosure of Process Related to Executive Compensation (nonprofits only): 
Nonprofit organizations that use the Internal Revenue Service’s (IRS) Safe 
Harbor Procedure must submit a special disclosure to OVW.13 (required by 34 
U.S.C. § 12291(b)(15)(B)(iii)). 
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) and Supporting Documents 
*REQUIRED IF APPLICABLE* 
A memorandum of understanding (MOU) is required if the lead applicant is a state, 
territory, or local government. It must demonstrate the required partnership with a victim 
service provider. OVW’s website has instructions for MOUs and letters of support.   
Additional Application Components 
Attach these in JustGrants:  
• Certification regarding out-of-scope activities letter signed by the Authorized 
Representative.  
o Note: This certification is the subject of federal litigation. For the most up-
to-date information about the certification requirement, see the notice on 
OVW’s funding opportunities page. 
• Summary Data Sheet, one to four pages. 
• Confidentiality Notice Form, signed by the Authorized Representative, 
acknowledging the confidentiality requirements of 34 U.S.C. § 12291(b)(2). 
• Delivery of Legal Assistance Certification, signed by the Authorized 
Representative, if the application proposes to provide legal assistance to victims. 
Disclosures and Assurances 
Complete the disclosures, assurances, and certifications in JustGrants. 
 
12 More information on this is here. 
13 See 34 U.S.C. § 12291(b)(15)(B)(iii). More information is here. 


OVW FY 2026 Transitional Housing Assistance Grant Program 
U.S. Department of Justice | Office on Violence Against Women | 10 
5. SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS AND DEADLINES 
The DOJ Grant Application Submission Checklist provides instructions for how to submit 
by the deadlines. Executive Order (E.O.) 12372 (Intergovernmental Review of Federal 
Programs) applies to this funding opportunity. OVW’s How to Apply page has a policy 
for applicants to request late submission due to technical difficulties, severe weather, or 
natural or manmade disaster. 
6. APPLICATION REVIEW INFORMATION 
OVW’s Discretionary Grant Application Review Process page explains the 
responsiveness review, review criteria, review and selection process, including risk 
review, and deciding official. 
7. AWARD NOTICES 
Read about the award notification process on OVW’s website. 
8. POST-AWARD REQUIREMENTS & ADMINISTRATION 
Read the Application Companion Guide for more information about standard award 
terms and conditions, administrative and national policy requirements, and post-award 
reporting requirements.  
9. QUESTIONS? 
NOFO Contact 
Phone: 202-307-6026 
Email: OVW.TransitionalHousing@usdoj.gov 
SAM.gov Help Desk 
Website: https://sam.gov/content/help  
Hours: 8 a.m. to 8 p.m. ET Monday – Friday 
Grants.gov Help 
Desk 
Phone: 800-518-4726 
Email: support@grants.gov 
Website: https://www.grants.gov/support  
Hours: 24 hours a day, 7 days a week (closed federal holidays) 
JustGrants Help 
Desk  
Phone: 866-655-4482 
Email: OVW.JustGrantsSupport@usdoj.gov  
Hours: 7 a.m. to 5 p.m. ET Monday – Friday