*Canadian Council on Rehabilitation and Work


2
Research, policy, and practice aimed at labour 
market inclusivity is often focused on creating 
equitable access to job opportunities. Certainly, 
achieving employment equity in Canada requires 
removing barriers that prevent people with disabilities 
from obtaining and retaining work. However, 
underrepresentation in the labour market manifests in 
many ways beyond employment rates.
Access to high-quality work is a well-understood social 
determinant of health.1 Employment is also a strong 
predictor of psychological well-being,2 and there is 
overwhelming evidence for a reciprocal, enduring 
relationship between self-esteem and work.3  At its 
best, work can also be an avenue for self-fulfillment, 
personal growth, and the chance to make a difference 
in the world.
True employment equity means ensuring workers 
with disabilities have access to high-quality work and 
pathways to develop their careers. Currently, workers 
with disabilities face not only lower employment rates, 
but inequitable access to advancement opportunities 
and to roles that utilize their full potential. 
This article explores why career advancement is 
a crucial and often overlooked element of inclusive 
employment. We will explore how addressing these 
disparities involves not only creating fair opportunities 
for upward mobility, but also expanding how we 
understand career advancement. We will also discuss 
persistent barriers to career advancement and 
meaningful work faced by workers with disabilities 
through a review of recent research and real examples. 
Finally, we illustrate promising practices and 
initiatives underway for promoting inclusive career 
advancement.


3
Shaping Tomorrow
What is Career Advancement?
Career advancement means different things to different 
people.4  Although typically associated with upward 
mobility, like promotion,5 ,6  advancement can also be 
achieved through job change, increased decision-making 
power, more benefits, new responsibilities, and greater 
autonomy. The pursuit of career advancement, in many 
ways, reflects a desire for work that goes beyond meeting 
basic needs. It illustrates the motivation to learn new skills, 
connect with others, and make an impact on the world. 
Career advancement is therefore closely linked to the 
concept of meaningful work.
Meaningfulness refers to the extent to which workers see 
their work as valuable and worthwhile.7  Most researchers 
define meaningful work as work that is (a) significant 
or contributing to a broader purpose, (b) a fit with the 
worker’s skills and goals, (c) personally fulfilling, and/or (d) a 
combination of these and sometimes other criteria.8 
Meaningful work has numerous benefits for employees and 
employers. It improves life satisfaction, job satisfaction, and 
subjective wellbeing.9,10  It also promotes organizational 
commitment and reduces turnover intentions. 9,10,11  Recent 
research on persons with intellectual and developmental 
disabilities has shown that meaningful work fosters a sense 
of pride, develops independence, and offers purpose in 
life.12  In short, those who find their jobs meaningful are 
happier, more fulfilled, and more engaged with their work.
Whether work feels meaningful is determined by individual-, 
societal-, job-, and organizational-level factors.7 Access 
to safe work is a societal factor, as are cultural norms 
influencing perceptions of power and material success.7 
Individuals with personality traits like extraversion, 
openness, and conscientiousness are more likely to 
find their work meaningful, and other individual factors 
include motivational factors like competence, relatedness, 
autonomy, and power; personal values; and life-story 
narratives.7 
Organizational factors like respect, trust, inclusivity, 
cooperation, corporate social responsibility practices, a 
focus on continuous learning, and HR practices that foster 
staff participation are linked to meaningfulness across all 
levels of a workplace.7 Job-level factors include autonomy, 
quality of social networks, connection in the workplace, 
stability, fair compensation, and the opportunity to use 
different skills at work.7 Many of these job factors, especially 
autonomy, stability, and compensation, tend to increase 
with seniority. Advancement within an organization can 
therefore be a direct pathway to more fulfilling work. 
However, career advancement is not limited to moving up 
the organizational hierarchy.


4
Shaping Tomorrow
Career ladders
Traditional career advancement involves 
climbing the ranks of an organization or field. 
Career bridges
Advancement is lateral, in which increased 
tasks, responsibilities or number of hours 
worked are assigned within the same role. Or, 
workers can make a move to a new field or 
career path. 
Career advancement is traditionally thought of as 
‘moving up’ by obtaining increasingly senior roles in 
an organizational hierarchy or over the course of one’s 
career journey. From this perspective, advancement 
looks like a staircase or a ladder.
Many people do want more seniority in their roles and 
all the advantages that come with it – like increased 
responsibility, higher pay, and more autonomy. 
People with disabilities are still underrepresented 
in professional, scientific, and technical industries 
and management and executive positions,13 ,14  and 
more likely to work part-time than workers without 
disabilities.15  There is plenty of work to be done to 
promote upward career mobility for workers with 
disabilities.
However, the idea that career advancement is 
like moving up a ladder assumes a linear, upward 
trajectory is the only pathway to success and 
meaningful work. For some, career advancement 
might mean learning new skills, taking on different 
responsibilities, entering a new field, or starting 
a business. Career advancement, in other words, 
can look like building bridges across positions, 
organizations, and fields, rather than climbing up a 
ladder. Career bridges offer an alternative metaphor for 
career progress by not defining it solely in hierarchical 
terms.
Expanding our definitions of career advancement 
to include lateral moves, career changes, and non-
traditional paths like entrepreneurship also allows 
us to see a wider range of possibilities for fostering 
meaningful, high-quality work. However, barriers 
to different forms of career advancement persist at 
attitudinal, social, and structural levels.
Reimagining Career Advancement


5
Shaping Tomorrow
Career Advancement Challenges 
for Workers with Disabilities
Accessing High-Quality and Meaningful 
Work
Persons with disabilities continue to report lower 
employment quality than their counterparts without 
disabilities.17,18  Barriers including stigma, talent 
mismatch, and other challenges prevent workers with 
disabilities from flourishing in their roles or developing 
their careers.
Talent Underutilization
A key component of meaningful work is feeling like 
one’s role suits their unique skills and abilities.8 
Workers with disabilities are more likely than their 
peers to be underutilized in their roles, or to work 
in roles that don’t suit their training, education, and 
experience. According to a 2023 Job Talks Access 
report, employees with disabilities are nearly twice as 
likely to be in roles with low autonomy and low job 
satisfaction, often doing entry-level work, and unable 
to see how their roles contribute to the organization’s 
mission.18 In such roles, seniority isn’t always the 
growth opportunity it seems. Even after advancing in 
the organizational hierarchy, workers with disabilities 
frequently felt underutilized and disillusioned.
Skill mismatch occurs when an employee’s 
competencies don’t align with the requirements 
and expectations of the position.19  While this can 
sometimes take the form of underskilling – lacking the 
necessary skills for the role – people with disabilities 
are also more likely to experience overskilling, or 
having skills beyond job requirements.20  Negative 
stereotypes and assumptions can cause employers 
to underestimate the qualifications and capabilities 
of job applicants with disabilities,20 which can lead 
to hiring decisions that don’t align with candidates’ 
actual skill sets. Skill mismatch can also result from 
having fewer opportunities to develop skills or access 
training. The consequences of skill mismatch can 
be lower job satisfaction and reduced earnings for 
workers,20 as well as productivity loss for workers and 
businesses.21 
Another career advancement barrier for persons with 
disabilities is simply that their unique perspectives 
and strengths often go unrecognized. As they must 
navigate a world that is not designed for them, many 
people with disabilities learn early on how to devise 
creative solutions to overcome challenges. Many 
people with disabilities demonstrate remarkable 
resilience in the face of adversity, manifesting in a 
strong work ethic, determination to succeed, and 
ability to persevere through difficulties. 22, 23 Further, 
navigating inaccessibility can contribute to the 
development of unique perspectives that drive 
innovation and improvement in products or services. 
Despite this, nearly half of respondents in a survey said 
that their market-worthy ideas were ignored by the 
people with the power to act on them.24
Recent research from the Institute for Work and Health has shown that workers with disabilities are less likely to 
report positive employment characteristics like flexibility and safety, and more likely to work in temporary, part-time, 
and gig employment; experience job and income insecurity; work in roles that don’t match or fully utilize their skills; 
face ‘job lock’, or the inability to leave a role due to the ensuing loss of employee benefits; and experience wage 
theft.17  Workers with disabilities therefore face challenges accessing high-quality, meaningful work; experience 
barriers moving their careers upwards or laterally; and frequently must navigate the precarious landscape of 
underemployment and non-standard work arrangements.
30%
According to the Canadian Human Rights Commission, more than 30% of persons with disabilities 
have reported being at a disadvantage in their careers due to disability-related barriers.16


Tokenism
Tokenism, or the practice of hiring a person with a 
disability to give the superficial appearance of fair 
treatment, 25 is detrimental to belonging and inclusion 
and damages efforts to foster meaningful work. 
Tokenism can manifest in several subtle but harmful 
ways. First, it can create a false sense of inclusion by 
creating an appearance of diversity without addressing 
underlying barriers. For example, employees with 
disabilities may be included in meetings and events 
but not given any real decision-making power or 
influence.26  
Second, tokenism allows organizations to approach 
inclusion from a quota mindset, declaring diversity 
goals achieved through the act of hiring workers 
with disabilities, while substantive barriers to 
inclusion and accessibility go unaddressed in 
policy, practice, and workplace culture.26 Token 
representation can also perpetuate ableism if the 
employee is seen as an exception rather than the 
norm, reinforcing stereotypes; or it can lead to 
unfounded generalizations about all people with 
disabilities.25 In sum, tokenism weakens efforts to 
promote understanding of the diverse experiences 
and capabilities of people with disabilities, and can 
indirectly undermine career advancement. 
Glass ceilings are invisible barriers that 
prevent upward mobility in organizations,6 like 
limited access to professional development 
opportunities, or discrimination in promotion 
decisions. Similarly, glass cliffs refer 
to high-risk leadership positions often 
disproportionately given to members of 
equity-deserving groups.27  These positions 
are ‘ledges’ from which a leader with 
disabilities may fall. Glass partitions describe 
the invisible ‘walls’ which can trap workers 
with disabilities in their current positions; 
for example, by being dependent on health 
coverage or support arrangements in a 
particular role or organization (i.e., job lock). 28
Career plateaus occur when an individual reaches a level in their professional 
life where they feel stuck.29  Individuals may stop learning new skills or growing 
existing ones. As industries evolve, those on a career plateau may fall behind on the 
knowledge and skills required to remain competitive.30  This can make it difficult 
to qualify for more advanced positions or adapt to industry changes. Workers with 
disabilities are often overlooked for progression and upskilling opportunities, 
increasing the likelihood of experiencing career plateaus.
6


7
Shaping Tomorrow
Barriers to Career Mobility
Job Lock
Job lock is the inability to leave a job due to 
a reliance on continued access to income 
or benefits, particularly medical benefits.31  
It is a structural, systemic barrier to career 
advancement for persons with disabilities.
Job lock is associated with lower life satisfaction 
and reduced motivation, and can negatively 
impact wellbeing and career growth.31 The risks 
of losing access to healthcare can outweigh a 
worker’s desire to change jobs, trapping them 
in low-quality or unsatisfying roles, delaying 
their retirement, or disincentivizing plans to 
start a business.32  For example, workers with 
medical conditions that require expensive 
prescription medication and frequent specialist 
appointments may be reluctant to pursue 
opportunities, like new jobs or entrepreneurship 
pathways, that offer basic (or no) extended 
health benefits – even if these roles present 
career development opportunities. Job lock 
is thus a detriment to workers’ quality of life 
and employment satisfaction, and to broader 
innovation and economic growth.
In countries like the United States, where 
employer health insurance is the predominant 
way of accessing healthcare, job lock is a 
major concern for labour market mobility 
and career development.33  In Canada, job 
lock is comparatively less prevalent, but 
many Canadians with disabilities do rely on 
employer benefits like vision care, prescription 
medication, and access to workplace wellness 
programs or health spending accounts, and 
remain in stable but less-than-ideal roles to 
retain coverage. Very few workers in precarious 
roles or gig work have access to extended health 
benefits. A portable benefits strategy is one 
potential solution that could provide healthcare 
access to gig economy workers and others who 
fall outside of employer-sponsored healthcare 
plans, and potentially mitigate job lock.34  
The province of Ontario has communicated 
their intent to develop this strategy and has 
convened a Portable Benefits Advisory Panel – a 
first across Canada.35 


8
Shaping Tomorrow
Stigma refers to negative beliefs or stereotypes about 
individuals whose characteristics are seen as different from, 
or less than, what society considers normal.36,37 Stigma in the 
form of ableism continues to be a barrier to employment 
and career advancement for persons with disabilities.36
Stigma is often embedded in organizational culture and 
sociocultural norms. For example, organizational-level 
barriers can appear as inaccessible hiring practices; 
tokenism; an absence of effective role models, mentors, 
and sponsors; and difficulties accessing needed 
accommodations. At the societal level, persistent barriers 
include insufficient access to education and career 
development opportunities, and the perpetuation of myths 
and misconceptions that negatively influence norms and 
expectations, like the long-debunked belief that people with 
disabilities are unmotivated to work.38 
Intersecting experiences of marginalization can lead to 
‘compounding stigma’ for diverse workers with disabilities. 
Little research exists examining specific intersections of 
disability with race, gender, and other social identities as 
they relate to career advancement. However, findings from a 
US study on the career development of 17 highly-achieving 
women with physical and sensory disabilities, who were 
diverse across various dimensions such as race, sexual 
orientation, disability type, and age, showed that race and 
gender interacted with experiences of disability to impede 
women’s access to the workforce.39  In India, researchers 
have seen that women with disabilities are stereotyped 
as incompetent compared to their male peers with 
disabilities.40  In the UK, research has shown that workers 
with disabilities in high-seniority roles are more likely to be 
men. 41 
Discrimination of persons with disabilities can manifest 
in covert ways. Examples of covert discrimination might 
include overlooking workers with disabilities for professional 
development opportunities like training programs or 
conferences; failing to proactively offer reasonable 
accommodations that could boost productivity; allowing 
disability stereotypes to influence performance reviews 
negatively; or passing over qualified workers with disabilities 
for promotions.42  Stereotypes that undermine the skill and 
capabilities of workers with disabilities can also impact how 
managers delegate challenging assignments that could help 
build skills or increase organizational visibility. For example, 
managers may hesitate to assign “stretch assignments”: 
projects that are beyond the worker’s current skill level and 
which can serve as career development opportunities.42
Stigma


9
Shaping Tomorrow
More than half of workers are in roles with one or more 
indicators of insecurity or precarity.43  More Canadians with 
disabilities are involved in precarious work, especially older 
adults and new workers with disabilities, compared to their 
counterparts without disabilities.44 
‘Non-standard’ employment – jobs outside the conventional 
model of full-time, permanent employment on which 
traditional labour laws are based – is on the rise.45  The 
increase in non-standard employment and precarious work, 
driven by factors like globalization, economic instability, 
technological advances, and the ‘on-demand economy’, is 
reshaping the labour landscape for workers with disabilities. 
The COVID-19 pandemic has had a lasting impact on 
non-standard work and the gig economy by exacerbating 
existing inequities for workers with disabilities – particularly 
those at the intersections of race, gender, and immigration 
status – who were, and are, disproportionately represented 
in food service, delivery, hospitality, and other public-facing 
‘essential jobs’.46 
Workers with disabilities earn less income, and are more 
likely to work part-time (<30 hours/week) and have short-
term contracts.17 Precarious work is inherently impermanent 
and unpredictable; workers may find themselves without 
employment on little notice and without recourse. Workers 
in precarious jobs also have fewer regulatory protections, 
leaving them vulnerable to exploitation and poor working 
conditions.17 These workers are more likely to work in 
high-intensity roles, increasing their risk of burnout; have 
access to less personal time off; have fewer opportunities 
to provide input at work; receive less support; and face a 
greater risk of workplace harassment.47 
Gig work is one form of precarious employment. For some 
workers with disabilities, gig work is a last resort, undertaken 
due to obstacles in accessing or maintaining employment in 
the traditional job market.48  Canadians with disabilities are 
1.5 times more likely than those without disabilities to work 
in the gig economy.17 
Spotlight on Gig Work
Everyone seems to agree that gig work is growing, yet the term has been inconsistently defined by policymakers, businesses, 
and researchers. 49
Gig work usually involves the provision of services on a project or contract basis. It is almost always associated with precarity, low 
pay, and a lack of worker protections, and often refers to work mediated by digital channels on an ‘on-demand’ basis (e.g., Uber, 
DoorDash, TaskRabbit).
Statistics Canada is creating a framework to define and collect data about gig work that aligns with the 
International Labour Organization’s Classifications of Status in Employment and Status at Work.49 This 
development will be significant for understanding the impact of gig work, 
especially on workers with disabilities. As of 2024, Statistics Canada has 
defined gig work as “paid work done on the basis of short-term tasks, 
projects, or jobs, which does not guarantee ongoing work, and where there is 
a need for the worker to play an active role in obtaining their next 
task, job or client.”50  Crucially, gig work can be understood as a 
type of ‘dependent self-employment’ – a concept which reflects 
the ways the worker is dependent on a business for most or 
all their work and has a limited ability to control their work 
model or to make business decisions. This relative lack of 
autonomy is one quality that differentiates dependent from 
independent self-employed workers (e.g., small business 
Precarity and the Challenges of Non-Standard Employment


10
Shaping Tomorrow
Non-standard and precarious employment are barriers 
to the career development of workers with (and without) 
disabilities in several ways. Workers in most non-standard 
roles are not afforded the typical terms, privileges, and 
benefits associated with traditional employee status (e.g., 
adequate wages, health insurance, retirement plans, 
job security, training and professional development 
opportunities, access to unionization and employment 
insurance, social support networks).17,48,51  They are also not 
always protected by government employment regulations, 
including fairness and equality, safety protections, 
personal, medical and/or family leave practices, workplace 
accommodations, and labour agreements. Lack of 
regulation means that many companies operating in the gig 
economy can neglect the duty to accommodate without 
consequence, or even enforce punitive policies, such as 
requiring workers with disabilities to obtain different, more 
costly accident insurance.51
The burden of administrative duties such as mileage 
tracking, insurance maintenance, and reporting taxes is high. 
Workers classified as ‘self-employed or contract workers are 
responsible for paying their own income taxes, necessitating 
a strong grasp of financial literacy, or the financial resources 
to outsource this responsibility.51 Additionally, there are extra 
costs associated with maintaining or upgrading equipment 
like vehicles and computers, which adds financial strain. 
Social assistance benefits can be jeopardized when workers 
with disabilities approach or exceed income thresholds, 
creating a disincentive to increase their work hours. All these 
factors can result in workers with disabilities feeling trapped 
in a cycle of unstable work and financial precarity.
To effectively address the drawbacks of non-standard, 
precarious employment for workers with disabilities, 
a better understanding of non-standard employment 
and its impact is needed, and policymakers must take 
decisive action. Policy officials and the government must 
consider how to strengthen regulatory frameworks and 
clarify definitions of employment to include non-standard 
employment models, ensuring self-employed and contract 
workers receive the same rights as traditional employees.52  
For example, enforcing greater transparency for businesses 
operating in the gig economy, and expanding gig workers’ 
capacity to participate in collective bargaining and resolve 
labour disputes, are potential mechanisms for improving 
precarious conditions and promoting career advancement.


11
Shaping Tomorrow
Facilitators of Career Advancement
There are a growing number of promising practices 
and initiatives to promote access to high-quality career 
development pathways. These range from legislative 
changes and cultural shifts, to grassroots initiatives and 
emerging practices, to career management strategies for 
workers with disabilities.
This section explores promising practices that are shaping 
the future of career advancement for workers with 
disabilities. From transformative organizational policies 
and individual career management strategies to the impact 
of inclusive leadership and the strategic use of assistive 
technologies, we showcase how these facilitators are 
collectively promoting a more equitable and inclusive 
professional landscape.
Research by Samosh (2020) proposes three pillars—
represented by the metaphor of a three-legged 
stool—that support the career advancement of 
persons with disabilities in leadership positions53:  
1.	
Career self-management strategies
	
This includes personal attributes and proactive 
behaviours, such as setting goals, seeking 
opportunities for skill development, and 
leveraging personal strengths.
2.	
Social networks
	
This pillar emphasizes the importance of 
external networks, including family, friends, 
acquaintances, and role models. 
3.	
Organizational and societal factors
	
This includes workplace policies, practices, 
and cultures that support inclusivity and 
accessibility, as well as broader societal 
supports like disability legislation and economic 
policies that reduce barriers to advancement.


12
Shaping Tomorrow
Disability rights legislation and policy levers are 
instrumental in facilitating career advancement for workers 
with disabilities by fostering greater accessibility and 
reducing discrimination. Policies that require employers to 
assess and measure underrepresentation gaps, for example, 
aim to boost employment opportunities and outcomes 
for underrepresented groups based on sociodemographic 
criteria. When coupled with good-faith efforts towards 
workplace inclusion, these policies can help address 
structural discrimination by setting concrete, measurable 
targets commensurate with labour market availability. 54  
Importantly, hiring quotas alone are unlikely to remove 
barriers to career advancement for persons with disabilities, 
and unintended consequences, such as tokenism, may 
occur from the use of quota systems without a culture of 
workplace inclusion and disability confidence.56 
Policy interventions alone are not sufficient to remove the 
barriers that inhibit the career advancement of persons with 
disabilities; other drivers, at both the organizational- and 
individual-level, also play an important role.
Promoting Career Advancement 
through Structural Change
Spotlight: Paralympians to Earn Equal Financial 
Rewards as Olympic Counterparts for First Time in 
Canadian History
Paralympic athletes historically earn very little to no 
financial rewards for their career success since the 
first Paralympic games began in 1960.57  This is in stark 
contrast to the financial incentives offered to their 
Olympic counterparts.
In Paris 2024, Canadian gold medalists earned $20,000, 
Silver medalists earned $15,000, and Bronze medalists 
earned $10,000.58  The 2024 Paris Games marked the 
first time in Canadian history in which Paralympians 
earned the same rewards. Canadian entrepreneur 
Sanjay Malaviya is the leading force behind this shift for 
Paralympian equity, which he pursued in 2022 by giving 
$5,000 to 130 Olympians and 53 Paralympians for winning 
medals at the Tokyo and Beijing Games. In support, the 
Paralympic Foundation of Canada has set forth an initial 
$8-million endowment to ensure Canadian Paralympians 
of the future have the same incentives and chances at 
financial success as their Olympic counterparts.59 
A Paralympic medal is worth the same as 
an Olympic medal. And that message to our 
Paralympians, to kids with disabilities all 
across Canada, is what matters.
– Canadian Paralympian Chantal Petitclerc
30%
While not a policy, the 50-30 Challenge 
initiative by the Government of Canada 
challenges Canadian organizations to 
increase the representation and inclusion 
of diverse groups, including persons with 
disabilities, on Canadian boards and senior 
management, with a minimum of 30% hired 
and/or promoted to leadership positions.55


13
Shaping Tomorrow
Disability Confident Leadership
Employers, HR professionals, and supervisors can be 
role models, mentors, and facilitators, both directly and 
indirectly promoting equitable career growth opportunities 
for workers with disabilities.
Direct supervisors and managers of workers with 
disabilities can have a significant impact on the career 
development of their employees.60 Supportive supervisors 
can foster success by assigning workers with disabilities 
to high-visibility projects and challenging assignments 
that raise their profile within the company and across their 
careers, and providing them with the necessary support, 
tools, and resources to ensure they have an equitable 
opportunity to succeed.
Leadership can promote career advancement 
opportunities by setting the tone for culture and climate 
in the workplace. Leaders who are disability confident—
that is, leaders who recognize the value that people with 
disabilities bring to their organizations, and who have 
the knowledge, skills, and confidence needed to support 
persons with disabilities in the workplace—can create 
accessible environments and inclusive workplace culture.61 
Effective and accessible communication from workplace 
leadership ensures employees can envision a career path 
within the organization.62  Leaders who transparently 
and authentically communicate their organization’s 
commitment to accessibility and inclusion can also help 
to reduce stigma, and combat unfounded concerns 
that accommodations and diversity initiatives lead to 
preferential treatment of employees with disabilities.63  
Disability representation at the highest levels in an 
organization plays a key role in creating a more disability 
inclusive culture in the workplace. Leaders with disabilities 
can provide support through mentorship, facilitating 
access to networks, and sharing knowledge. Leaders with 
disabilities in organizations are also well-positioned to 
advocate for the inclusion of other persons with disabilities 
and normalize the inclusion of people with disabilities in the 
workplace.64  When leaders share their disabilities openly in 
the workplace, they promote a culture of inclusion.  
Disability Inclusion Training
Spotlight on Disability Confidence
CCRW’s Disability Confidence Toolkit provides a dedicated 
section on career advancement for inclusive employers. 
Intended for use by managers, Diversity, Inclusion, Equity, 
and Accessibility specialists, and HR professionals, the 
Career Development tool helps businesses understand 
career development and helps people leaders learn how to 
have career conversations with, determine advancement 
opportunities for, and empower the career development 
of workers with disabilities. Both organizational and 
worker perspectives are considered in this resource, which 
was created through an advisory group of community 
organizations. The focus of the Disability Confidence Toolkit 
is to support businesses on their journey of accessibility.
Facilitators in the Workplace
Workplace training initiatives are another powerful facilitator 
for career advancement by reducing disability stigma in 
the workplace.53,63 Disability inclusion training can debunk 
misconceptions, illustrate common workplace barriers and 
the effects of bias, educate staff about the diverse range of 
disability experiences and the value of assistive technologies 
and accommodations, and improve disability confidence.
Disability inclusion training should be offered company-
wide, including to leadership. Leaders who engage in 
training will be more prepared to broaden perspectives 
about disability across the company and may better 
appreciate the individual strengths of workers with 
disabilities.61
Employees with disabilities can also benefit from disability 
inclusion training across the organization. When employers 
and staff learn about disability, workers with disabilities 
spend less time and energy self-advocating and educating 
their colleagues and managers on accessibility and 
accommodations.63 Employees with disabilities may also 
learn self-advocacy tools about confronting discrimination 
and building confidence. Beyond disability-related 
training, training designed to up- or re-skill employees with 
disabilities can further support career growth.66  
The National Organization on Disability found 
that companies with executives who disclose 
a disability have 34% higher rates of disability 
disclosure among their staff.65
34%


Supporting Disclosure and Access to Accommodations
Workers who seek access to accommodations must often 
navigate the complex decision of disability disclosure, risking 
negative impacts such as discrimination and hostility from 
coworkers.67  The possibility of losing accommodations can stop 
employees with disabilities from seeking new positions and 
better opportunities – a form of job lock. 
Employers can improve disclosure processes for employees with 
disabilities by identifying and removing barriers to disclosure 
within their organization (e.g., addressing the organization’s 
culture, policies, and the perceived supportiveness of colleagues 
and supervisors),67 demedicalizing the accommodations 
process, ensuring access to accommodations across the 
worker’s entire employment lifecycle, and implementing 
occupational assessments across the organization to ensure all 
employees receive support.60 
One way to improve the accommodations process is to 
implement accommodations passports.60 These are tools 
for employers to document and communicate the specific 
requested supports required by each employee. Removing the 
need to disclose again when moving upwards or laterally within 
an organization, ensuring consistency of accommodations, and 
streamlining the process of making requests are a few ways that 
this tool can benefit workplaces.
14


15
Shaping Tomorrow
Social and professional networks are important facilitators 
of career advancement. Internal networks, or networks 
within the workplace, provide access to the instrumental, 
informational, and emotional support necessary to succeed 
in the workplace, while external networks outside of the 
workplace can support access to new roles and other 
development opportunities.53 Mentors are typically more 
experienced professionals in similar fields or within the 
same workplaces who provide advice, information, and 
encouragement. Mentors can support career advancement 
by providing access to new contacts, direction and 
guidance, and by offering an insider perspective on their 
industry or role.
Every individual’s network differs in size, closeness, and 
the number and types of contacts, so both the quality and 
‘returns’ of these networks can vary.68 Research has shown 
that lack of access to professional networks is a barrier to 
obtaining promotion for persons with disabilities.69  People 
with disabilities and other members of equity-deserving 
groups are not always afforded the same opportunities to 
build networks. Employers can support their workers with 
disabilities by connecting them with professional contacts, 
mentors, or setting up disability resource groups and 
disability networks.
Inclusive managers and mentors play an important role in 
career advancement for workers with disabilities. A 2020 
study conducted by MentorCanada showed that of the 2,838 
youth with disabilities surveyed, those who were mentored 
were more likely to report positive employment outcomes 
compared to youth with disabilities who did not have a 
mentor (89% to 75%).70  Alongside improved employment 
outcomes, mentorship improves self-determination skills, 
awareness of workplace supports, and social skills.71  
Mentoring may also increase efficacy in making career-
related decisions and knowledge about different career 
options.72 
Companies that want to support career advancement for 
their employees with disabilities should consider setting 
up or facilitating disability networks. A study by Kulkarni et 
al. (2014) showed that disability networks positively impact 
the career development of workers with disabilities.40 
When people with disabilities join a network comprised 
of other workers with disabilities, they gain access to 
mentors at work, or even become role models for others 
with disabilities.53 Formal mentoring programs for persons 
with disabilities, or disability-specific employee resource 
groups, can also improve the likelihood of employees with 
disabilities attaining promotion in their jobs.65 
Taking Control of Career Development
Networks & Mentorship


16
Shaping Tomorrow
Career Management Strategies
Career management is a lifelong process of career planning 
and decision-making73  in which workers consider their 
talents, interests, values, and lifestyle preferences, and 
determine what jobs, companies, and industries are a good 
fit for them. Based on this information, they set career goals 
and build a plan to achieve them. Sometimes the plans 
work, while other times they don’t; either way, workers get 
feedback that can help them adjust their plan.74  Career 
management provides a structured way of navigating a 
complex and unpredictable work world.73 
Career management begins early in life. Early work and 
volunteer experiences can have positive impacts on the 
employment outcomes of youths with disabilities. Early 
work experience substantially improves the likelihood 
that youths and young adults will obtain employment 
in adulthood,75  especially if they found their job 
independently.76  Volunteer work similarly encourages the 
discovery of one’s abilities, the development of employment 
skills, and helps inform career interests77  -- crucial 
elements to successful career management activities. 
This underscores the need to ensure young people with 
disabilities have equitable access to early work experiences.
Proactive career management strategies for all workers 
include skill-building, networking, and mentorship, as 
we’ve discussed. They also include setting clear goals by 
defining qualities like specific job titles, skillsets, or desired 
industries; maintaining a positive mindset by persisting 
through career obstacles, and focusing on goals rather 
than hurdles; and even engaging in disability advocacy 
by raising awareness about disability in the workplace 
and helping to formulate disability-friendly policies.78  
Employment coaches can play a vital role in supporting 
career management by assisting with goal setting, working 
with jobseekers and workers with disabilities to identify 
their skills and growth areas, finding job openings in fields 
of interest, and sharing knowledge about workplace 
accommodations relevant to their clients.
Workers with disabilities face unique challenges in 
career management as a result of systemic barriers and 
discrimination. Some workers with disabilities adopt 
career management strategies that may appear to others 
as self-limiting, such as opting for non-traditional career 
pathways or choosing not to pursue opportunities for 
upwards mobility.27  However, as we have discussed, a more 
holistic view shows that career advancement can take many 
forms. The most important indicator of successful career 
advancement is that workers find their careers rewarding 
and meaningful.
Entrepreneurship, Freelancing, and 
Independent Contracting 
Despite the inherent risks and challenges of non-standard 
work, opportunities in entrepreneurship, freelancing, and 
independent contracting can be rewarding career pathways 
for many people with disabilities. 
Autonomy is a component of job satisfaction, and it is a 
recognized benefit of entrepreneurship for persons with 
disabilities. 79,80,81  The flexibility afforded by contract jobs 
and gig work, which are increasingly prevalent in today’s 
economy, can also allow some workers with disabilities to 
exercise greater autonomy over their work-life balance and 
find roles that match their unique skills and talents.
In non-standard employment, workers often have more 
freedom to customize their schedules, number of work 
hours, locations, job tasks, and work conditions.48 In other 
words, they have the flexibility to implement their own 
workplace modifications to meet disability-related needs 
and family obligations, without having to navigate the 
workplace accommodations process.51 They can utilize 
their own assistive or adaptive technology and preexisting 
support systems (e.g., families, friends, significant others) to 
accommodate their needs. Without a traditional employer, 
disability disclosure is less relevant, allowing workers with 
disabilities to avoid medicalized processes and bureaucratic 
barriers, as well as potential discrimination from colleagues 
and employers.51 
Some digital platforms such as Upwork and Rover enable 
workers to set their own rates, helping ensure they receive 
equitable wages. Various forms of contract work can be 
lucrative for people with disabilities, especially those who 
have stable housing as well as a primary source of income 
or financial support from a member of their household.48 
When freelance or contract work serves as a secondary 
source of income, it can also provide valuable experience 
and training, promoting employability and greater 
independence.


A Final Note on Inclusive 
Career Advancement
Career advancement for persons with disabilities is not one-size-fits-all. Pathways to career growth can 
include upward mobility, lateral moves, skill development, and non-traditional career pathways like 
entrepreneurship and freelancing. 
The employment barriers faced by workers with disabilities are complex and persistent, arising from 
stigma and systemic inaccessibility. However, by removing the barriers workers with disabilities face to 
accessing high-quality, rewarding jobs that fully utilize their skills and make the most of their talents, 
the potential benefits for workers with disabilities, the workforce, and Canada are immense. These 
benefits include increased innovation and productivity, economic growth, a more diverse workforce, and 
better quality of life. Through fostering inclusive workplaces, implementing effective accessibility policy, 
and empowering workers with disabilities to take charge of their careers through career management 
strategies, mentorship, and employment coaching, this potential can be harnessed. By addressing 
the barriers and leveraging the facilitators of career advancement, we can create a more inclusive and 
equitable labour market where everyone has the freedom to realize their full potential.
17


18
Shaping Tomorrow
1.	
Steege, A. L., Silver, S., Mobley, A., & Haring Sweeney, M. (2023). Work as a key social determinant of health: The case for including work in all health data 
collections. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. https://blogs.cdc.gov/niosh-science-blog/2023/02/16/sdoh/
2.	
Drake, R. E., & Wallach, M. A. (2020). Employment is a critical mental health intervention. Epidemiology and Psychiatric Sciences, 29, e178. https://doi.
org/10.1017/S2045796020000906
3.	
Krauss, S., & Orth, U. (2022). Work experiences and self-esteem development: A meta-analysis of longitudinal studies. European Journal of Personality, 
36(6), 849-869. https://doi.org/10.1177/08902070211027142
4.	
Perkins, B.D., Tyrrell, L., & Scutella, R. (2009). Is career advancement important to disadvantaged jobseekers? Analysis of a large survey of disadvantaged 
jobseekers [Conference proceedings]. An Inclusive Society? Practicalities and Possibilities. Social Policy Research Centre. https://core.ac.uk/download/
pdf/30684906.pdf
5.	
Greenhaus, J. H., & Parasuraman, S. (1993). Job performance attributions and career advancement prospects: An examination of gender and race effects. 
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 55(2), 273-297. https://doi.org/10.1006/obhd.1993.1034
6.	
Braddock, D., & Bachelder, L. (1994). The glass ceiling and persons with disabilities. Report prepared for The Glass Ceiling Commission: U.S. Department of 
Labor. Federal Publications. https://ecommons.cornell.edu/server/api/core/bitstreams/93767ecf-e2a1-4a94-8e72-0566a3504fa1/content 
7.	
Sandoghdar, A. L., & Bailey, C. (2023). What is meaningful work and why does it matter? A guide for practitioners. [Technical report]. King’s College London. 
https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.18357.24808
8.	
Both-Nwabuwe, J. M. C., Dijkstra, M. T. M., & Beersma, B. (2017). Sweeping the floor or putting a man on the moon: How to define and measure meaningful 
work. Frontiers in Psychology, 8(1658). https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01658
9.	
Soren, A., & Ryff, C. D. (2023). Meaningful work, well-being, and health: Enacting a eudaimonic vision. International Journal of Environmental Research and 
Public Health, 20(6570). https://doi.org/10.3390%2Fijerph20166570
10.	
Fairlie, P. (2011). Meaningful work, employee engagement, and other key employee outcomes: Implications for human resource development. Advances 
in Developing Human Resources, 13(4), 508-525. https://doi.org/10.1177/1523422311431679
11.	
Arnoux-Nicolas, C., Sovet, L., Lhotellier, L., di Fabio, A., & Bernaud, J-L. (2016). Perceived Work conditions and turnover intentions: The mediating role of 
meaning of work. Frontiers in Psychology, 7(704). https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00704
12.	
Lanchak, E. R., Guest, L., McMillan, E. D., Julie, L. T., & Rowley, H. (2023). “More than a paycheck”: Parent perspectives on meaningful work for individuals 
with intellectual and developmental disabilities. Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities, 61(2), 145-157. https://doi.org/10.1352/1934-9556-61.2.145 
13.	
Statistics Canada. (2023, August 30). Labour market characteristics of persons with and without disabilities in 2022: Results from the Labour Force Survey. 
https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/daily-quotidien/230830/dq230830a-eng.htm
14.	
Statistics Canada (2023, April 4). Representation of persons with disabilities in executive positions, 2016 to 2019. https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/daily-
quotidien/230404/dq230404b-eng.htm
15.	
Statistics Canada (2024, May 28). A demographic, employment and income profile of persons with disabilities aged 15 years and over in Canada, 2022. 
https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/pub/89-654-x/89-654-x2024001-eng.htm 
16.	
Canadian Human Rights Commission. (2019, January 1). Report: Roadblocks on the career path: Challenges faced by persons with disabilities in 
employment. https://www.chrc-ccdp.gc.ca/en/resources/publications/report-roadblocks-the-career-path-challenges-faced-persons-disabilities 
17.	
Shahidi, F. V., Jetha, A., Kristman, V., Smith, P. M., & Gignac, M. A. (2023). The employment quality of persons with disabilities: Findings from a national 
survey. Journal of Occupational Rehabilitation, 33(4), 785-795. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10926-023-10113-7
18.	
Job Talks Access. (2023). National survey of workers with disabilities. https://www.jobtalksaccess.com/report
19.	
Thorn, E. (2024, August 15). Skills Mismatch | What Is It & How to Bridge the Gap. Toggl [Blog]. https://toggl.com/blog/skills-mismatch
20.	
Jones, M. K., & Sloane, P. J. (2010). Disability and skill mismatch. Economic Record, 86, 101-114. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1475-4932.2010.00659.x 
21.	
Puckett, J., Hoteit, L., Perapechka, S., Loshkareva, E., & Bikkulova, G. (2020, January 15). Fixing the global skills mismatch. BCG Global. https://www.bcg.
com/publications/2020/fixing-global-skills-mismatch
22.	
Lindsay, S., Cagliostro, E., Albarico, M., Mortaji, N., & Karon, L. (2018). A systematic review of the benefits of hiring people with disabilities. Journal of 
Occupational Rehabilitation, 28(4), 634-655. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10926-018-9756-z
23.	
Sherbin, L., & Kennedy, J. T. (2017, December 27). The case for improving work for people with disabilities goes way beyond compliance. Harvard Business 
Review. https://hbr.org/2017/12/the-case-for-improving-work-for-people-with-disabilities-goes-way-beyond-compliance
24.	
Sherbin, L., Kennedy, J. T., Jain-Link, P., & Ihezie, K. (2017). Disabilities and inclusion. Coqual. https://www.talentinnovation.org/_private/assets/
DisabilitiesInclusion_KeyFindings-CTI.pdf
25.	
Sherrer, K. (2018). What is tokenism, and why does it matter in the workplace? Vanderbilt Business School. https://business.vanderbilt.edu/
news/2018/02/26/tokenism-in-the-workplace/ 
26.	
Boyd, A. (2023). The effects of tokenism on workplace diversity and inclusion efforts. Amber K. Boyd Attorney at Law. https://www.amberboydlaw.com/
the-effects-of-tokenism-on-workplace-diversity-and-inclusion-efforts
27.	
Wilson-Kovacs, Ryan, M.K., D., Haslam, S.A., & Rabinovich, A. (2008). ‘Just because you can get a wheelchair in the building doesn’t necessarily 
Endnotes


19
Shaping Tomorrow
mean that you can still participate’: Barriers to the career advancement of disabled professionals. Disability & Society, 23(7), 705–717. https://doi.
org/10.1080/09687590802469198
28.	
Roulstone, A. & Williams, J. (2014). Being disabled, being a manager: ‘glass partitions’ and conditional identities in the contemporary workplace. Disability 
& Society 29(1), 16-29. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09687599.2013.764280
29.	
Indeed for Employers. (n.d.). Career plateaus explained: How to help employees who feel stuck. https://www.indeed.com/hire/c/info/career-plateaus
30.	
Seng, E. (2024). What is a career plateau and how can you overcome it? https://www.calent3.com/news-events/post/what-is-a-career-plateau-and-how-
can-you-overcome-it
31.	
Fisher, G. G., Ryan, L. H., Sonnega, A., & Naudé, M. N. (2016). Job Lock, work, and psychological well-being in the United States. Work, Aging and 
Retirement, 2(3), 345. https://doi.org/10.1093/workar/waw004
32.	
Baker, D. (2015). Job lock and employer-provided health insurance: Evidence from the literature. AARP Public Policy Institute. https://www.aarp.org/
content/dam/aarp/ppi/2015-03/JobLock-Report.pdf
33.	
Farooq, A., & Kugler, A. (2016). Beyond job lock: Impacts of public health insurance on occupational and industrial mobility. National Bureau of Economic 
Research. https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w22118/w22118.pdf
34.	
Benefits Canada. (2021). Ontario recommending introduction of new portable benefits program. Benefits Canada. https://www.benefitscanada.com/
benefits/health-benefits/ontario-recommending-introduction-of-new-portable-benefits-program/
35.	
Benefits Canada. (2022). Ontario mulling implementing new ‘portable benefits’ for precarious workers. Benefits Canada. https://www.benefitscanada.
com/benefits/health-benefits/ontario-mulling-implementing-new-portable-benefits-for-precarious-workers/
36.	
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (n.d.). Common barriers to participation experienced by people with disabilities. https://www.cdc.gov/
ncbddd/disabilityandhealth/disability-barriers.html
37.	
Goffman, E. (1963). Stigma: Notes on the management of spoiled identity. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
38.	
Ali, M., Schur, L., & Blanck, P. (2011). What types of jobs do people with disabilities want? Journal of Occupational Rehabilitation, 21(2), 199–210. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10926-010-9266-0
39.	
Noonan, B. M., Gallor, S. M., Hensler-McGinnis, N. F., Fassinger, R. E., Wang, S., & Goodman, J. (2004). Challenge and success: A qualitative study of the 
career development of highly achieving women with physical and sensory disabilities. Journal of Counseling Psychology 51(1), 68-80. https://doi.
org/10.1037/0022-0167.51.1.68
40.	
Kulkarni, M. & Gopakumar, K.V. (2014). Career management strategies of people with disabilities. Human Resource Management, 53(3), 445-466. 
DOI:10.1002/hrm.21570
41.	
Sayce, L. (2009). Doing seniority differently: A study of high fliers living with ill health, injury or disability. London, United Kingdom: RADAR. https://www.
equallyours.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2009/10/radar-DSD-fullreport_3.pdf 
42.	
Gonzales, M. (2023). Supporting invisible disabilities in the workplace. Shrm.org. https://www.shrm.org/topics-tools/news/all-things-work/invisible-
disabilities 
43.	
Lewchuk, W., Procyk, S., Leflèche, M., Goldring, L., Shields, J., & Viducis, P. (2018). Getting left behind: Who gained and who didn’t in an improving labour 
market. Poverty and Employment Precarity in Southern Ontario (PEPSO). https://pepso.ca/documents/pepso-glb-final-lores_2018-06-18_r4-for-website.
pdf
44.	
Jetha, A., Martin Ginis, K.A., Ibrahim, S., & Gignac, M. A. M. (2020). The working disadvantaged: the role of age, job tenure and disability in precarious work. 
BMC Public Health, 20, 1-12. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-020-09938-1
45.	
International Labour Organization. (2017, May). The rising tide of non-standard employment. https://webapps.ilo.org/infostories/en-GB/Stories/
Employment/Non-Standard-Employment
46.	
Cubrich, M., Tengesdal, J. A., Ugueto-Rey, G., Stahl, R., & Crow Brauer, M. (2022). Pandemics and precarious work: Translating research to practice for 
marginalized workers. Translational Issues in Psychological Science, 8(3), 416-430. https://doi.org/10.1037/tps0000327. 
47.	
Chen, W. H., & Mehdi, T. (2019). Assessing job quality in Canada: A multidimensional approach. Statistics Canada. https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/
pub/11f0019m/11f0019m2018412-eng.htm
48.	
Penner, S., Griffith, J., Karoli, K., & Stockdale, C. (2023, August 31). The Canadian gig economy for workers with disabilities: Positive and negative 
factors and future directions. Work Wellness Institute. https://workwellnessinstitute.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/08/FSC_Report_GigWorkers_
Disabilities_20230824-1.pdf
49.	
Labour Market Information Council (2021, September). Making sense of gig work. https://lmic-cimt.ca/publications-all/lmi-insight-report-no-45-making-
sense-of-gig-work/
50.	
Hardy, V. (2024, March 4). Defining and measuring the gig economy using survey data. Statistics Canada. https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/en/pub/75-004-
m/75-004-m2024001-eng.pdf?st=62H-o-ks
51.	
Harpur, P., & Blanck, P. (2020). Gig workers with disabilities: Opportunities, challenges, and regulatory response. Journal of Occupational Rehabilitation, 
30, 511-520. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10926-020-09937-4 
52.	
Employment and Social Development Canada (2023, March). What we heard: Developing greater labour protections for gig workers. Government of 
Canada. https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/esdc-edsc/documents/corporate/portfolio/labour/programs/labour-standards/reports/gig-workers-what-
we-heard/WWHR-Developing-greater-labour-protections-for-gig-workers.pdf
53.	
Samosh, D. (2020). The three-legged stool: Synthesizing and extending our understanding of the career advancement facilitators of persons with 
disabilities in leadership positions. Business & Society, 60(7), 1773-1810. https://doi.org/10.1177/000765032090713


20
Shaping Tomorrow
54.	
Revillard, A. (2023). The disability employment quota, between social policy and antidiscrimination. Global Social Policy, 23(1), 92-108. https://doi.
org/10.1177/14680181221138558
55.	
Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada (n.d.). The 50-30 challenge: Your diversity advantage. Government of Canada. https://ised-isde.
canada.ca/site/ised/en/50-30-challenge-your-diversity-advantage
56.	
Buchter, L. (2020). Tell me your story: How recruitment practices implementing affirmative action laws may undermine the laws’ goals. Law & Social 
Inquiry, 45(4), 902-934. https://doi.org/10.1017/lsi.2019.79
57.	
International Paralympic Committee (n.d.). Paralympics History. https://www.paralympic.org/ipc/history 
58.	
Canadian Olympic Committee (n.d.). Canadian Olympic Committee Athlete Excellence Fund (AEF). https://olympic.ca/programs/athlete-excellence-fund/
59.	
Heroux, D. (2024, January 24). “Finally”: Canadian Para athletes to be financially rewarded for medals won at Paralympics. CBC. https://www.cbc.ca/
sports/paralympics/paralympians-financially-rewarded-medals-1.7092887 
60.	
de Raaf, S., Wray, P., & Thackeray, L. (2023, September). Career mobility of people with disabilities. Social Research and Demonstration Corporation. 
https://www.srdc.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/03/Career-Mobility-and-People-with-Disabilities-Project-Final-Report.pdf 
61.	
Suter, R., Scott-Parker, S. and Zadek, S. (2007). Realising potential: Disability confidence builds better business. Cornell  University. https://ecommons.
cornell.edu/server/api/core/bitstreams/4a1cab2e-bfac-4ece-aa6b-61f9e4c6570f/content
62.	
Flick, M., & McManus, R. (2022, February). Employers’ lessons learned in hiring, retaining and advancing employees with disabilities. Public Policy Forum. 
https://ppforum.ca/wp-content/uploads/2022/06/AccessAbility-StrategyReport-PPF-May20221.pdf
63.	
Jones, G.E. (1997). Advancement opportunity issues for persons with disabilities. Human Resource Management Review 7(1), 55-76. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S1053-4822(97)90005-X
64.	
Howard, J. (2022, August 24). Disability representation in leadership. Inclusion Hub. https://www.inclusionhub.com/articles/the-importance-of-disability-
representation-in-leadership
65.	
National Organization on Disability. (2023). Disability in the workplace: 2023 insights report. https://nod.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/01/Disability-in-
the-Workplace-2023-Insights-Report.pdf.
66.	
Muscular Dystrophy Canada. (2023, April). Shaping Canada’s Disability Inclusion Action Plan: Bridging the gap between lived experiences and policy 
through a community-led, capacity building and knowledge-exchange approach. https://muscle.ca/wp-content/uploads/2023/07/517014980-diap-final-
report-en.pdf.
67.	
Tomas, V., Ahmed, H., & Lindsay, S. (2022). Unravelling the complexities of workplace disclosure among persons with non-visible disabilities and illnesses: 
A qualitative meta-ethnography. Journal of Occupational Rehabilitation, 32, 538-563. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10926-022-10023-0
68.	
Woehler, M. L., Cullen-Lester, K. L., Porter, C. M., & Frear, K. A. (2021). Whether, how, and why networks influence men’s and women’s career success: Review 
and research agenda. Journal of Management, 47(1), 207-236. https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206320960529
69.	
Robert, P. M., & Harlan, S. L. (2006). Mechanisms of disability discrimination in large bureaucratic organizations: Ascriptive inequalities in the workplace. 
The Sociological Quarterly, 47(4), 599-630. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1533-8525.2006.00060.x
70.	
Mentor Canada. (2022, August). The mentoring effect: Youth experiencing disabilities. https://mentorcanada.ca/sites/default/files/2022-08/The%20
Mentoring%20Effect%20Youth%20Experiencing%20Disabilities%20EN_new.pdf
71.	
Sally, L., Hartman, L. R., & Fellin, M. (2016). A systematic review of mentorship programs to facilitate transition to post-secondary education and 
employment for youth and young adults with disabilities. Disability and Rehabilitation, 38(14), 1329-1349. https://doi.org/10.3109/09638288.2015.1092174
72.	
Mentor Canada. (2024, March). Mentoring for persons experiencing disabilities: A review of the literature. Canadian Association for Supported 
Employment. https://www.supportedemployment.ca/wp-content/uploads/2024/06/Mentoring-for-persons-experiencing-disability.pdf 
73.	
King, Z. (2004). Career self-management: Its nature, causes and consequences. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 65(1), 112-133. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0001-8791(03)00052-6
74.	
Greenhaus, J. H., Callanan, G. A., & Godshalk, V. M. (2000). Career management (3rd ed.). Dryden Press.
75.	
Mamun, A. A., Carter, E. W., Fraker, T. M., & Timmins, L. L. (2018). Impact of early work experiences on subsequent paid employment for young adults with 
disabilities. Career Development and Transition for Exceptional Individuals, 41(4), 212-222. https://doi.org/10.1177/2165143417726302
76.	
McDonnal, M. C., & O’Mally, J. (2012). Characteristics of early work experiences and their association with future employment. Journal of Visual Impairment 
& Blindness, 106(3), 133-144. https://doi.org/10.1177/0145482X1210600302
77.	
Lindsay, S., Chan, E., Cancelliere, S., & Mistry, M. (2018). Exploring how volunteer work shapes occupational potential among youths with and without 
disabilities: A qualitative comparison. Journal of Occupational Science, 25(3), 332-336. https://doi.org/10.1080/14427591.2018.1490339
78.	
Coetzee, M., Ximba, T., & Potgieter, I. L. (2017). Exploring career advancement challenges people with disabilities are facing in the South African work 
context. SA Journal of Human Resource Management, 15(1), 1-11. https://doi.org/10.4102/sajhrm.v15i0.815
79.	
Harris, S. P., Caldwell, K., & Renko, M. (2014). Entrepreneurship by any other name: Self-sufficiency versus innovation. Journal of Social Work in Disability & 
Rehabilitation, 13(4), 317-349. https://doi.org/10.1080/1536710x.2014.961115
80.	
Norstedt, M., & Germundsson, P. (2022). Self-employment for people with disabilities: Barriers to and (im)possibilities in starting and running their own 
business. Scandinavian Journal of Disability Research, 24(1), 239-252. https://doi.org/10.16993/sjdr.909 
81.	
Balcazar, F. E., Murthy, S., Gibbons, T. M., Sefandonakis, A., Renko, M., Parker Harris, S., & Caldwell, K. (2023). Supports and barriers that entrepreneurs with 
disabilities encounter when starting their businesses. Rehabilitation Psychology, 68(1), 91-101. https://doi.org/10.1037/rep0000479