Abstract
We leverage variation in the adoption of coeducation by U.S. women’s colleges to study how exposure to a mixed-gender collegiate environment affects women’s human capital investments. Our event-study analyses of newly collected historical data find a 3.0-3.5 percentage-point (30-33%) decline in the share of women majoring in STEM. While coeducation caused a large influx of male peers and modest increase in male faculty, we find no evidence that it altered the composition of the female student body or other gender-neutral inputs. Extrapolation of our main estimate suggests that coeducational environments explain 36% of the current gender gap in STEM.
JEL: I21, I23, I24, J16, J24
In 2016, women earned 57% of all baccalaureate degrees awarded in the United States, but only 37% of degrees awarded in STEM fields.1 Gender gaps in the choice of major and occupation account for much of the pay gap between college-educated men and women (Brown and Corcoran, 1997; Bertrand, 2017; Blau and Kahn, 2017; Sloane, Hurst and Black, 2019). Beyond inhibiting gender equality, the lack of gender diversity in high-paying fields may also curtail economic productivity and innovation (Hunt, 2016; Hsieh et al., 2019). Designing policies to address these issues requires a complete understanding of the causes of the gender gap in choice of field.
While canonical models of college major choice emphasize heterogeneity in skills and earning potential (Willis and Rosen, 1979; Altonji, Blom and Meghir, 2012; Altonji, Arcidiacono and Maurel, 2016), recent work attributes gender gaps largely to differences in preferences and subjective beliefs (Zafar, 2013; Wiswall and Zafar, 2015, 2018; Patnaik, Wiswall and Zafar, 2020). An important hypothesis is that these differences are shaped by gendered features of the collegiate environment, such as interactions with male students and faculty that may discourage women from entering male-dominated fields (Ceci, Williams and Barnett, 2009; Hill et al., 2010; Shapiro and Sax, 2011). However, the difficulty of isolating plausibly exogenous variation in these non-pecuniary factors has limited efforts to test this hypothesis.
In this paper, we estimate the impact of mixed-gender educational environments on women’s field choices by leveraging an important setting: the decline of women’s colleges in the United States. While women’s colleges numbered in the hundreds in the early 1960s, most have since transitioned to coeducation. These transitions occurred at varying times and were driven by a number of factors, such as an increasingly competitive environment in higher education and the gradual liberalization of Catholic institutions (Goldin and Katz, 2011). They impacted schools at a variety of positions in the American college market—from elite colleges like Sarah Lawrence, to regional schools like Elms College of Massachusetts, to larger public institutions like Radford University of Virginia. We hand-collect information on the timing of schools’ transitions to coeducation, merge it to multiple sources of panel data on the near-universe of U.S. baccalaureate institutions, and implement a dynamic difference-in-difference research design that compares the evolution of majoring behavior at newly coeducational colleges to behavior at colleges that did not alter the gender mix of the student body. In contrast to the existing literature, which studies marginal changes in the gender composition of classmates or instructors in an otherwise stable campus environment (e.g., Carrell, Page and West, 2010; Huntington-Klein and Rose, 2018), our paper analyzes a more fundamental reform that altered many social and educational aspects of the college experience (Miller-Bernal, 1993).
We first find that coeducation substantially altered the distribution of fields chosen by graduating women. Our event-study estimates show that the share of women majoring in any STEM field declined by 3.0-3.5 percentage points (30-33%) in the ten years following the arrival of coeducational classes. This response was driven by decreases in the shares of women majoring in biology, physical sciences, and math. We also find substantial decreases in the share of women majoring in economics and in business. Correspondingly, we find increases in the shares of women choosing health, psychology and social sciences other than economics.2 These estimates are robust across several different choices of comparison group, including a synthetic control approach.
Coeducation could influence women’s field choices through two primary channels. First, a coeducational environment could influence a woman’s choice of major, conditional on having enrolled at the college (an environmental effect). As might be expected, we find that coeducation had a dramatic effect on the gender composition of peers: The male share of the student body increased steadily, reaching a 21- to 24-percentage-point increase in the latter half of the first decade after the reform. We also find a statistically significant increase in the male share of faculty, although this effect is only one-fifth as large as the male peer effect. In contrast, we find no evidence that the switch to coeducation was accompanied by changes in a range of “gender-neutral” factors that may influence the choice of major, such as class sizes, the menu of courses offered, per-student expenditures, or the level of academic competition.
Second, coeducation could affect STEM-inclined women’s propensities to enroll at former women’s colleges (a composition effect). We investigate these mechanisms using a novel linkage between our hand-collected data and survey data on the career aspirations and academic records of college freshmen. We find no evidence of changes in a rich set of characteristics including intended major, intended career, demographic characteristics, or high school GPAs. To maximize our power to detect changes in composition, we use these variables to construct a predicted share of women who will major in STEM, based on their freshman characteristics. We find an insignificantly positive effect of coeducation on this index, suggesting that if anything, coeducation made the female student body more STEM-inclined. Though the data limit the precision of our estimates, the confidence intervals indicate that the composition effect could account for at most 16-30% of the total effect of coeducation on the share of women earning degrees in STEM.
Overall, these results are most consistent with the hypothesis that coeducation reduced the share of women majoring in STEM fields through its effect on the campus environment, and in particular via the increased exposure to male peers. As we discuss, there are several potential mechanisms that could underlie this effect, such as costs associated with mixed-gender competition, shifting gender norms and stereotypes, marriage market signals, and changes to teaching styles and subjective content accompanying the influx of male students. Though we do not have the ability to distinguish among these various channels, our findings suggest that social interventions that target the salience and perception of gender on college campuses may be important in increasing the representation of women in science. In fact, a simple extrapolation of our results suggests that exposure to coeducational environments explains 36% of the contemporary gender gap in STEM major choice.
This paper contributes to several strands of literature. While gender differences in student characteristics such as math ability (Turner and Bowen, 1999; Speer, 2021), STEM grades (Goldin, 2015; Astorne-Figari and Speer, 2019; Calkins, 2021), and high school course-taking (Ceci et al., 2014; Card and Payne, 2017) all contribute to gender differences in college major choice, they only account for a small portion of the gap (Patnaik, Wiswall and Zafar, 2020). We build on literature suggesting that the gender gap is driven by heterogeneous preferences over fields of study (e.g., Zafar, 2013; Wiswall and Zafar, 2015, 2018; Patnaik, Wiswall and Zafar, 2020), finding that exposure to male peers in college may be an important determinant of these preferences.
Our study of real-world exposure to male peers furthers literature that uses laboratory and field experiments to analyze the role of the social environment on gender gaps in economic behavior (Bertrand, 2011). Women’s willingness to compete and aptitude in competition have been shown to be lower in mixed-gender relative to single-sex environments (Gneezy, Niederle and Rustichini, 2003; Niederle and Vesterlund, 2007, 2008; Kamas and Preston, 2012). In addition, these differences appear to depend on prevailing social norms (Gneezy, Leonard and List, 2009), exposure to male peers in elementary school (Booth and Nolen, 2012a,b), and whether actions will be observed by male peers (Bursztyn, Fujiwara and Pallais, 2017). Our paper helps link this literature to real-world gender gaps in educational outcomes.
Our analysis also contributes to a growing literature on the gender composition of peers in educational environments. This literature has relied largely on fluctuations in the sex composition of classmates to study gendered peer effects (Hill, 2015; Huntington-Klein and Rose, 2018; Brenøe and Zölitz, 2020; Shan, 2021; Bostwick and Weinberg, 2022). The evidence generally suggests that more male-dominated peer groups deter women from quantitative fields, although these effects may disappear or even reverse in contexts where gender norms are likely to be less salient than other mechanisms such as social coordination (e.g., Zölitz and Feld, 2018). Our investigation differs in two important ways. First, we exploit a source of variation that induced a more dramatic shift in the male share of peers and the campus environment. In doing so, our estimates capture responses along several policy-relevant margins and shed light on the potential effects of broad-based efforts to change the perception of gender on college campuses. Second, we study exposure to men in a majority-women environment. Our results may be relevant for policies designed to foster access to single-sex educational settings, particularly ongoing initiatives that expose young women to STEM-related content. They may also shed light on the potential effects of the entry of men into women-dominated labor markets, such as nursing and family care.
Finally, our paper contributes to literature on the educational roles of women’s colleges. Early studies found that graduates of women’s colleges earned higher income and had higher occupational prestige than graduates of coeducational colleges (Riordan, 1994; Tidball, 1980, 1989). Women at women’s colleges also tend to report greater satisfaction with educational aspects of the college experience and greater support in their educational endeavors (Smith, 1990; Miller-Bernal, 1993; Kinzie et al., 2007).3 Our paper also builds on work by Billger (2002). In a study of an anonymous liberal arts college that converted from women-only to a coeducational environment, she shows that the reform was accompanied by little or no change in the curriculum or other features of the campus environment. However, relative to aggregate national trends, she finds a decrease in the number of women choosing traditionally male majors and occupations after a single women’s college transitioned to coeducation. We expand on this literature by exploiting variation in the date of transition to coeducation in a causal framework, considering the near-universe of historical women’s colleges in the United States, and providing a more detailed exploration of the mechanisms.4
I. Women’s Colleges’ Transitions to Coeducation
A. Historical context
Women’s colleges have been a part of higher education in the United States since 1836. Most early women’s colleges were located in the Northeast and were progressive institutions designed to expand educational opportunities for women (Chamberlain, 1988). Their footprint grew as Protestant- and Catholic-affiliated schools opened, mostly in the South and Midwest (Harwarth, Maline and DeBra, 1997). Non-denominational public universities, such as Texas Women’s University, and private women’s colleges, such as Sarah Lawrence, added to the ranks in the 20th century. While the precise number is a subject of debate, by the 1960s, it was estimated that between 233 and 315 U.S. colleges served a women-only student body (Harwarth, Maline and DeBra, 1997).
The modern decline of women’s colleges began in earnest in the late 1960s. While much of this trend was driven by changes in demand for single-sex education, the timing of and approach to the transition to coeducation was characterized by substantial heterogeneity (Miller-Bernal and Poulson, 2004; Thomas, 2008). The liberalization of Catholic education following the Vatican II council opened the door to coeducation in traditional Catholic schools (Goldin and Katz, 2011). Some institutions also worried about the implications of proposed equal rights legislation (Thomas, 2008). These forces led to a wave of changes, with roughly one-half of women’s colleges disappearing or converting to coeducation by the early 1970s. Other schools resisted coeducation but eventually followed suit, with more colleges ending single-sex education nearly every year since. Still more chose to embrace their single-sex mission for good: Thirty-seven women’s colleges remained in operation as of 2022.5
Our research design leverages variation in the existence and timing of coeducation events across comparable groups of institutions to estimate causal effects of coeducation on women’s choices of major. This design is internally valid under the assumption that the timing of coeducation at a particular school is not correlated with idiosyncratic trends in women’s major choices at that school. We provide evidence supportive of this assumption.
B. Expected effects of coeducation
Guided by a simple Roy model (presented in Appendix A), we discuss a number of mechanisms by which women’s field choices at former women’s colleges may be affected by the transition to coeducation.
First, women’s college transition to coeducation may alter the enrollment decisions made by women high school seniors. Women who prefer a single-sex environment may substitute away from and toward other women’s colleges, while women who prefer a co-educational environment may substitute toward . If women’s pre-enrollment propensities to major in STEM are correlated with preferences for single-sex educational environments, we may see changes in majoring behavior that are driven by changes in the composition of students.
For women who continue to enroll at college , the transition to coeducation may impact field choices by changing the (perceived or realized) payoffs of majoring in STEM relative to non-STEM fields. This effect, which we refer to as the environmental effect, may itself be the product of several different factors associated with the transition to coeducation. For example, coeducation could introduce psychological costs related to competition with men for course grades and professors’ attention (Niederle and Vesterlund, 2007). This could steer women toward non-STEM majors, to the extent that men disproportionately entered STEM classrooms (Kahn and Ginther, 2017). The presence of men on campus could also increase the salience of gender norms and stereotypes (Akerlof and Kranton, 2000; Schmader, 2002; Steele, 1997), leading women to choose non-STEM fields out of a sense of social conformity. Gender norms could also play a role through the marriage market if majoring in a high-paying, STEM-related field is seen as a negative signal to potential future spouses (Bertrand, Kamenica and Pan, 2015; Bursztyn, Fujiwara and Pallais, 2017). We refer to the collection of mechanisms related to changes in the gender composition of women’s classmates as gendered peer effects.
Other mechanisms, such as changes in the educational inputs provided by newly coeducational colleges, may also factor into the environmental effect. For instance, if colleges hire more male faculty to prepare for the arrival of male students, one byproduct could be a weakening of role model effects that have been shown to draw women into quantitative fields (Carrell, Page and West, 2010; Kofoed and McGovney, 2019; Bottia et al., 2015). In addition, even holding the gender mix of the faculty and student bodies constant, coeducation could influence women’s major choices through gender-neutral peer effects. For example, coeducation could change the average abilities and attitudes of peers, which could affect the competitiveness of STEM courses and the style or content of instruction.
We interpret our main empirical estimates as the total effect of coeducation on women’s field choices, summed across all of these mechanisms. While we cannot quantify every single mechanism, our analyses allow us to rule out some mechanisms in favor of others. Our main goal is to distinguish the composition effect from the environmental effect, which we accomplish via an indirect approach (see Section V.D). The environmental effect informs our main question of interest: How the field choices of a fixed group of women respond to coeducation-induced changes in gendered features of the collegiate environment.
II. Data and Sample Construction
Our analysis relies on a hand-collected list of women’s colleges and their dates of transition to coeducation. Our collection effort, which we detail in Appendix B, aimed to identify all baccalaureate-degree-granting women’s colleges that transitioned to coeducation beginning in the 1960s. Ours is the only dataset we are aware of that covers this modern period of transition. See Goldin and Katz (2011) for a similar dataset covering an earlier time period.
We found 154 such institutions, 118 for which we could observe students’ field choices at least 4 years before and a decade after coeducation. We then excluded 41 institutions that did not fit into our target population of institutions that offered an arts-and-sciences curriculum and experienced sharp transitions to coeducation.6 This yielded a main sample of 77 “treated” institutions.
Figure 1 documents the distribution of the years of transition to coeducation at women’s colleges in our sample. The modal transition dates are 1969-1971, before the passage of Title IX in 1972. Title IX is unlikely to have meaningfully affected the women’s colleges in our sample—the majority of which were private and received little federal funding.7
A. IPEDS sample on women’s fields of degree
Our main analyses rely on data from the Higher Education General Information Survey (HEGIS) and the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS). HEGIS and IPEDS provide information from 1966–1986 and 1987–2016, respectively, on the number of degrees awarded by year, institution, major, and gender (National Center for Education Statistics, 2004, 2019). Both sources cover close to the full universe of baccalaureate-degree-granting institutions in the United States, and all of those legally classified as institutes of higher education. For the remainder of the paper we will refer to the HEGIS and IPEDS data as IPEDS for concision.8
We use these data to construct a measure of the share of graduates of gender that earn a degree in field at institution in academic year :
|  | (1) | 
is the number of degrees in major earned by graduates from institution in year of gender . The data only provide a measure of degrees awarded: we do not observe individuals who matriculate but do not finish their degrees, or the time to completion for those who finish their degrees. We therefore cannot investigate intermediate channels of degree progress.
Our primary focus is on the share of women completing degrees in quantitative fields such as math, biology, and the physical sciences. We pool these three majors, as well as engineering, engineering technology, and computer science, into a comprehensive STEM field. We also examine economics. Finally, we aggregate all other individual majors into nine fields, and examine the effects of coeducation on the full distribution of degrees awarded across these eleven fields (see Section IV.B).
Figure 2 graphs sex-specific distributions of field choices. For treated schools, we report the distribution of majors for women in the five years prior to coeducation, and for men in the 10 years after coeducation. For comparison, we show the distributions for women and men at always-coeducational schools, weighted to represent the same academic years as those represented among treated schools. Women at treated schools (dark blue) were slightly more predisposed toward high-return fields like STEM and economics than women at coeducational schools (medium blue). However, we see the opposite relationship among men: relative to their counterparts at coeducational schools (gray), the first cohorts of men who entered former women’s colleges (light blue) were less likely to choose heavily quantitative majors. Even so, a comparison of men and women at treated schools shows that the newly admitted men were more STEM-inclined than women. This suggests that the gender mix of the classroom in these fields changed substantially in response to coeducation.
Our final analysis tracks changes in over time for the 77 treated schools and 934 potential comparison schools, including 29 “always-women’s” colleges that did not adopt coeducation during our sample period.
B. HERI data on freshman women’s characteristics
To examine the effect of coeducation on the composition of newly-enrolled women, we require panel information on the underlying abilities and curricular preferences of women and their peers. We collect these data from the CIRP Freshman Survey, which is produced by the Higher Education Research Institute (HERI) at UCLA (Higher Education Research Institute, 2020). Our sample includes nearly 13 million college freshmen who entered baccalaureate institutions between 1966 and 2006. The survey elicits information from entering freshmen at these participating institutions on their college and career plans, academic preparedness, and other characteristics. Staff at HERI linked these data to our data on coeducation dates, allowing us to study the evolution of these outcomes before and after schools adopted coeducation.
One drawback of the Freshman Survey is that it is not collected at all schools, nor is it collected regularly at all participating colleges. Because our research design requires observing schools both before and after the transition to coeducation, we limit our HERI sample to institutions that appear at least once in the five years before and once in the 10 years after coeducation. This leaves us with 30 treated institutions. As shown in Appendix Figure A2, most but not all of these schools are present in any given year: we observe the average treated school 9.5 times in the 15-year window surrounding the transition to coeducation. Our pool of potential comparison schools consists of 127 that did not transition to coeducation during our sample period and that provided data in the same set of academic years as our treated schools.
Appendix Table A2 compares pre-treatment institutional characteristics, as measured in the IPEDS data, between the main IPEDS sample of switchers and the HERI subsample. The samples are very similar in terms of shares of women majoring in STEM, total enrollment, and (very low) number of graduate degrees awarded. In addition, similar shares of each sample are under private control, are affiliated with the Catholic church, and are rated as selective. The table also reports characteristics of treated institutions that were excluded from the main sample. The excluded sample is similar to the main sample, although it contains a lower average share of women majoring in STEM, is less Catholic, and is less selective.
III. Empirical Strategy
Our goal is to estimate the average treatment effect of adopting coeducation on the distribution of fields studied by graduating women at historical women’s colleges. We are also interested in the mechanisms underlying any effects on degrees earned. Our difference-in-difference research design compares outcomes before and after coeducation (first difference) to contemporaneous trends at schools that did not alter the gender mix of the campus environment (second difference). Under a parallel trends assumption that we discuss in the next subsection, our estimates can be interpreted as the average treatment effect of coeducation on treated schools (ATT).
Our empirical strategy relies on a version of the difference-in-difference estimator proposed by Callaway and Sant’Anna (2021).9 Estimation proceeds in two steps.
First, for each school that transitioned to coeducation in year , we construct event-study estimates of the effect of coeducation on outcome (e.g., the share of women graduating in STEM at school in year ). From a set of untreated schools, we select a group of comparison schools that match school on a vector of baseline covariates. Then, we use observed outcome trends at school and comparison schools , relative to a chosen base period , to construct the following:
|  | (2) | 
where are non-negative weights that sum to 1. We define the base period as the five years prior to , and as the average outcome observed at school during this period.10 We define the weights as the re-scaled number of degrees awarded to women in the school’s first year in our sample: .
In the second step, we average our school-specific estimates across all treated schools by time relative to the year of treatment. That is, if is the year that school adopted coeducation, we construct ATT estimates at different event times . This yields a flexible estimate of the dynamic response of our outcomes of interest to the adoption of a coeducational campus environment. Specifically, our aggregate event-study parameters are constructed as:
|  | (3) | 
In addition, to provide a summary measure and increase statistical power, we construct estimates that pool event-time into five-year periods after the transition to coeducation. We refer to these estimates as “short-run” and “long-run effects:
|  | (4) | 
|  | (5) | 
For all estimated parameters, we conduct inference using a block bootstrap clustered at the school level with 1,000 replications. We report standard 95% pointwise confidence intervals in our event-study figures. In Appendix C, we also report event-study results with more conservative confidence intervals that adjust for multiple hypothesis testing across event-study periods (Callaway and Sant’Anna, 2021).
A. Construction of comparison groups
Our school-specific estimates are unbiased under a standard parallel trends assumption: that the average outcome trend observed in comparison group equals the trend we would have observed at school in the absence of coeducation. In this subsection, we describe the process of choosing comparison groups for which this assumption is most plausible.11
Table 1 provides summary statistics that inform our choices of comparison groups. Column 1 presents average institutional characteristics for our main sample of treated schools, calculated in the relevant base period for each school. In these pre-coeducation years, one-tenth of graduates at treated schools earned degrees in STEM, and the annual growth in STEM was close to zero. The typical treated school had a small enrollment of around 1, 200 and conferred very few graduate degrees. Nearly all treated schools were privately controlled, 64% were affiliated with the Catholic church, and 19% were selective.12
Table 1—
|  | (1) Treated schools | (2) Untreated wom. clg. | (3) Difference (1)-(2) | (4) All untreated | (5) Difference (1)-(4) | 
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| Panel A: Differences between treated and candidate comparison schools |  |  |  |  |  | 
| STEM share of women’s degrees | 0.10 (0.05) | 0.12 (0.05) | −0.02** [0.04] | 0.08 (0.05) | 0.02*** [0.00] | 
| Annual growth rate, STEM | −0.005 (0.011) | −0.003 (0.010) | −0.002 [0.15] | −0.003 (0.015) | −0.003** [0.03] | 
| Total enrollment | 1226 (917) | 1162 (732) | 64 [0.64] | 6020 (7654) | −4794*** [0.00] | 
| Female share of all degrees | 0.97 (0.07) | 1.00 (0.02) | −0.02*** [0.01] | 0.47 (0.13) | 0.50*** [0.00] | 
| Graduate degrees awarded | 27 (51) | 15 (43) | 12* [0.07] | 233 (513) | −206*** [0.00] | 
| Private college | 0.92 (0.27) | 0.99 (0.11) | −0.07** [0.02] | 0.56 (0.50) | 0.35*** [0.00] | 
| Ever Catholic-affiliated | 0.64 (0.48) | 0.43 (0.49) | 0.21*** [0.01] | 0.07 (0.25) | 0.57*** [0.00] | 
| Selective admission | 0.19 (0.39) | 0.45 (0.50) | −0.26*** [0.00] | 0.15 (0.35) | 0.04 [0.41] | 
| Observations | 77 | 57 | 134 | 934 | 1,011 | 
| Panel B: Differences between treated and matched comparison schools |  |  |  |  |  | 
| STEM share of women’s degrees | 0.10 (0.05) | 0.10 (0.05) | −0.00 [0.98] | 0.09 (0.06) | 0.01 [0.14] | 
| Annual growth rate, STEM | −0.005 (0.011) | −0.004 (0.010) | −0.001 [0.34] | −0.006 (0.013) | 0.000 [1.00] | 
| Total enrollment | 1226 (917) | 1149 (675) | 77 [0.56] | 1537 (1283) | −304** [0.05] | 
| Female share of all degrees | 0.97 (0.07) | 0.99 (0.03) | −0.02** [0.04] | 0.59 (0.24) | 0.38*** [0.00] | 
| Graduate degrees awarded | 27 (51) | 15 (43) | 12* [0.06] | 38 (88) | −11 [0.34] | 
| Private college | 0.92 (0.27) | 0.99 (0.10) | −0.07** [0.02] | 0.92 (0.28) | 0.00 [1.00] | 
| Ever Catholic-affiliated | 0.64 (0.48) | 0.64 (0.48) | 0.00 [1.00] | 0.63 (0.48) | 0.00 [1.00] | 
| Selective admission | 0.19 (0.39) | 0.19 (0.39) | 0.00 [1.00] | 0.18 (0.38) | 0.00 [1.00] | 
| Observations | 77 | 54 | 131 | 496 | 571 | 
Note: Column 1 shows means (standard deviations) for our main treated sample of women’s colleges, averaged over the five years prior to each treated school transition to coeducation. Comparison group means in column 2 are constructed by matching each treated school with all women’s colleges that never transitioned, or transitioned at least ten years after . We then stack these comparison groups across all treated schools and compute sample means for the resultant “grand” group. Column 3 restricts to comparison schools that match school on selectivity and Catholic affiliation. Columns 4-5 show estimated differences in means [p-values] between treated and comparison samples. STEM share of women’s degrees is weighted by total degrees awarded to women, female share of degrees is weighted by total degrees awarded, and all other means are unweighted. Columns 6-9 show analogous statistics for the full comparison group of colleges. Column 7 matches on enrollment and annual growth rate of STEM, in addition to selectivity and Catholic affiliation.
Source: Data are drawn from IPEDS surveys, spanning 1966-2016, linked to hand-collected dates of transitions to coeducation by institution. See Section 2.1 for further information on sample construction and characteristics.
Columns 2-5 of panel A of Table 1 present statistics for two sets of possible comparison schools. For a given treated school , our preferred comparison set of untreated women’s colleges consists of women’s colleges that were treated at least 10 years after school , or never at all. A larger comparison set consists of all untreated colleges, i.e., all schools that were coeducational throughout our sample period. All statistics in these columns are re-weighted to represent the same academic years as the treated group.13 The set of untreated women’s colleges (Column 2) is similar in some respects to the sample of treated schools. However, Column 3, which provides formal tests of differences in means, shows that the treated sample has fewer STEM majors, is more likely to be Catholic-affiliated, and is less likely to be private or selective than the comparison set. The differences between the treated sample and the set of all untreated colleges are more stark (Columns 4-5): the untreated schools are much larger on average, award many more graduate degrees, and are less likely to be private or Catholic. In addition, women at these institutions were significantly less likely to major in STEM.
In panel B of Table 1, we repeat the exercise using the subset of candidate comparison schools that match our treated institutions on selected covariates. For the untreated women’s colleges set, our matching variables are indicators of Catholic affiliation and selectivity—the main dimensions of imbalance shown in Column 3. By construction, the treated and resultant comparison groups are now identical on these characteristics (Columns 2-3). However, the two groups are now also virtually identical on pre-treatment growth in STEM and the share of women choosing STEM. The between-group differences in the other characteristics remain small in magnitude.
For the comparison group of all untreated colleges, our matching variables are quintiles of school size (i.e., total degrees awarded) and quartiles of base period growth in STEM major choice, in addition to Catholic and selective indicators. Columns 4 and 5 show that this procedure also largely eliminates observable differences between the treated group and the resultant comparison group. The comparison group is still slightly larger and, by construction, contains a higher baseline proportion of male students, but is otherwise very similar to the treated group.
For robustness, we construct two additional matched comparison groups: a never-treated women’s colleges group that includes only the 29 schools that never adopted coeducation during our sample period, and a group that includes all coeducational or women-only institutions specified as liberal arts colleges by the 1987 Carnegie Classification system. Appendix Table A1 provides the details.14
It is important to note that pre-treatment balance on observed characteristics is not necessary for the validity of our research design. However, the achievement of balance or near-balance on a variety of characteristics may inspire confidence in the key identification assumption that treated and comparison groups experience similar trends in unobserved determinants of major choice. We test this assumption in several ways. First, our event-study approach enables us to estimate for years prior to coeducation (): a series of coefficients that depart significantly from 0 would be suggestive of a violation of parallel trends. We assess the robustness of pre-trend estimates across our 4 comparison groups as well as 6 other specifications presented in Appendix Figure A1. Second, in Appendix D, we estimate a synthetic control specification and verify that the results match our event study specifications. Third, in the next subsection, we test for confounding effects arising from correlation between the timing of coeducation and labor market shocks that alter the returns to STEM.
B. Tests for confounding labor market shocks
We use the March CPS to construct four measures of labor market conditions at the state-year level (Ruggles et al., 2020), and assign these measures to colleges by state of location and year. Then, we use our event-study framework to test for changes in these measures around the timing of coeducation (Pei, Pischke and Schwandt, 2018). If the resultant estimates depart substantially from 0, it could suggest that our main results are driven not by coeducation, but rather by gender-neutral, external labor-market forces that have previously been shown to impact students’ college major choices (Willis and Rosen, 1979; Altonji, Blom and Meghir, 2012; Altonji, Arcidiacono and Maurel, 2016).
The results of these exercises are shown in Figure A3. We find no effect on the unemployment rate, a common measure of the overall health of the labor market. The event-study is quite flat, with the 95% confidence interval generally ruling out any effects larger than one-half of 1 percent in either direction. We also find no correlation between coeducation and the ratio of employment in STEM-related occupations to employment in non-STEM occupations among college-educated workers (our estimated long-run effect is −0.0013 with a standard error or 0.0035). We do find a short-run increase in the earnings of male workers in STEM occupations (relative to male workers in non-STEM occupations) following coeducation (panel C). However, to the extent that this estimate indicates an increase in demand for STEM workers, we would expect it to increase the share of students majoring in STEM fields. Furthermore, this effect dissipates after a few years, and the estimated long-run effect is indistinguishable from 0 (0.043, s.e. 0.034). Finally, the relative earnings among women in STEM occupations exhibits a slight decrease, but just as is the case for men, it quickly dissipates and is indistinguishable from 0 in the long run (−0.014, s.e. 0.023).
IV. Main Results
Figure 3 presents our main event-study estimates of the effect of coeducation on the share of women graduating in STEM. Consistent with the assumption of parallel trends, we see estimates very close to 0 with little evidence of a trend break in the years prior to the adoption of coeducation. Recall that our data measures baccalaureate degrees awarded, so the estimates for the first two years of coeducation primarily represent the field choices of women who were juniors or seniors when the first cohort of male freshmen arrived on campus. Most of these women would have chosen their majors and taken their core classes prior to the reform. In contrast, most of the women who graduated in the third year of coeducation (event time ) would have spent the bulk of their college experience in a mixed-sex environment. Thus, the sharp drop beginning at event time 2 is exactly what we would expect if the arrival of men discouraged women from choosing STEM programs. This pattern is remarkably similar across all 4 of our comparison groups.
Table 2 presents estimates of the “long-run” effect on women’s choice of major, constructed using equation 5. Our main specification (Panel A) finds that coeducation induced a 3.0 percentage-point decline in the share of women majoring in STEM. To provide context for this estimate, the second row records the predicted share of women majoring in STEM in the long run (event times 5 to 9) under the counterfactual scenario in which the college did not transition to coeducation. We compute these counterfactual shares by adding the contemporaneous average trend in STEM majoring at comparison schools (i.e., the second term in equation 2) onto the pre-treatment average share of women students majoring in STEM at treated schools. Table 2 reports a counterfactual share of 9.9%—relative to this baseline, coeducation caused a 3.0/9.9 = 30% decline in the share of women majoring in STEM. Our alternative specifications, presented in Panels B-D, show similar but slightly larger estimates. Our estimated effects on STEM are statistically significantly different from 0 in all specifications.
Table 2—
|  | (1) STEM | (2) Biology | (3) Phys science | (4) Math | (5) Economics | 
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| Panel A: Not-yet-treated comparison group |  |  |  |  |  | 
| Long-run effect | −0.030*** (0.0077) | −0.017*** (0.0040) | −0.0058*** (0.0017) | −0.0059* (0.0033) | −0.0062* (0.0032) | 
| Counterfactual mean | 0.099 | 0.060 | 0.016 | 0.019 | 0.013 | 
| Observations | 5,505 | 5,505 | 5,505 | 5,505 | 5,505 | 
| Panel B: All-college comparison group |  |  |  |  |  | 
| Long-run effect | −0.031*** (0.0067) | −0.014*** (0.0045) | −0.0064*** (0.0022) | −0.0082*** (0.0031) | −0.0081** (0.0033) | 
| Counterfactual mean | 0.103 | 0.057 | 0.017 | 0.022 | 0.014 | 
| Observations | 27,618 | 27,618 | 27,618 | 27,618 | 27,618 | 
| Panel C: Never-treated comparison group |  |  |  |  |  | 
| Long-run effect | −0.035*** (0.0092) | −0.018*** (0.0046) | −0.0060*** (0.0019) | −0.0088** (0.0041) | −0.0089** (0.0037) | 
| Counterfactual mean | 0.103 | 0.060 | 0.016 | 0.022 | 0.016 | 
| Observations | 5,164 | 5,164 | 5,164 | 5,164 | 5,164 | 
| Panel D: Liberal arts college comparison group |  |  |  |  |  | 
| Long-run effect | −0.035*** (0.0059) | −0.018*** (0.0039) | −0.0067*** (0.0018) | −0.0082*** (0.0028) | −0.0074*** (0.0028) | 
| Counterfactual mean | 0.105 | 0.062 | 0.017 | 0.021 | 0.014 | 
| Observations | 20,954 | 20,954 | 20,954 | 20,954 | 20,954 | 
Note: Table displays the estimated effect of the switch to coeducation on graduating female students’ choice of major, estimated using from equation 5. Each panel uses the specified pool of institutions to construct a comparison group and estimate a counterfactual trend in major choices, conditional on college selectivity and historical affiliation with the Catholic Church. In panel B, we additionally condition on school size, as measured by number of degrees granted, and the trend in STEM choice among all students. Standard errors are estimated using a block bootstrap with 1,000 replications that accounts for intracluster correlation at the institution level. Counterfactual mean is the share of women that would have chosen each major at treated schools if choices at those schools had followed trends at the comparison group of institutions.
Source: Data drawn from IPEDS surveys, spanning 1966-2016, linked to hand-collected dates of transitions to coeducation by institution.
Our main result is robust to a wide variety of alternative methods of constructing the comparison group. Appendix Figure A1 presents several robustness checks. Using the preferred control group specification, Panel A shows that the treatment effect estimates change little when 1) treated schools that were originally excluded are returned to the sample; 2) the main treated sample is restricted to the HERI sub-sample; or 3) early switchers (1969-1971) are excluded from the main treated sample. (In the second case, the pre-trend estimates are slightly different from the main sample, although they display a slight upward pre-trend that works against our finding.) Panel B shows robustness of the estimates to: 4) the inclusion of Census division as an additional matching variable; 5) defining liberal arts colleges according to the Carnegie classification rather than our graduate-degree-based measure; 6) using a standard two-way fixed-effects regression estimator; or 7) using a synthetic control estimation approach (see Appendix D for detail).
A. Components of STEM
Figure 4 provides estimates of the effect of coeducation on the share of women earning degrees in a more specific set of quantitative fields. Panels A through C report event study estimates for three main components of STEM: biology, math, and physical sciences. These account for more than 97 percent of all baseline STEM majors in our main treated sample. Panel D considers economics, which is not included in our definition of STEM but is nevertheless highly quantitative. All 4 sets of event studies display similar patterns to the overall STEM event study—a flat pre-trend that breaks downward in the third or fourth year of coeducation before stabilizing in the long run.
Columns 2 through 5 of Table 2 report our estimates of the long-run effect on each field. The preferred estimates indicate a 1.7 percentage-point decline in the share of women majoring in biology, a 0.6 percentage-point decline for physical sciences, a 0.6 percentage-point decline for math, and a 0.6 percentage-point decline for economics. The estimates are all statistically significant at the 10% level or lower. Panels B-D report estimates based on our alternative comparison groups, and once again show slightly larger and more statistically significant declines.
B. The distribution of field choices
What fields were chosen by women at former women’s colleges in lieu of STEM and economics? To answer this question, we classify all individual majors into eleven major concentrations: STEM, art, business, economics, education, health, home economics, humanities, psychology, social sciences other than economics and psychology, and all other fields.15 We then estimate the long-run effect on each field using equation 5.
Panel A of Figure 5 presents the estimated long-run effects on each field, ranked in increasing order.16 STEM experienced the largest outflows of women, with business and economics experiencing smaller outflows. In contrast, we estimate that health, psychology and social sciences other than economics experienced inflows of women, although none of these estimates are statistically significant.
Panel B of Figure 5 presents semi-elasticity responses that account for the relative sizes of each field by dividing each estimate in Figure 5 by the counterfactual proportion of women majoring in the field.
After rescaling by field size in this way, the gender-normative pattern of substitution strengthens: Economics, STEM, and business experience the greatest proportional outflows of women, while social sciences other than economics, health, and psychology experience the greatest inflows. Overall, these results provide strong evidence that the coeducation of women’s colleges sparked substantial changes in the degrees earned by women. In the next section, we turn to the mechanisms that may explain these results.
V. Mechanisms
As discussed in Section I.B, if the switch to coeducation affected women’s enrollment decisions, the results reported in section IV could be attributed to a composition effect that altered the preferences or abilities of the female student body. In addition, these responses could be due to environmental effects, i.e., women’s progress toward degrees in certain fields may have been shaped by the changing campus environment, conditional on having enrolled. We explore these possibilities below. Our analysis suggests that composition effects played a limited role, if any, in driving changes in women’s educational choices. Our data and research design are less informative about the precise nature of the environmental effect, which could itself be classified into a number of distinct mechanisms. However, we argue that the evidence is most consistent with environmental mechanisms operating through greater exposure to male peers and faculty as the primary cause of the decline in the share of women majoring in quantitative fields.
A. Exposure to male peers and faculty
We begin by exploring the impact of coeducation on the gender mix of the campus environment. While the reform almost mechanically increases the presence of men, the size of this effect is not clear ex ante.
Panel A of Figure 6 reports event-study estimates of the effect of coeducation on the share of freshmen who were male. The male share rose steadily for several years before beginning to level off at one-fifth to one-quarter of entering students. The male share of graduating students rose somewhat more slowly: the long-run estimate of the male share in our preferred sample is 0.192, indicating that the male share of graduates increased by 19.2 percentage points by years 5 to 9 post-transition (Column 3 of Table A3).
Since these men were disproportionately likely to choose quantitative fields (recall Figure 2), these results suggest that women, particularly in STEM-related classrooms, experienced substantial inflows of male peers. Panel A of Figure A9 shows that the coeducation-driven change in the share of women majoring in a field was negatively correlated with the predicted share of men choosing that field.17 This pattern holds within our “quantitative” fields of biology, math, physical science, and economics, as well as in general. This negative correlation is merely suggestive, but it is consistent with the theory that women’s field-choice responses were partially driven by specific exposure to men in the classroom.
Next, we examine the gender composition of the faculty. In fall 1971, women made up 51% of faculty at women’s colleges, compared to only 22% at coeducational institutions in our sample. Although information on faculty in the IPEDS data is spotty, we observe faculty numbers by sex in select fall semesters between 1971 and 1989, after which it is reported consistently. Event-study estimates of the male share of faculty are presented in Panel B of Figure 6. We observe a small increase, with a statistically significant long-run estimate of 4.5 percentage points (12%, see Table A3). This effect is about one-fifth the size of the observed 21.1-percentage-point increase in the male share of freshmen and 21.6-percentage-point increase in the male share of undergraduates. The increase in male peers is also much larger relative to the base share (of nearly zero percent). Overall, these results suggest a greater potential for gendered peer effects, relative to role model effects, to influence women’s field choices.18
B. Other features of campus environment
We next explore the possibility that the adoption of coeducation was accompanied by changes in gender-neutral features of the college environment. For example, if the admission of men altered the distribution of academic ability among the study body, it may have affected the level of competition (e.g., for grades or other career-advancing opportunities like internships) in STEM-related classrooms, pushing women into other majors (Fischer, 2017).
We study the impact on academic competition by using the HERI Freshman Survey data to rank all entering freshmen in each school and year by their high school grade point averages (GPAs). (GPA is the most consistently observed measure of student ability in the data.) We then estimate the effect of coeducation on female students’ average rank within their class. As shown in Panel C of Figure 6, we document a statistically significant 4 percentile increase in the average woman’s ability position. This result suggests that, to the extent that gender-neutral academic competition is important in determining field choices, coeducation would have driven more women into competitive majors.19
Another way coeducation could have increased gender-neutral pressures is by leading classrooms to become crowded — or even so full that women could not enroll in them. While we do not observe detailed data on classroom size, we can evaluate the possibility that average classroom size changed by analyzing student-faculty ratios. The results in Panel D of Figure 6 suggest that schools quickly increased their faculty ranks to keep up with the influx of male students. After a small and statistically insignificant bump in years 2 and 3, the student-faculty ratio kept pace or even fell at former women’s colleges relative to our preferred comparison group.
We also consider whether transitioning colleges changed course offerings in a bid to attract additional students or due to budgetary shortfalls. Although we exclude colleges that closed shortly after the transition to coeducation (and verified in Figure A1 that including these schools did not affect our STEM estimates), it is possible that operational schools de-funded lab spaces or otherwise changed course offerings in a manner that discouraged quantitative field choices. We construct a proxy for course catalogs by counting the number of individual majors in which a degree was awarded at school in year , using the most disaggregated field definitions possible in the IPEDS data.20 The resulting estimates in Panel E of Figure 6 are small and statistically insignificant, suggesting little change in the menu of degree options available to students. The estimates in Panel F provide a related test of changes in instructional expenditures per student. Once again, we find no evidence of substantial changes in this educational input.
Finally, in Appendix section F, we perform a complementary test of the hypothesis that coeducation created capacity constraints that limited the production of STEM graduates. The logic behind this test is that in the face of binding resource constraints, a women’s college might choose to open its doors to men (to expand tuition revenue) and curtail its most expensive programs (to cut costs). To assess this hypothesis, we compare overall growth in degrees earned by field following coeducation to field-specific estimates of the marginal cost of instruction from Hemelt et al. (2018). Contrary to the hypothesis, we find a slight positive correlation between marginal cost and growth in degrees earned, both within STEM fields and overall. These findings suggest that the estimated effect of coeducation on women’s STEM major choices was not driven by binding resource constraints.
C. Student preferences and characteristics
Another important hypothesis is that coeducation induced a composition effect, i.e., that the women enrolling in the newly coeducational environment were ex ante less likely to choose STEM fields.
It is important to note that students’ field and career choices are far from determined when they enroll: their decisions are shaped substantially by the campus environment and other factors over their collegiate careers (Zafar, 2011; Stange, 2012; Gong, Stinebricker and Stinebrickner, 2019; Owen, 2020; Patnaik, Wiswall and Zafar, 2020). Even among students who formally declare a STEM major, nearly half end up switching to another field or dropping out (Altonji, Arcidiacono and Maurel, 2016). The literature does, however, establish moderate relationships between eventual field choices and baseline factors such as preferences for coursework and careers (e.g., Zafar, 2013), expectations about family (e.g., Wiswall and Zafar, 2021), the influence of parents and other family members (Patnaik, Wiswall and Zafar, 2020), and academic ability (e.g., Zafar, 2011; Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner, 2014).
We use the HERI data to estimate the effects of coeducation on several of these factors. We begin with our most direct and powerful predictor: freshman women’s field preferences. The first four panels of Figure 7 show event-study estimates of the effect of coeducation on the share of newly-enrolled freshman women intending to major in STEM and its largest components: biology, physical sciences, and math.21 The event studies are mostly flat, absent a few statistically insignificant and transitory changes. In all cases, the event study figures bear little resemblance to the sharp decreases in actual choice of major that we observe in Figures 4 and A1.22 Table 3 summarizes by presenting estimated long-run effects for each major, using each of our three comparison groups. Across all outcomes and comparison groups, our estimates are small and never statistically distinguishable from 0.
Table 3—
|  | (1) STEM | (2) Biology | (3) Math | (4) Phys science | 
|---|---|---|---|---|
| Panel A: Not-yet-treated comparison group |  |  |  |  | 
| Long-run effect | 0.016 (0.026) | −0.0064 (0.015) | 0.011 (0.015) | 0.011 (0.0092) | 
| Counterfactual mean | 0.090 | 0.080 | 0.005 | 0.006 | 
| Observations | 1,426 | 1,426 | 1,426 | 1,426 | 
| Panel B: All-college comparison group |  |  |  |  | 
| Long-run effect | 0.011 (0.013) | 0.0056 (0.013) | 0.0052 (0.0068) | 0.0002 (0.0024) | 
| Counterfactual mean | 0.082 | 0.065 | 0.005 | 0.012 | 
| Observations | 4,680 | 4,680 | 4,680 | 4,680 | 
| Panel C: Never-treated comparison group |  |  |  |  | 
| Long-run effect | 0.018 (0.027) | −0.0052 (0.016) | 0.012 (0.016) | 0.012 (0.0097) | 
| Counterfactual mean | 0.092 | 0.081 | 0.005 | 0.006 | 
| Observations | 1,400 | 1,400 | 1,400 | 1,400 | 
| Panel D: Liberal arts college comparison group |  |  |  |  | 
| Long-run effect | 0.0052 (0.013) | −0.0087 (0.013) | 0.0099 (0.0086) | 0.0040 (0.0042) | 
| Counterfactual mean | 0.088 | 0.076 | 0.003 | 0.008 | 
| Observations | 9,083 | 9,083 | 9,083 | 9,083 | 
Note: Table displays estimates long-run effect effect of women’s colleges’ switch to coeducation on the degree intentions of entering freshman women. Effects are derived from the estimator of Callaway and Sant’Anna (2021) using equation 2 and aggregating cohort-level effects using equation 5. Each panel uses the specified pool of institutions to construct a comparison group and estimate a counterfactual trend in major choices, conditional on college selectivity and historical affiliation with the Catholic Church. For each treated school, comparison group is also limited to schools that participated in the HERI Freshman Survey in the same years from 5 years before to 10 years after the transition to coeducation. In panel B, we additionally condition on pre-reform school size, as measured by number of entering freshman students in our sample. Counterfactual mean is the estimated share of women intending to choose each major at treated schools if those schools had followed trends at the comparison group of institutions.
The final two panels of Figure 7 present event-study estimates for career and family ambitions. We find no evidence of a decline in the share of freshman women who report an interest in a career in science (Panel E). If anything, there is a slight increase in event years 6 and 7 that then reverses. Panel F tests for changes in the share of freshman women who say that raising a family is either a “very important” or “essential” personal goal. We estimate a remarkably flat pattern, suggesting that coeducation did not increase the family-related goals of the subsequent female student body.
Next, we consider changes in other characteristics that may predict students’ propensity to choose quantitative majors, such as academic ability and parental background. Panels A and B of Figure 8 test for changes in the HERI data’s best measure of academic ability, high school GPA. Following the switch to coeducation, there was no decrease in the share of women earning at least an A, or at least an A-. (Effects at lower points in the distribution are similar and shown in Appendix Figure A10.) If anything, our preferred estimates show slight long-run increases that are statistically insignificant.
Panels C through F of Figure 8 show small and statistically insignificant changes in various other characteristics that we might expect to be correlated with academic choices. In panel C, we see no change in the racial composition of women entering newly coeducational colleges. We also see little evidence of a change in parents’ educational background. Entering women were no more likely to be first-generation college attendees (panel D), and no more likely to have parents with college degrees (panels E and F).
D. How large could the composition effect be?
As discussed in the previous section, we find no evidence that coeducation systematically altered a variety of characteristics related to students’ propensities to choose quantitative majors. An alternative approach would combine a large set of freshman characteristics to construct a predicted share who would be expected to major in STEM, and then study the evolution of this measure after the transition to coeducation. We turn to this approach as another test of composition effects and to calculate a reasonable upper bound on the extent to which composition effects could explain our main results.
This approach requires two pieces of information. First, we need to know the effects of coeducation on freshman characteristics. We can estimate these effects using our HERI Freshman Survey data. Second, we need to know the marginal effects of these characteristics on the probability of graduating with a STEM degree. We estimate these effects using a sample of women from the National Longitudinal Study of 1972 (NLS72), which follows students from high school into adulthood between 1972 and 1986 (National Center for Education Statistics, 1999).23 The value of these data is that they provide individual measures of pre-college characteristics linked to field of degree earned. In addition, the sample was drawn at a time relatively close to the date of transition to coeducation for the bulk of our sample.
Using our NLS72 sample, we estimate , where is an indicator for earning a degree in a STEM field and is a vector of characteristics measured in student freshman year or earlier. We then interact the vector of coefficients, , with the characteristics of students in our HERI Freshman Survey data to predict the share of women in each year and school who will earn a major in STEM. Finally, we use this predicted share as the outcome in our main specification to estimate the long-run effect of coeducation on the share of entering freshman women who would be expected ex ante to major in a STEM field.
Panel A of Table 4 presents our estimates of from the NLS72. By far the most predictive baseline characteristic of eventually majoring in STEM is intending to major in STEM. This characteristic alone explains about 19% of the variation in attainment of a STEM degree. Our estimates in column 1 suggest that women who intend to major in STEM are nearly 34 percentage points more likely to do so (relative to the overall mean of 8%, or 3% among women who did not plan to major in STEM). In columns 2-4, we add other measures that may play a role in eventual choice of field: career and family aspirations, parents’ occupation and education, and high school grades and coursework. The coefficient on STEM intentions changes little, and the R-squared barely budges, rising to only 0.215 in our most detailed specification. These results suggest STEM intentions are a relatively powerful predictor of eventual major, and are also in line with the literature suggesting that students’ experiences during college play a large role in choice of major (Arcidiacono, 2004; Zafar, 2011; Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner, 2014; Gong, Stinebricker and Stinebrickner, 2019; Astorne-Figari and Speer, 2019; Patnaik, Wiswall and Zafar, 2020).
Table 4—
|  | (1) | (2) | (3) | (4) | 
|---|---|---|---|---|
| Panel A: Effect of freshman characteristics on women’s likelihood of earning STEM degree |  |  |  |  | 
| Effect of intent to major in STEM | 0.336*** (0.040) | 0.333*** (0.040) | 0.332*** (0.040) | 0.317*** (0.041) | 
| Covariates: |  |  |  |  | 
| Career, family aspirations |  | X | X | X | 
| Parental education, occupation |  |  | X | X | 
| High school grades, coursework |  |  |  | X | 
| R-squared | 0.191 | 0.199 | 0.205 | 0.215 | 
| Observations | 1,235 | 1,235 | 1,235 | 1,235 | 
| Panel B: Effect of coeducation on predicted share of female freshmen who will major in STEM, preferred comparison group |  |  |  |  | 
| Estimated composition effect | 0.005 (0.008) | 0.009 (0.010) | 0.009 (0.010) | 0.012 (0.011) | 
| Composition effect / Total effect of coeducation on STEM major choice | −16% | −28% | −27% | −37% | 
| Composition effect upper bound | 32% | 32% | 31% | 29% | 
| Panel C: Effect of coeducation on predicted share of female freshmen who will major in STEM, all-college comparison group |  |  |  |  | 
| Estimated composition effect | 0.004 (0.005) | 0.001 (0.006) | 0.002 (0.006) | 0.001 (0.006) | 
| Composition effect / Total effect of coeducation on STEM major choice | −11% | −4% | −5% | −4% | 
| Composition effect upper bound | 16% | 29% | 28% | 29% | 
Note: Panel A reports regression estimates of the effect of intention to major in STEM as of freshman year on share of students earning STEM degree, derived from sample of women in National Longitudinal Study of 1972. Panels B and C report implied long-run effect on the predicted share of freshman women at newly coeducational colleges who will major in STEM, estimated using equation 5 and sample of women from the HERI Freshman Survey. Predicted share in STEM is constructed by interacted coefficients from the regressions in panel A with characteristics of entering freshman women in the HERI data. Share of total effect explained by composition is constructed by dividing predicted STEM effect by estimated effect of coeducation on the share of women earning STEM degree from our linked IPEDS-HERI data (−0.034, see Panel A of Figure A1). Upper bound on composition effect is constructed by dividing lower bound of 95% confidence interval of predicted STEM effect by −0.034. See Appendix Table A7 for estimates drawing on alternative comparison groups.
In the lower panels of Table 4, we evaluate the effect of coeducation on the predicted share of entering freshman women who will major in STEM, which is calculated using intent to major in STEM and the characteristics specified as covariates in panel A. Panel B reports estimates using our preferred comparison group. Using only intended major, we find a slight increase in the predicted STEM share of one-half of one percentage point. Recall that our linked HERI-IPEDS subsample suggested a 3.4 percentage-point decrease in STEM degree attainment; this implies that composition changes explain 0.5/ – 3.4 or −16% of the overall effect on coeducation.24 A more conservative approach to quantifying the composition effect would be to consider the lower bound on the 95% confidence interval for the effect on the predicted share in STEM. In this case, the composition effect can explain a decrease of at most 1.1 percentage points, or 32% of the overall decrease in STEM.
In panel C of Table 4, we conduct the same exercise using estimates from our comparison group comprised of all colleges that did not adopt coeducation during our sample period. In this case, we bound the composition effect at 16%-29% of the overall effect. We report the same exercise for our other two comparison groups in Appendix Table A7 and find similar results.
In sum, our main point estimates of the composition effect are close to zero or are even positive, which could occur if the arrival of men on campus caused a shift toward more STEM-inclined women who were undeterred from mixed-gender competition. A more conservative interpretation of our results, however, is that we can rule out moderately negative composition effects. Overall, the evidence suggests that the decline in women majoring in STEM at former women’s colleges can be attributed primarily to changes in the campus environment – the most important of which was the increase in male peers.
VI. Discussion
Our paper takes advantage of a unique natural experiment in the history of American higher education—the transitions of hundreds of women’s colleges to coeducation at varying times during the 1960s-2000s—to isolate the contributions of mixed-gender collegiate environments to gender disparities in field choice. This analysis expands a literature that has emphasized the role of non-pecuniary factors, such as subjective beliefs and preferences, on major choice, but has produced relatively little evidence on how major choices actually respond to changes in non-pecuniary features of the environment.
Drawing on a newly assembled historical dataset, we report event-study estimates that compare the evolution of women’s major choices at newly coeducational colleges to those at comparable colleges that transitioned at different times (or did not transition at all). In the long run, we find that the share of women majoring in STEM fell by around 3.0-3.5 percentage points (30-33%) relative to control colleges. We also estimate negative effects of coeducation on women’s likelihoods of earning degrees in economics and business.
While our data and research design cannot pinpoint the precise mechanisms behind this shift, we are able to rule out some important channels. We find little evidence that coeducation altered the STEM preferences or preparedness of matriculating women. Our bounding exercises suggest that even under the most conservative assumptions, composition changes can explain less than one-third of the overall observed effect. Examining “gender-neutral” features of the campus environment, we find no evidence that coeducation created stricter competition for grades and opportunities in STEM-related classrooms, changed the menu of courses offered, or created capacity constraints in high-cost fields. However, we show that coeducation dramatically altered the gender mix of students and – to a lesser extent – faculty. We therefore conclude that the bulk of the evidence suggests that women’s exit from STEM fields was driven by greater exposure to male peers and a small decrease in opportunities for women to interact with same-gender faculty role models.
What do our estimates imply about the overall gender gap in STEM observed in recent years? According to our 2016 data, 28 percent of baccalaureate degrees awarded to men were in STEM fields, but only 11.5 percent of degrees awarded to women were in STEM fields. We can construct an estimate of the contribution of coeducation to this gap with a simple extrapolation of our main results. Note that in 2016, 57 percent of total degrees were awarded to women, so the average woman’s potential peer group was 43 percent male. As discussed in Section V.A, coeducation caused a 21.6 percentage-point increase in the male share of undergraduates and a 3.0 percentage-point decline in the share of women graduating with STEM degrees. Thus, a 43-percentage-point reduction in the male share of undergraduates would be associated with a 3.0 · 43/21.6 = 5.97-percentage-point increase in the share of women majoring in STEM. This amounts to 36 percent of the 16.5-percentage-point gap. This 43/21.6 scaling factor assumes that our main estimate of the effect of coeducation on women’s STEM majoring is driven exclusively by greater exposure to male peers, but is consistent with our finding that coeducation caused negligible changes to student composition or other environmental features. 25
Of course, this counterfactual exercise must be qualified in several respects. Our main samples of treated and comparison colleges primarily contain students who live on campus, which is less often true of students at 4-year colleges today. In addition, most coeducation events occurred in the 1960s-80s, when gender roles may have been more salient than they are today. These considerations suggest that our exercise overstates the aggregate role of coeducational environments. On the other hand, the men who entered newly coeducational colleges were less likely than the average man to enter traditionally male fields (Figure 2). This suggests that women at newly coeducational colleges faced less competition from men in STEM classrooms than would be predicted based on the male share of the student body—implying that our exercise understates the aggregate role of coeducational environments.
In either case, our findings suggest that the way gender is understood and performed26 within coeducational college environments contributes meaningfully to gender disparities in field choice. Our results have implications for ongoing initiatives that infuse features of single-sex learning environments into coeducational settings, such as coding academies for girls, mentoring for freshman women by upperclasswomen, and the creation of academic clubs and conferences for women in STEM. For instance, to increase the proportion of women in computer engineering, Harvey Mudd College has provided first-year students opportunities to attend the Grace Hopper Celebration of Women in Computing conference (Corbett and Hill, 2015). While a large-scale return to single-sex education is unlikely, policies such as these may be effective in closing the persistent gender gap in college major choice.
Supplementary Material
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Martha Bailey, Dan Bernhardt, John Bound, Charlie Brown, Angela Cools, Manasi Deshpande, Chloe East, Rita Ginja, Donna Ginther, Yifan Gong, Sara Heller, Brian McCall, Marta Murray-Close, Stephanie Owen, Arpita Patnaik, Kevin Stange, Mel Stephens, Daniel Tannenbaum, Sarah Turner, Russell Weinstein, Basit Zafar, several anonymous Reviewers, and various conference and seminar participants for helpful feedback. We are grateful to Brantly Callaway and Pedro Sant’Anna for enlightening correspondence about their estimator. Ellen Stolzenberg provided invaluable assistance with the CIRP Freshman Survey. Riley Knust provided excellent research assistance. Calkins and Binder acknowledge financial support from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development of the National Institutes of Health under Award Number T32HD007339 and use of the services and facilities of the Population Studies Center at the University of Michigan, funded by the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute Of Child Health and Human Development of the National Institutes of Health under Award Number P2CHD041028. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health or the U.S. Census Bureau. A Rackham Graduate Research Grant from the University of Michigan provided additional support.
Footnotes
These statistics are from the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS). Throughout this paper we define STEM to include biological sciences, physical sciences, science technology, mathematics and statistics, engineering and engineering technology, and computer science.
Most health majors are in nursing or allied health fields, rather than pre-professional degree programs.
In addition, Dasgupta and Asgari (2004) found that students at a women’s college were less likely to form negative stereotypes about women’s STEM abilities than woman students at a coeducational college.
In an important study of the historical drivers of the rise and decline of single-sex education in the United States, Goldin and Katz (2011) also assembled data on institutions’ dates of conversion to from single-sex environments to coeducation. Although our data was collected independently, the time periods of the two datasets partially overlap, and we verify that our transition dates largely coincide during the era where it is possible to compare them. We thank the authors for generously providing their data.
The excluded schools include 23 that operated coordinate programs or merged with men’s colleges, 2 that did not meet the legal definition of “institutions of higher learning” under Title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965, 6 that closed shortly after the transition, and 10 that did not appear to offer STEM programs. Our main results are robust to including these schools: the estimated effect of coeducation on women’s STEM field choices is similar but slightly attenuated, consistent with the introduction of measurement error into the sample. See Appendix B.B2 and Figure A1 for further detail.
Until 1987, Title IX only applied to the particular program receiving federal money at private colleges, rather than all programs (Rim, 2020). Aside from student aid grants, colleges in our sample likely received little federal money: direct federal appropriations were unlikely, and the median expenditure on research reported in IPEDS per year was $0.
The data from the HEGIS 1970 issue on degrees awarded has historically not been available in digital form. We digitized this issue for our analysis.
We discuss the relationship between our empirical approach and the original Callaway and Sant’Anna (2021) estimator in further detail in Appendix C. A growing body of literature demonstrates the difficulty of interpreting estimates from conventional two-way fixed-effects regressions as ATTs in settings such as ours, where there is variation in treatment timing and where treatment effects are likely to be heterogeneous over time and across treated units (Borusyak, Jaravel and Spiess, 2021; Callaway and Sant’Anna, 2021; Goodman-Bacon, 2021; Sun and Abraham, 2021). Nevertheless, we also report estimates from a two-way fixed-effects regression in Figure A1.
For example, if school admitted its first coeducational class in , then .
The identification assumption underlying our estimate of the ATT parameter is weaker than this: we can have non-parallel trends at individual schools , so long as these average out to zero in the population of treated schools .
“Selective” refers to a 1972 Barron’s rating of 1-3. Some institutions were not rated by Barron’s—we code these institutions as non-selective.
We construct these statistics by first matching each treated school with all comparison-group candidates, e.g., all women’s colleges that transitioned at least ten years after or never at all. We then limit the years of consideration to the relevant base period , stack comparison groups for all treated schools , and compute sample means of the resultant stacked sample.
The vector of matching variables for never-treated women’s colleges includes indicators of Catholic affiliation and selectivity. The liberal arts college matching vector additionally includes bins of base-period trends in STEM major choice. Just as in panel B of Table 1, Columns 7 and 9 of Table A1 show that we achieve balance or near-balance on all relevant baseline variables.
“Other” contains a set of small majors, many of which were not likely offered by small private women’s colleges (e.g. agriculture and forestry). The ones that likely were offered include interdisciplinary majors and social services. See Appendix E.E1 for details on the construction of these groups.
Appendix Figure A5 and Appendix Tables A4 and A5 present the event study and long-run estimates for fields where these estimates are not reported in the main text.
The predicted share of men earning degrees in field is calculated by multiplying the share of men majoring in (the light blue bar in Figure 2) by the share of degrees granted to men, then dividing by the predicted share of all students receiving degrees in field .
Another way to bound the likely contribution of changes among the faculty is to draw on estimates from the literature on female role models. The best source for this exercise is Carrell, Page and West (2010), who report the effect of the female share of faculty on STEM degree receipt for women at the U.S. Air Force Academy. Their estimates for the full sample of students range from 0.010 (Table V, column 6) to 0.047 (Table VIII, column 6). Taking the larger of these two estimates, and combining it with the 4.5-percentage-point increase in the male share of faculty in our setting, we would expect coeducation-induced role model effects to lead to a 4.5 × 0.047 = 0.2-percentage-point decrease in the share of women earning STEM degrees, i.e., less than 10 percent of the total effect. While we interpret these estimates cautiously since they come from a very different setting (a male- dominated military academy), they suggest role model effects probably played at most a minor role in women’s departure from STEM programs.
We might still be concerned that these results for the average woman mask a pattern in which the highest-ability men sort into quantitative fields. We therefore repeat the exercise but limit the sample to freshmen who declared an intention to major in STEM. This restriction greatly restricts our sample size and statistical power, but we find no evidence that women saw more competition on academic ability in STEM classes: Our estimates are all statistically indistinguishable from 0 and range from a very small negative effect of −1 percentile to a substantially positive effect of 6 percentiles (Table A6).
Using this proxy, the average number of degrees offered among our switching colleges is 25.
The HERI data does not report intention to major in economics separately from other social sciences, so we do not include it in this analysis.
Note that this exercise is not a pure test of the composition effect: students could rationally anticipate an environmental effect from the arrival of male peers and change their intended coursework, even before matriculating. Nonetheless, the small effects on intended major that we document would suggest little scope for composition effects.
See Appendix G for more details on the NLS72 and construction of our sample.
Note that this calculation assumes no correlation between the effects on women’s STEM intentions and STEM degree receipt. Using a bootstrap on our linked HERI-IPEDS subsample, we estimate a correlation of −0.02 between the two statistics. This correlation near 0 is exactly what we would expect in the absence of composition effects.
A related interpretation would assume that male peer share is a sufficient statistic for exposure to coeducational environments, and thus that other environmental factors adjust in proportion to the change in the male share of peers. For example, we found that coeducation caused a 4.5 percentage-point increase in the male share of faculty along with the 21.6 percentage-point increase in male peers.
See Butler (1990).
Contributor Information
Avery Calkins, RAND Corporation.
Ariel J. Binder, U.S. Census Bureau
Dana Shaat, American Institutes for Research.
Brenden Timpe, University of Nebraska - Lincoln.
REFERENCES
- Akerlof George A., and Kranton Rachel E.. 2000. “Economics and identity.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(3): 715–753. [Google Scholar]
- Altonji JG, Arcidiacono P, and Maurel A. 2016. “Chapter 7 - The Analysis of Field Choice in College and Graduate School: Determinants and Wage Effects.” In Handbook of the Economics of Education. Vol. 5, , ed. Hanushek Eric A., Machin Stephen and Woessmann Ludger, 305–396. [Google Scholar]
- Altonji Joseph G., Blom Erica, and Meghir Costas. 2012. “Heterogeneity in Human Capital Investments: High School Curriculum, College Major, and Careers.” Annual Review of Economics, 4(1): 185–223. [Google Scholar]
- Arcidiacono Peter. 2004. “Ability sorting and the returns to college major.” Journal of Econometrics, 121(1–2): 343–375. [Google Scholar]
- Astorne-Figari Carmen, and Speer Jamin D.. 2019. “Are Changes of Major Major Changes? The Roles of Grades, Gender, and Preferences in College Major Switching.” Economics of Education Review, 70: 75–93. [Google Scholar]
- Bertrand Marianne. 2011. “New Perspectives on Gender.” Handbook of Labor Economics, 4b: 1543–1590. [Google Scholar]
- Bertrand Marianne. 2017. “The Glass Ceiling.” Becker Friedman Institute for Research in Economics 2018–38. [Google Scholar]
- Bertrand Marianne, Kamenica Emir, and Pan Jessica. 2015. “Gender identity and relative income within households.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121: 571–614. [Google Scholar]
- Billger Sherrilyn M. 2002. “Admitting men into a women’s college: A natural experiment.” Applied Economics Letters, 9(7): 479–483. [Google Scholar]
- Blau Francine D., and Kahn Lawrence M.. 2017. “The Gender Wage Gap: Extent, Trends, and Explanations.” Journal of Economic Literature, 55(3): 789–865. [Google Scholar]
- Booth Alison, and Nolen Patrick. 2012a. “Choosing to compete: How different are girls and boys?” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 81(2): 542–555. [Google Scholar]
- Booth Alison L., and Nolen Patrick. 2012b. “Gender differences in risk behaviour: does nurture matter?” The Economic Journal, 122(558): F56–F78. [Google Scholar]
- Borusyak Kirill, Jaravel Xavier, and Spiess Jann. 2021. “Revisiting event study designs: Robust and efficient estimation.” Unpublished working paper. [Google Scholar]
- Bostwick Valerie K., and Weinberg Bruce A.. 2022. “Nevertheless She Persisted? Gender Peer Effects in Doctoral STEM Programs.” Journal of Labor Economics, 40(2): 397–436. [DOI] [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
- Bottia Martha Cecilia, Stearns Elizabeth, Roslyn Arlin Mickelson Stephanie Moller, and Valentino Lauren. 2015. “Growing the roots of STEM majors: Female math and science high school faculty and the participation of students in STEM.” Economics of Education Review, 45: 14–27. [Google Scholar]
- Brenøe, Anne Ardila, and Ulf Zölitz. 2020. “Exposure to more female peers widens the gender gap in STEM participation.” Journal of Labor Economics, 38(4): 1009–1054. [Google Scholar]
- Brown Charles, and Corcoran Mary. 1997. “Sex-Based Differences in School Content and the Male-Female Wage Gap.” Journal of Labor Economics, 15(3): 431–465. [Google Scholar]
- Bursztyn Leonardo, Fujiwara Thomas, and Pallais Amanda. 2017. “Acting Wife: Marriage Market Incentives and Labor Market Investments.” American Economic Review, 107(11): 3288–3319. [Google Scholar]
- Butler Judith. 1990. Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity. New York, NY:Routledge. [Google Scholar]
- Calkins Avery. 2021. “Gender, grades, and college major during the dot-com crash.”
- Callaway Brantly, and Sant’Anna Pedro H. C.. 2021. “Difference-in-Differences with multiple time periods.” Journal of Econometrics, 225(2): 200–230. [Google Scholar]
- Card David, and Payne A. Abigail. 2017. “High School Choices and the Gender Gap in STEM.” NBER Working Paper 23769. [Google Scholar]
- Carrell Scott E., Page Marianne E., and West James E.. 2010. “Sex and science: How professor gender perpetuates the gender gap.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(3): 1101–1144. [Google Scholar]
- Ceci Stephen J., Ginther Donna K., Kahn Shulamit, and Williams Wendy M.. 2014. “Women in Academic Science: A Changing Landscape.” Psychological Science in the Public Interest: A Journal of the American Psychological Society, 15(3): 75–141. [DOI] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
- Ceci Stephen J., Williams Wendy M., and Barnett Susan M.. 2009. “Women’s underrepresentation in science: sociocultural and biological considerations.” Psychological Bulletin, 135(2): 218–261. [DOI] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
- Chamberlain Mariam K. 1988. Women in Academe: Progress and Prospects. Russell Sage Foundation. [Google Scholar]
- Corbett Christianne, and Hill Catherine. 2015. Solving the Equation: The Variables for Women’s Success in Engineering and Computing. Washington, DC:AAUW. [Google Scholar]
- Dasgupta Nilanjana, and Asgari Shaki. 2004. “Seeing is believing: Exposure to counterstereotypic women leaders and its effect on the malleability of automatic gender stereotyping.” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 40(5): 642–658. [Google Scholar]
- de Chaisemartin Clément, and Xavier DœHaultfmuille. 2020. “Two-Way Fixed Effects Estimators with Heterogeneous Treatment Effects.” American Economic Review, 110(9): 2964–2996. [Google Scholar]
- Fischer Stefanie. 2017. “The downside of good peers: How classroom composition differentially affects men’s and women’s STEM persistence.” Labour Economics, 46: 211–226. [Google Scholar]
- Gneezy U, Niederle M, and Rustichini A. 2003. “Performance in Competitive Environments: Gender Differences.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3): 1049–1074. [Google Scholar]
- Gneezy Uri, Leonard Kenneth L., and List John A.. 2009. “Gender Differences in Competition: Evidence From a Matrilineal and a Patriarchal Society.” Econometrica, 77(5): 1637–1664. [Google Scholar]
- Goldin Claudia. 2015. “Gender and the Undergraduate Economics Major: Notes on the Undergraduate Economics Major at a Highly Selective Liberal Arts College.” Harvard University. [Google Scholar]
- Goldin Claudia, and Katz Lawrence F.. 2011. “Putting the “Co” in education: Timing, reasons, and consequences of college coeducation from 1835 to the present.” Journal of Human Capital, 5(4): 377–417. [Google Scholar]
- Gong Yifan, Stinebricker Todd, and Stinebrickner Ralph. 2019. “Uncertainty about future income: Initial beliefs and resolution during college.” Quantitative Economics, 10: 604–641. [Google Scholar]
- Goodman-Bacon Andrew. 2021. “Difference-in-differences with variation in treatment timing.” Journal of Econometrics, 225(2): 254–277. [Google Scholar]
- Harwarth Irene, Maline Mindi, and DeBra Elizabeth. 1997. Women’s Colleges in the United States: History, Issues, and Challenges. [Google Scholar]
- Hemelt Steven W., Stange Kevin M., Furquim Fernando, Simon Andrew, and Sawyer John E.. 2018. “Why is math cheaper than English? Understanding cost differences in higher education.” NBER Working Paper 25314. [Google Scholar]
- Higher Education Research Institute. 2020. “CIRP Freshman Survey.” https://heri.ucla.edu/cirp-freshman-survey/. [Google Scholar]
- Hill Andrew J. 2015. “The Girl Next Door: The Effect of Opposite Gender Friends on High School Achievement.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7(3): 147–77. [Google Scholar]
- Hill Catherine, Corbett Christianne, St. Rose Andresse, and American Association of University Women. 2010. Why so few? women in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. Washington, D.C:AAUW. [Google Scholar]
- Hsieh Chang-Tai, Hurst Erik, Jones Charles I., and Klenow Peter J.. 2019. “The Allocation of Talent and U.S. Economic Growth.” Econometrica, 87(5): 1439–1474. [Google Scholar]
- Huntington-Klein Nick, and Rose Elaina. 2018. “Gender Peer Effects in a Predominantly Male Environment: Evidence from West Point.” AEA Papers and Proceedings, 108: 392–395. [Google Scholar]
- Hunt Jennifer. 2016. “Why do Women Leave Science and Engineering?” ILR Review, 69(1): 199–226. [Google Scholar]
- Kahn Shulamit, and Ginther Donna. 2017. “Women and STEM.” NBER Working Paper 23525. [Google Scholar]
- Kamas Linda, and Preston Anne. 2012. “The importance of being confident; gender, career choice, and willingness to compete.” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 83(1): 82–97. [Google Scholar]
- Kinzie Jillian (Jillian L.), Thomas Auden D, Palmer Megan M, Umbach Paul D, and Kuh George D. 2007. “Women Students at Coeducational and Women’s Colleges: How Do Their Experiences Compare?” Journal of College Student Development, 48(2): 145–165. [Google Scholar]
- Kofoed Michael S., and McGovney Elizabeth. 2019. “The Effect of Same-Gender or Same-Race Role Models on Occupation Choice Evidence from Randomly Assigned Mentors at West Point.” Journal of Human Resources, 54(2): 430–467. [Google Scholar]
- Miller-Bernal Leslie. 1993. “Single-sex versus coeducational environments: A comparison of women students’ experiences at four colleges.” American Journal of Education, 102(1): 23–54. [Google Scholar]
- Miller-Bernal Leslie, and Poulson Susan L.. 2004. Going coed: Women’s experiences in formerly men’s colleges and universities, 1950-2000. Vanderbilt University Press. [Google Scholar]
- National Center for Education Statistics. 1999. “National Longitudinal Study of the Class of 1972.” Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor]. 10.3886/ICPSR08085.v1. [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- National Center for Education Statistics. 2004. Higher Education General Information Survey 1965-1980. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor]. [Google Scholar]
- National Center for Education Statistics. 2019. “Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System 1980-2016.” https://nces.ed.gov/ipeds/use-the-data.
- Niederle Muriel, and Vesterlund Lise. 2007. “Do Women Shy Away From Competition? Do Men Compete Too Much?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(3): 1067–1101. [Google Scholar]
- Niederle Muriel, and Vesterlund Lise. 2008. “Gender Differences in Competition.” Negotiation Journal, 24(4): 447–463. [Google Scholar]
- Owen Stephanie. 2020. “College Field Specialization and Beliefs About Relative Performance: An Experimental Intervention to Understand Gender Gaps in STEM.” University of Michigan Working Paper. [Google Scholar]
- Patnaik Arpita, Wiswall Matthew, and Zafar Basit. 2020. “College majors.” Working paper. [Google Scholar]
- Pei Zhuan, Pischke Jorn-Steffen, and Schwandt Hannes. 2018. “Poorly measured confounders are more useful on the left than on the right.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics. [Google Scholar]
- Rim Nayoung. 2020. “The effect of title IX on gender disparity in graduate education.”
- Riordan Cornelius. 1994. “The Value of Attending a Women’s College.” The Journal of Higher Education, 65(4): 486–510. [Google Scholar]
- Ruggles Steven, Flood Sarah, Goeken Ronald, Grover Josiah, Meyer Erin, Pacas Jose, and Sobek Matthew. 2020. “IPUMS USA: Version 10.0 [dataset].” IPUMS, Minneapolis, MN. [Google Scholar]
- Schmader Toni. 2002. “Gender Identification Moderates Stereotype Threat Effects on Women’s Math Performance.” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 38(2): 194–201. [Google Scholar]
- Shan Xiaoyue. 2021. “Does minority status drive women out of male-dominated fields?” Unpublished manuscript.
- Shapiro Casey A., and Sax Linda J.. 2011. “Major selection and persistence for women in STEM.” New Directions for Institutional Research, 2011(152): 5–18. [Google Scholar]
- Sloane Carolyn, Hurst Erik, and Black Dan. 2019. “A cross-cohort analysis of human capital specialization and the college gender wage gap.” NBER Working Paper 26348. [Google Scholar]
- Smith Daryl G. 1990. “Women’s Colleges and Coed Colleges.” The Journal of Higher Education, 61(2): 181–197. [Google Scholar]
- Speer Jamin D. 2021. “Bye Bye Ms. American Sci: Women and the Leaky STEM Pipeline.” IZA Institute of Labor Economics IZA DP No. 14676. [Google Scholar]
- Stange Kevin M. 2012. “An empirical investigation of the option value of college enrollment.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4(1): 49–84. [Google Scholar]
- Steele Claude M. 1997. “A threat in the air: How stereotypes shape intellectual identity and performance.” American Psychologist, 52(6): 613–629. [DOI] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
- Stinebrickner Ralph, and Stinebrickner Todd R.. 2014. “A Major in Science? Initial Beliefs and Final Outcomes for College Major and Dropout.” The Review of Economic Studies, 81(1 (286)): 426–472. [Google Scholar]
- Sun Liyang, and Abraham Sarah. 2021. “Estimating dynamic treatment effects in event studies with heterogeneous treatment effects.” Journal of Econometrics, 225(2): 175–199. [Google Scholar]
- Thomas Auden D. 2008. “Preserving and strengthening together: Collective strategies of U.S. women’s college presidents.” History of Education Quarterly, 48(4): 565–589. [Google Scholar]
- Tidball M. Elizabeth. 1980. “Women’s Colleges and Women Achievers Revisited.” Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society, 5(3): 504–517. [Google Scholar]
- Tidball M. Elizabeth. 1989. “Women’s colleges: Exceptional conditions, not exceptional talent, produce high acheivers.” In Educating the majority: Women challenge tradition in higher education. , ed. Pearson Carol S., Shavlik Donna L and Touchton Judith G., 157–172. Ace MacMillan. [Google Scholar]
- Turner Sarah E., and Bowen William G.. 1999. “Choice of Major: The Changing (Unchanging) Gender Gap.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 52(2): 289–313. [Google Scholar]
- Willis Robert, and Rosen Sherwin. 1979. “Education and Self-Selection.” Journal of Political Economy, 87(5): S7–36. Publisher: University of Chicago Press. [Google Scholar]
- Wiswall Matthew, and Zafar Basit. 2015. “Determinants of college major choice: Identification using an information experiment.” The Review of Economic Studies, 82(2): 791–824. [Google Scholar]
- Wiswall Matthew, and Zafar Basit. 2018. “Preference for the Workplace, Investment in Human Capital, and Gender.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(1): 457–507. [DOI] [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
- Wiswall Matthew, and Zafar Basit. 2021. “Human Capital Investments and Expectations about Career and Family.” Journal of Political Economy, 129(5): 1361–1424. [Google Scholar]
- Zafar Basit. 2011. “How do college students form expectations?” Journal of Labor Economics, 29(2): 301–348. [Google Scholar]
- Zafar Basit. 2013. “College major choice and the gender gap.” Journal of Human Resources, 48(3): 545–595. [Google Scholar]
- Zölitz Ulf, and Feld Jan. 2018. “The effect of peer gender on major choice.” University of Zurich Department of Economics Working Paper 270. [Google Scholar]
Associated Data
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.