This issue brief complements the full report, Improving the Lives of LGBT Older Adults, available at www.lgbtmap.org and www.sageusa.org.
LGBT Older Adults and
Social Security
Services & Advocacy
for Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual
&  Transgender Elders
ISSUE SUMMARY
Lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) older adults 
are not eligible for Social Security spousal benefits, survivor 
benefits or death benefits. This disparate treatment is especially 
unjust because Social Security benefits are not freely given; 
they are based on the contributions people make throughout 
their working lives—and LGBT people work and pay into Social 
Security in the same manner as their heterosexual counterparts. 
The lack of equal Social Security benefits contributes to higher 
poverty rates among older same-sex couples, and significantly 
reduces their retirement income, potentially leaving a surviving 
same-sex spouse without a living-wage income.1
LACK OF CRITICAL SAFETY NET LEADS TO 
HIGHER POVERTY LEVELS FOR LGBT ELDERS
Social Security is the single most important financial safety 
net program for older adults and makes the difference between 
poverty and a living-wage retirement for a significant portion of 
older Americans. Almost all elder households (89%) receive Social 
Security, and almost a third of single retirees receive income only 
from Social Security.2 The poorest fifth of retired couples rely on 
Social Security for 80% of their income (see Figure 1).3 Lacking 
Social Security, the poverty rate among older adults would rise 
from just under 10% to almost 50%.4
Data show that same-sex and heterosexual couples are 
similarly dependent on Social Security to maintain a living-wage 
income.5 However, contrary to stereotypes, LGBT older adults as a 
group are poorer and less financially secure than American elders 
as a whole (see Figure 2). Also, many older LGBT people lived the 
majority of their working years in an era when discrimination was 
widespread and legal (as it still is in many parts of the country), job 
opportunities were limited, and the jobs available to LGBT people 
Figure 1: Percentage of Households with High
Reliance on Social Security Income
Married couples
Single people
Source: 2006 Figures; “A Profile of Older Americans: 2008, “ Administration on Aging, U.S. Department 
of Health and Human Services, 2008.
52%
72%
20%
41%
12%
29%
SS is at least 
half of income
SS is at least 
90% of income
Rely 100% on SS
Figure 2: Poverty Rates
4.6%
4.9%
9.1%
Senior heterosexual 
couples
Senior gay
male couples
Senior lesbian 
couples
Source: Goldberg, Naomi G. “The Impact of Inequality for Same-Sex Partners in Employer-Sponsored 
Retirement Plans,” The Williams Institute, May 2009
1	 Roughly 4.1% of Americans are LGBT, giving us an estimated 1.5 million LGB elders today, a figure expected to grow to nearly 3 million by 2030. The 4.1% figure is from UCLA’s Williams Institute on Sexual 
Orientation and the Law; however, given concerns that stigma causes under-identification, many sources use an estimate of 3-8%, which would translate to 1 million to 2.8 million LGBT elders.
2	2006 figures from “A Profile of Older Americans: 2008” Administration on Aging, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2008.
3	2006 figures from “A Profile of Older Americans: 2008” Administration on Aging, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2008.
4	U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Administration on Aging, 2008. The current poverty rate among elders is 9.7%, with an estimated 47% living below the poverty line were it not for Social Security.
5	For example, in households where both partners are over age 65, Social Security accounts for 33.4% of the income of retired heterosexual couples, 31.1% of the income of retired gay male couples and 36.2% 
of retired lesbian couples “The Impact of Inequality for Same-Sex Partners in Employer-Sponsored Retirement Plans,” The Williams Institute, Naomi G. Goldberg, May 2009.
September 2010


This issue brief complements the full report, Improving the Lives of LGBT Older Adults, available at www.lgbtmap.org and www.sageusa.org.
were less likely to include health benefits or pensions. For LGBT 
elders, a lifetime of employment discrimination also translates 
into earning disparities, reduced lifelong earnings, smaller Social 
Security payments, and fewer opportunities to build pensions. 
Government safety net programs such as Social Security then 
exclude LGBT elders, creating further economic challenges.
UNEQUAL TREATMENT DESPITE EQUAL 
CONTRIBUTIONS
Despite similar reliance on Social Security, and high poverty 
rates among LGBT older adults, LGBT elders are not equally eligible 
for Social Security benefits. This disparate treatment is especially 
unjust because American elders are not automatically granted 
Social Security; rather, their eligibility and benefit amounts are 
based on how much they contribute to Social Security in the 
form of mandatory payroll taxes throughout their working lives—
and LGBT people work and pay into Social Security in the same 
manner as their heterosexual counterparts.
The Social Security benefits denied to LGBT elders include the 
“spousal benefit,” the “survivor benefit” and the “death benefit.”
DENIAL OF “SPOUSAL BENEFIT”
The “spousal benefit” allows any person who once was, or is, 
married for at least ten years to receive the greater of the Social 
Security benefit that he or she has earned over a lifetime, or 50% 
of the benefit that his or her past or current spouse has earned 
(the theory is that one spouse was caring for children and may 
have lower or no earnings). For example, a wife who has never 
worked may nonetheless claim $500 monthly in Social Security 
if her husband receives $1,000 monthly. Because the federal 
government does not recognize the relationships of same-
sex couples, they are ineligible for spousal benefits. The lack of 
spousal benefits can cost an LGBT elder up to $14,076 a year in 
lost benefits (assuming one partner earns the maximum monthly 
Social Security payout and the other does not qualify for Social 
Security due to lack of legal recognition).6
DENIAL OF “SURVIVOR BENEFIT”
The Social Security “survivor benefit” allows a surviving 
heterosexual spouse or ex-spouse to receive the greater of his or 
her individual benefit or 100% of the spouse’s benefit amount. 
For example, the otherwise ineligible homemaker in the previous 
example receives $1,000 monthly upon her husband’s death, 
whereas a lesbian widow without work history receives nothing.7 
In 2004, the Human Rights Campaign (HRC) estimated that the 
average annual impact of the lack of a survivor benefit on a gay 
man or lesbian who earned less than his or her deceased partner 
was $5,528.8 Given that the median income for households of 
single individuals over age 65 (including widows and widowers) 
is $15,928,9 this discrepancy in Social Security payments can 
literally mean the difference between an income one can survive 
on or living in poverty. The lack of survivor benefits can cost an 
LGBT elder up to $28,152 per year in lost benefits (assuming one 
partner earned the maximum monthly Social Security payout 
and the other does not qualify for Social Security due to lack of 
legal recognition).10
DENIAL OF “DEATH BENEFIT”
Social Security pays a one-time “death benefit” of $255 when 
a spouse dies, which often helps cover funeral and burial or 
cremation expenses.
CONSEQUENCES OF UNEQUAL TREATMENT
Among the Social Security benefits denied to LGBT elders, 
the lack of survivor benefits is the most harmful. Not only has the 
surviving spouse just been widowed, but the legal invisibility of 
the partner’s relationship to the deceased could now leave him 
or her in financial crisis. 
Data show the grim effects of this unequal treatment: lesbian 
couples receive an average of 31.5% less in Social Security and 
gay couples receive 17.8% less, when compared to heterosexual 
couples (see Figure 3).11
Over time, the effects of this unequal treatment compound, 
as shown in Figure 4, potentially leaving a same-sex couple in 
poverty, while providing far more adequate financial security for 
a heterosexual couple with an identical initial financial situation.
6	If the worker were to retire at age 66 and receive the maximum benefit of $2,346 per month, the worker’s spouse would be eligible for a spousal benefit of $1,173 per month, or $14,076 per year.
7	This is true even if the heterosexual couple is divorced, as long as they were married at least 10 years.
8	$5,528 is the average difference in Social Security benefits between two same-sex partners. HRC provides the following example: If one partner earns $10,000 per year in Social Security income and the other 
earns $4,472 and the higher-income partner dies, the surviving heterosexual partner now gets the $10,000 per year while the surviving gay partner only gets the $4,472 per year. Lisa Bennet and Gary J. Gates, 
“The Cost of Marriage Inequality to Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual Older adults,” HRC Foundation Report, 2004.
9	Social Security Administration, “Income of the Population 55 or Older, 2006,” February 2009.
10	If the worker were to retire at age 66 and receive the maximum benefit of $2,346 per month, the worker’s surviving spouse would be eligible for a survivor’s benefit of $2,346 per month, or $28,152 per year.
11	“The Impact of Inequality for Same-Sex Partners in Employer-Sponsored Retirement Plans,” The Williams Institute, Naomi G. Goldberg, May 2009.
Figure 3: Annual Social Security Income of Older Couples
2005/2006
$17,176
$14,116
$11,764
Senior heterosexual 
couples
Senior gay
male couples
Senior lesbian 
couples
Source: Goldberg, Naomi G. “The Impact of Inequality for Same-Sex Partners in Employer-Sponsored 
Retirement Plans,” The Williams Institute, May 2009


This issue brief complements the full report, Improving the Lives of LGBT Older Adults, available at www.lgbtmap.org and www.sageusa.org.
The inequities in Social Security benefits can also create 
significant hardship for single LGBT elders. Overall, single older 
adults are highly reliant on Social Security, with 41% of these adults 
relying on Social Security for 90% of their income.12 While LGBT 
elders are much more likely than their heterosexual peers to live 
alone, many were once in long-term committed relationships—
and many are, in fact, widows or widowers. Any heterosexual 
elder who has been married for a minimum of 10 years and is not 
currently remarried is eligible for spousal and survivor benefits. 
However, LGBT elders are not eligible for benefits based on past 
same-sex relationships.
POLICY SOLUTIONS
Even in states where same-sex couples can marry, the federal 
government does not recognize such marriages under the Defense 
of Marriage Act (DOMA), resulting in the denial of many federal 
benefits including equal Social Security benefits.13 To provide older 
same-sex couples with access to Social Security benefits and other 
critical safety net programs, Congress must repeal DOMA and states 
must establish relationship recognition for all couples. Pending full 
marriage equality for same-sex couples, Social Security equity can 
be obtained by revising the Social Security Act to provide benefits to 
domestic partners. For example, make married same-sex partners, 
“permanent partners,” “domestic partners” or those in “civil unions” 
eligible for spousal Social Security benefits.14
Second, the Social Security Act contains an opposite-sex 
definition of spouse, so a DOMA repeal may not automatically 
result in Social Security benefits for married same-sex couples. 
Policymakers must also update the Social Security Act (SSA) 
definitions of “wife” and “husband” so they no longer assume an 
opposite-sex relationship.
Third, policymakers should pass the federal Employment Non-
Discrimination Act (ENDA) including protections based on gender 
identity and expression. This act is critical to secure the financial 
health of LGBT elders as lifetimes of employment discrimination 
result in lower earnings and lower Social Security benefits.
12	2006 figures from “A Profile of Older Americans: 2008,” Administration on Aging, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2008.
13	Note that on July 8, 2010, the U.S. District Court of Massachusetts ruled DOMA unconstitutional in its lack of recognition of same-sex couples for the purposes of Social Security benefits, federal employee 
benefits and tax returns (Gill v. The Office of Personnel Management). This decision is expected to be appealed.
14	This could be done both by creating a unique definition of domestic partner for this act for which any same-sex couple would qualify and/or by recognizing formalized unions in other states (domestic 
partnerships, civil unions, marriages) as domestic partners for the purposes of Social Security.
Individual 
Monthly 
Social Security 
Benefit
$1,0791
$1,0791
$264 
(sporadic 
work 
history 
at lower 
income)
$264 
(sporadic 
work 
history 
at lower 
income)
Monthly 
Social Security 
with Spousal 
Benefit
$1,079
$1,079
$540, half of 
George’s SS 
benefit
$264, not 
eligible for 
spousal 
benefit
Combined 
Social Security 
Benefit
$1,619/mo
($19,428/yr)
$1,343/mo
($16,116/yr)
Impact Over 15 
Years (Assumes 
Each Couple 
Spends $15,000/
Yr of their Social 
Security Income)2
• Save $4,428/yr
• Total Savings: 
 $66,420
• Save $1,116/yr
• Total Savings: 
 $16,740
George and 
Christine Die 
— Social Security 
for Maria and June
• Maria is eligible 
for survivor 
benefit
• SS is $1,079/mo 
or $12,948/yr
• Total savings of 
$66,420
• June is not eligible 
for survivor benefit
• SS continues 
at $264/mo or 
$3,168/yr
• Total savings of 
$16,740
Financial Outcome 
for Maria and June 
(Ongoing Cost of 
Living Drops to 
$12,000)
• Maria can continue 
to live in her home 
indefinitely
• She also has access 
to modest savings 
for occasional 
emergencies or 
luxuries
• Within 2 years, 
June has no 
savings and can’t 
afford groceries 
and property taxes
• She is forced to 
sell her home and, 
once the equity is 
depleted, apply for 
food stamps
Income at
29%
of poverty 
line, loses 
home, needs 
food stamps
Income at
120%
of poverty 
line, owns 
home, modest 
savings
Figure 4: Compounding Effects of Social Security Inequities Can Leave LGBT Elders in Poverty 
Christine and June
George and Maria
1. The average Social Security payout for a retired worker.
2. Assumes each couple owns their home and has very modest expenses; however a similar scenario would arise where couples spend more but rely on other sources of income for those additional expenses 
(e.g., each couple spends $30,000 per year and relies on $15,000 of earned income). 


Services & Advocacy
for Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual
&  Transgender Elders
305 7th Avenue, 6th Floor • New York, NY 10001
www.sageusa.org
2215 Market St. • Denver, CO 80205
www.lgbtmap.org
1333 H Street NW, 10th Floor • Washington DC, 20005
www.americanprogress.org
80-Year-Old Man Struggles 
to Make Ends Meet after 
Being 
Denied 
Survivor 
Benefits
Herbert 
Burtis 
and 
John 
Ferris met in college, in 
1948. Herb was 18, John was 
22. They legally married in 
Massachusetts in 2004, after 
what they called their “55-year 
engagement.” 
When 
John 
died in August 2008, they had 
been together for 60 years. 
Now 80, Herb is learning how to live a life without John. He says 
it’s the hardest thing he’s ever had to do—harder than living apart 
from John for 21 years when they had jobs in different states; 
harder than watching John’s health deteriorate from Parkinson’s 
disease for 16 years; harder, even, than caring for him in their 
Sandisfield home during the final years of John’s life. 
But the federal government has pulled away the Social Security 
safety net John paid into all the years he was working, and that 
Herb still pays into through his adjunct work as a voice teacher at 
Smith College. 
“Just as I struggled to cope with John’s loss, I never thought 
I would have to fight the federal government for the legal and 
financial protections that I need, and that other surviving spouses 
can count on,” says Herb.
Herb loses $700 monthly in Social Security income because he is not 
eligible for survivor benefits. Herb says the extra income “… would 
cover my gap health insurance—what I get above and beyond 
Medicare. My medications alone are $700 each month. It would 
make a big difference.”
Married Lesbian Couple 
Falls through the Social 
Security Safety Net
Bette Jo and Jo Ann became 
friends as college students in 
1960. They parted ways af­
ter graduation, but nearly 20 
years later they both found 
themselves living in Massa­
chusetts. They reconnected, 
and fell in love. 
They have been committed to each other for nearly 30 years, 
building a life together in the Boston neighborhood of Jamaica 
Plain where they are well-known as the “hot dog ladies” for their 
role in weekly community barbecues during the summer. Bette 
Jo, 68, retired last year after a 35-year career as a labor and delivery 
nurse. Jo Ann, 68, still works part time as a garden educator. They 
legally married in their backyard garden—their pride and joy—in 
2004, with friends and neighbors.
They have found joy in the good times and have loved and supported 
each other through the hard times—through losing parents, losing 
friends, and both their battles with cancer. They worry about their 
financial future. But unlike other married people their age, their 
worries are multiplied by federal discrimination. They lose money 
each year because they are denied the spousal Social Security benefit 
that would increase Jo Ann’s monthly Social Security payment. 
Jo Ann will also be denied the Social Security survivor benefit. Says 
Jo Ann, “I will not only lose the love of my life, I will lose more than 
$12,864 each year—a major part of my retirement income.”
“We have both worked hard at our jobs—jobs we have loved, but they 
never were going to make us wealthy,” says Bette Jo. “We have paid 
into Social Security all our lives, but now we are not fully protected by 
the system the way other married couples are.” 15
Herb Burtis struggles to make ends meet after be­
ing denied Social Security Survivor benefits of his 
partner of 60 years. © Gay & Lesbian Advocates & 
Defenders
Bette Jo Green and Jo Ann Whitehead, together for 
30 years, worry about their financial future. © Gay 
& Lesbian Advocates & Defenders
ABOUT THIS BRIEF
This is one of a series of issue briefs based on content from Improving the Lives of LGBT Older Adults, a report which provides an
in-depth examination of the issues facing LGBT elders, and potential solutions for improving their lives. For more information, visit www.lgbtmap.org 
or www.sageusa.org. 
15	These stories are used with permission, © Gay & Lesbian Advocates & Defenders
Herb, Bette Jo and Jo Ann are all plaintiffs in the recent lawsuit, Gill v. Office of Personnel Management, filed by Gay & Lesbian 
Advocates & Defenders. In July of 2010, the Massachusetts District Court ruled that the Defense of Marriage Act’s denial of Social 
Security benefits to same-sex spouses is unconstitutional. This decision is being appealed and only pertains to same-sex couples 
who can legally marry in their state. For more information, see www.glad.org/doma/lawsuit