DISCUSSION PAPER SERIES
IZA DP No. 15285
Philippe Sterkens
Axana Dalle
Joey Wuyts
Ines Pauwels
Hellen Durinck
Stijn Baert
Homosexuality’s Signalling Function in 
Job Candidate Screening:  
Why Gay Is (Mostly) OK
MAY 2022


Any opinions expressed in this paper are those of the author(s) and not those of IZA. Research published in this series may 
include views on policy, but IZA takes no institutional policy positions. The IZA research network is committed to the IZA 
Guiding Principles of Research Integrity.
The IZA Institute of Labor Economics is an independent economic research institute that conducts research in labor economics 
and offers evidence-based policy advice on labor market issues. Supported by the Deutsche Post Foundation, IZA runs the 
world’s largest network of economists, whose research aims to provide answers to the global labor market challenges of our 
time. Our key objective is to build bridges between academic research, policymakers and society.
IZA Discussion Papers often represent preliminary work and are circulated to encourage discussion. Citation of such a paper 
should account for its provisional character. A revised version may be available directly from the author.
Schaumburg-Lippe-Straße 5–9
53113 Bonn, Germany
Phone: +49-228-3894-0
Email: publications@iza.org
www.iza.org
IZA – Institute of Labor Economics
DISCUSSION PAPER SERIES
ISSN: 2365-9793
IZA DP No. 15285
Homosexuality’s Signalling Function in 
Job Candidate Screening:  
Why Gay Is (Mostly) OK
MAY 2022
Philippe Sterkens
Ghent University
Axana Dalle
Ghent University
Joey Wuyts
Ghent University
 
Ines Pauwels
Ghent University
Hellen Durinck
Ghent University
Stijn Baert
Ghent University, University of Antwerp, 
Université catholique de Louvain and IZA


ABSTRACT
IZA DP No. 15285
MAY 2022
Homosexuality’s Signalling Function in 
Job Candidate Screening:  
Why Gay Is (Mostly) OK*
To explain the mixed findings on hiring discrimination against homosexual applicants, 
we explore the perceptual drivers behind employers’ evaluations of gay men and lesbian 
women. Therefore, we conduct an extensive vignette experiment among 404 genuine 
recruiters, for which we test systematically-selected perceptions theoretically associated 
with homosexual job candidates in earlier studies. We find causal evidence for distinct 
effects of sexual identities on candidate perceptions and interview probabilities. In particular, 
interview probabilities are positively (negatively) associated with the perception of lesbian 
women (gay men) as being more (less) pleasant to work with compared to heterosexual 
candidates. In addition, interview chances are negatively associated with the perception of 
gay men and lesbian women as being more outspoken. Furthermore, our data align well 
with the idea of a concentrated discrimination account, whereby a minority of employers 
who privately hold negative attitudes towards homosexual individuals are responsible for 
most instances of hiring discrimination.
JEL Classification: 
C91, J15, J71
Keywords: 
homosexuality, signalling, statistical discrimination, taste-based 
discrimination, hiring experiment
Corresponding author:
Axana Dalle
Ghent University
Sint-Pietersplein 6
9000 Ghent
Belgium
E-mail: Axana.Dalle@UGent.be
* Data processing is organised in line with Ghent University’s code of conduct and therefore adheres to the General 
Data Protection (GDPR) standards. No external funding was received for this study.


 
2
1. Introduction 
Since the first empirical investigation of sexual orientation-based discrimination in economics 
(Badgett, 1995), the socioeconomic outcomes of homosexuals have, in general, improved 
globally (Badgett, Carpenter, & Sansone, 2021; Drydakis, 2022; OECD, 2020). The scientific 
investigation of the labour market success of LGBTQ individuals has branched into both a 
supply-side (Burn & Martell, 2020) and a demand-side research tradition (Burn, 2018; Burn, 
2020). Given that differences in labour market outcomes between heterosexual and 
homosexual individuals appear nowadays to be mainly driven by the demand side of labour 
(Fric, 2017), it is necessary to further investigate labour market discrimination. 
 
As evidenced in earlier research,  homosexuals are susceptible to hiring discrimination, 
already in the earliest stages of the recruitment process. Indeed, both field (e.g. Drydakis, 
2009; Drydakis, 2015; Hammarstedt, Ahmed, & Andersson, 2015; Hebl, Foster, Mannix, & 
Dovidio, 2002; Jepsen & Jepsen, 2015; Laurent & Mihoubi, 2017) and laboratory studies 
(Everly, Unzueta, & Shih, 2016; Horvath & Ryan, 2003; Singletary & Hebl, 2009) have found 
evidence of discriminatory treatment in the application process. However, a substantial number 
of studies, again in both field (Martell, 2014; Powdthavee & Wooden, 2014) and lab settings 
(Baert, 2018a; Nadler & Kufahl, 2014; Niedlich & Steffens, 2015), have found no such 
evidence. A recent meta-analysis of this mixed evidence by Lippens and colleagues (2021) 
indicates that across all field experiments between 2005 and 2020, gay or lesbian job 
candidates received on average 35 per cent fewer positive reactions than heterosexual 
candidates. 
From a theoretical perspective, the two seminal (economic) theories of taste-based 
(Becker, 1957) and levels-based statistical discrimination (Arrow, 1973; Phelps, 1972) can 
explain hiring discrimination against homosexuals. First, according to the theory of taste-based 
discrimination, employers may be prejudiced against homosexuals and might, therefore, 
expect disutility in collaboration with homosexuals themselves or from colleagues and 
clientele. Consequently, the prejudiced employers are, to some degree, willing to pay a price 
to avoid collaboration with homosexual employees. Specifically, they would rather hire a less 
competent heterosexual candidate than a skilled homosexual candidate. Second, the theory 
of levels-based statistical discrimination provides a more rational explanation for discrimination 
against homosexual job applicants. The starting point of this theory is that employment 
decisions are made under uncertainty. After all, employers do not possess perfect information 
on individual candidates. To aid decision-making under uncertainty, employers apply their 
general productivity beliefs of homosexuals as a group to the individual (homosexual) 
candidate. Negative productivity beliefs (Spence, 1978) concerning homosexual candidates 


 
3
then create advantages for heterosexual candidates and this therefore results in different hiring 
probabilities for individual candidates from both groups. 
Both the theories of taste-based and levels-based statistical discrimination, to some 
extent, rely on explaining hiring discrimination through HPSOR\HUV¶ EHOLHIV about (typical) 
homosexual candidates, or in other words, through WKHVLJQDOVWKH\GHULYHIURPDFDQGLGDWH¶V
sexual orientation. However, to the best of our knowledge, researchers have yet to establish 
exactly which employer perceptions of homosexual candidates drive potential differences in 
hiring probabilities between heterosexual and homosexual candidates. Furthermore, as Fric 
(2017) concluded in his review, policy-makers require such knowledge to develop effective 
measures which target negative attitudes and prejudice against homosexuals in the labour 
market. 
The empirical investigation of these driving perceptions is challenging and necessitates 
an in-depth analysis for three reasons. First, as we show in Appendix Table 1, our own review 
of the multidisciplinary peer-reviewed literature yielded no less than 70 characteristics 
associated with homosexuality. The sheer number of such characteristics is astonishing and 
raises questions regarding (1) the attributed relevance of each characteristic in contemporary 
hiring processes and (2) the complex detailed image (some) employers might have of 
homosexuals. Second, thus far we have discussed homosexuals as one homogenous group. 
However, researchers have found heterogeneity in both the hiring chances and attributes 
associated with gay men and lesbian women. Different patterns of perceptions could be in play 
when explaining differences in the hiring probabilities of gay men and lesbian women and, 
FRQVHTXHQWO\DµRQHVL]HILWVDOOIRUPDW¶RISROLF\-making might be undesirable when supporting 
gay men and lesbian women. Third, in addition to the large number of perceptions and the 
potential differences between gay men and lesbian women, the perception puzzle is further 
complicated by the mixed valence of perceptions. In fact, both positive and negative traits have 
been associated with homosexuality. The latter may suggest WKDW KRPRVH[XDOV¶ KLULQJ
probabilities might be the result of an interplay between both positive and negative candidate 
perceptions associated with sexual orientations. 
Given the current state of the literature, instead of simply providing yet another data 
point on the instances of hiring discrimination against homosexuals, research calls for a deeper 
understanding of the phenomenon ± and its mixed findings (Neumark, 2018; Rivera, 2020). 
Through a vignette experiment among real-life recruiters, equally distributed between the 
United Kingdom and the United States, we contribute to the development of such an 
understanding in two ways. First and foremost, we conduct an empirical and causal evaluation 
RI KRPRVH[XDOLW\¶V signalling function for gay men as well as lesbian women within one 
framework. Moreover, as a prerequisite to accomplishing this, we additionally contribute to the 
literature by reviewing and structuring the literature on potential signals. As a second broader 


 
4
contribution, we go beyond a traditional investigation of sexual orientation discrimination¶s 
moderators on the candidate, job and recruiter sides by testing the idea of a concentrated 
discrimination account, whereby a minority of employers, who privately hold negative attitudes 
towards gay men and lesbian women, are responsible for most instances of hiring 
discrimination. 
2. Data 
To make these contributions, we conducted two vignette studies, one of which functioned as 
a pre-study. Vignette studies are controlled experiments in a laboratory setting that integrate 
experimental manipulations in a survey set-up. They are commonly employed to analyse 
human decision-making in the context of hiring decisions (Kübler, Schmid, & Stüber, 2018; 
Sterkens, Baert, Rooman, & Derous, 2021; Van Belle, Di Stasio, Caers, De Couck, & Baert, 
2018; Van Borm, Burn, & Baert, 2021). In such experiments, participants evaluate fictitious 
candidate profiles (vignettes) that vary across several characteristics (vignette dimensions, for 
LQVWDQFHµMRE-UHOHYDQWH[SHULHQFH¶) on a predetermined number of levels (vignette levels, for 
LQVWDQFHµ\HVQR¶ 
Vignette experiments are favoured over administrative data when studying hiring 
discrimination because they, in principle, enable a causal interpretation of candidate 
manipulations ± whereas administrative worker data could vary by confounding characteristics. 
Moreover, compared to correspondence experiments ± the golden standard for measuring 
hiring discrimination (Neumark, 2018) ± vignettes facilitate the survey of SDUWLFLSDQWV¶WKRXJKW
processes behind hiring decisions. Hence, vignettes are more suitable for testing explanations 
for hiring discrimination, which is the aim of our study. 
In contrast to prior experiments in a lab context on hiring discrimination against 
homosexuals, which primarily featured student populations (Baert, 2018a; Binder & Ward, 
2016; Pichler, Varma, & Bruce, 2010), our study features a much smaller body of experiments 
in a lab setting among genuine HR professionals. Compared to the two vignette experiments 
featuring HR professionals (Barron, 2009; Van Hoye & Lievens, 2003), our experiment is 
methodologically innovative as ZH PDQLSXODWHG WKH FDQGLGDWHV¶ VH[XDO RULHQWDWLRQ ZLWKLQ
subjects so that each participant had to evaluate four candidates with a different sexual 
orientation (see Subsection 2.2). Our vignette experiment is also substantively innovative in 
comparison to studies by Barron (2009) and Van Hoye and Lievens (2003) because we not 
only measure hirability but also, and very specifically, the candidate perceptions related to gay 
men and lesbian women which could explain their hirability. Although the experimental control 


 
5
installed by a lab environment allows researchers to isolate variables and elaborately survey 
its participants, laboratory settings are also particularly susceptible to social desirability bias 
µWKHNQRZOHGJHRIEHLQJREVHUYHGPRWLYDWHVSDUWLFLSDQWVWREHKDYHLQZD\VWKDWDUHVRFLDOO\
DSSURYHG RI UHJDUGOHVV RI WKHLU SULYDWH EHOLHIV¶ 7KURXJKRXW 6HFWLRQ , we discuss the 
measures taken to limit such bias such as multiple manipulations (Subsection 2.2) and the 
administration of a social desirability scale (Subsection 2.4). Finally, we return to a discussion 
of social desirability in Section 4.  
2.1. Pre-study 
To investigate the signalling function of homosexuality and the explanatory potential of signals 
for hiring probabilities, we systematically reviewed the literature for potential signals emitted 
by homosexual job candidates. We identified a total of 70 characteristics (see Appendix Table 
1). However, presenting each of these candidate perceptions as items to recruiters would have 
put unreasonable cognitive demands on participants, especially given our within-subjects 
design whereby each recruiter evaluated and shared their perceptions of multiple job 
candidates (Subsection 2.2). After all, as Bethlehem and Biffignandi (2012) explain, research 
requiring excessive cognitive effort jeopardises both the response rate and data quality due to 
UHVSRQGHQWV¶VDWLVILFLQJWHQGHQFLHVi.e. the µOHVVDWWHQWLYHDQVZHULQJRILWHPV¶.  
Consequently, we conducted a pre-study in which we applied item reduction 
techniques to filter out the signals that fit three criteria: applicability, relevance to the work 
context and limited overlap. First, when reviewing the literature we traced back studies as early 
as 1976 but limited ourselves to the investigation of those signals applicable to homosexuality 
as commonly perceived by contemporary recruiters. Second, although the identified signals 
span a broad range of characteristics, not all of these characteristics are necessarily relevant 
to the work context. For example, participating recruiters indicated that non-conformism and 
the need for security are fairly irrelevant. Third, we retained those signal items that showed a 
limited overlap with one another because research on social cognition has evidenced that there 
are dimensions underlying stereotypes of homosexuality (Fiske, Cuddy, & Glick, 2007). 
Therefore, we excluded passiveness as a signal as we already took the opposite signal, 
namely assertiveness, into account. 
2.1.1. Data collection 
We conducted our pre-study in the form of an online survey and followed an approach 
comparable to the development of the Sexual Prejudice Scale (Chonody, 2013). Employing 
the services of the online panel service Prolific (Palan & Schitter, 2018; Peer, Brandimarte, 
Samat, & Acquisti, 2017), 50 British and 50 American individuals experienced in making 


 
6
recruitment decisions (hereafter referred to as recruiters) completed our pre-VWXG\¶V four sets 
of questions. In the first three batteries, recruiters indicated the degree to which they agreed 
with 70 statements concerning the characteristics of (1) the average gay man, (2) the average 
lesbian woman and (3) the relevance of each characteristic to a hiring decision. For example, 
approachability, eccentricity, group orientation, honesty, intelligence and social competence 
were assessed ± the full list is presented in Appendix Table 1 ± employing a 6-point response 
scale, ranging from strongly disagree (score 1) to strongly agree (score 6).1 The fourth battery 
was used to register WKHSDUWLFLSDQW¶VVRFLR-demographics: gender (male, female, non-binary 
or third gender, prefer not to say); age in years (numbers); nationality (British, American, other); 
level of education (no diploma, high school, bachelor, masters, PhD); and sexual orientation 
(lesbian woman, gay man, bisexual, heterosexual, other, prefer not to say).  
2.1.2. Signal elimination procedure 
The item reduction process consisted of four subsequent phases ± the results of which are 
presented in Appendix Table 1. In the first phase, we strictly filtered out perception items based 
on descriptives. More concretely, items that were, on average, perceived by recruiters as 
irrelevant to a hiring decision or inapplicable to gay men or lesbian women (i.e. an average of 
below 3) were dropped. Hence, we eliminated 23 items. In this step, we dropped a further four 
items because they were close approximations of overall hireability and, therefore, of the hiring 
decision to be made in the experiment (for example µeffective performance of job-related 
tasks¶).  
Next, the second phase of the elimination procedure involved a re-examination of the 
item pool following factor analyses on the evaluations of signals for gay men and lesbian 
women separately. Here, we dropped two items (Appendix Table 1, column (4)) because they 
deviated from the factor structures emerging for either gay men or lesbian women (i.e. 
µQRQFRQIRUPLVW¶had a factor loading lower than .35) or were empirical opposites of other signals 
(i.e. µSDVVLYH¶ZDVGURSSHGLQH[FKDQJHIRUµDVVHUWLYH¶ 
In the third phase of the eliminations, we discussed emerging themes within the signal 
factors from the previous step µIDFWRU LQWHUSUHWDWLRQ¶ and based the selection on item 
interpretations and their underlying correlations. As is evident from Appendix Table 1, 17 
original items were summarised in five QHZO\JHQHUDWHGLWHPVµHPSDWK\¶µFUHDWLYLW\¶µORYLQJ
and VRIW¶µVHOI-DZDUHQHVV¶ DQGµHPRWLRQDOLW\¶) that fit the factor structures. Furthermore, after a 
                                               
1 Our 6-point response scale did not contain a neutral option, thus forcing respondents to 
express (dis)agreement with statements. This is common practice when measuring socially-
sensitive attitudes (Chonody, 2013). 


 
7
re-examination of the correlation matrixes, we dropped another four items because they 
showed a substantial overlap with other signals and had limited relevance to the hiring decision 
(average below 3.250). 
In the fourth and final phase, the face validity of each individual item was scrutinised. 
Consequently, we excluded five more items because, from experiences in the field, these 
candidate characteristics were less likely to be gauged from the earlier phases of resume 
screening (e.g. how individualistic a candidate is).  
The remaining 20 items were subjected to the evaluation of a set of labour market 
experts. Based on their suggestion of a health stigma surrounding homosexuality, we agreed 
on a reduction of the 70 initial items to the following 21 potential signals of being a gay or 
lesbian job candidate: social skills, assertiveness, outspokenness, dominance, independence, 
competitiveness, leadership abilities, team orientation, empathy, loving- and softness of 
personality, emotional sensitivity, neatness, intelligence, open-mindedness, creativity, 
talkativeness, honesty, professionalism, self-awareness, career orientation and current health. 
2.2. Vignette design 
In our main experiment, recruiters indicated their judgements and perceptions of four fictitious 
job candidates µYLJQHWWHV¶ who varied, among other characteristics, in their sexual orientation. 
In total, our profiles consisted of seven dimensions, summarised in Table 1 below. This 
multidimensionality serves a three-fold purpose. First, we more concretely mimic the 
complexity of real-life hiring decisions, enabling a causal analysis of candidate-side 
moderators of hiring probabilities and, even more crucially, counteracting social desirability 
bias. That is, through multiple manipulations in addition to sexual orientation, recruiters were 
forced to make trade-offs between dimensions. This, in turn, makes it harder for participants 
to select candidates in a socially desirable manner (Auspurg & Hinz, 2014), thus addressing a 
recurring point of critique on prior discrimination experiments conducted in the lab (Section 1). 
 
Our candidates¶ sexual orientation was signalled to recruiters through the first two 
dimensions of the vignettes, namely gender (man, woman) and marital status (married to [male 
name], married to [female name], married).2 Compared to earlier experimental manipulations 
RI VH[XDO RULHQWDWLRQ VXFK DV µLQYROYHPHQW LQ /*%7 RUJDQLVDWLRQ¶ (Ahmed, Andersson, & 
Hammarstedt, 2013; Barron & Hebl, 2013; Binder & Ward, 2016 RU µUHIHUHQFH WR /*%7
scholarship programme¶ Barron, 2009; Cunningham, Sartore, & McCullough, 2010), our 
                                               
2 The (fe)male names used to indicate their marital partner were (Sarah Adams, Ellen 
Jones) James Bell and Oliver Smith. We randomly added gender names to avoid combinations 
of vignettes where multiple candidates were married to equally named partners. 


 
8
operationalisation has the advantage of providing a more unambiguous signal of sexual 
orientation. Disclosing an affiliation with an LGBT organisation could bias the results as a meta-
analysis of 12 correspondence experiments concerning sexual orientation suggests that 
unequal treatment is mainly driven by the signalling of an affiliation rather than homosexuality 
in itself (Lippens, Vermeiren, & Baert, 2021). We discuss this point further in Subsection 3.2.2. 
The third dimension revealed WKHFDQGLGDWH¶VDJH in years (33, 38, 43, 48). To support 
the ecological validity of the experiment by avoiding overly similar profiles, we randomly 
adjusted each of the four age levels by adding or subtracting two years (Sterkens et al. 2021). 
Apart from age being a logical element in a job application, previous research findings have 
been mixed regarding the moderating effect of age on sexual orientation-based discrimination 
(Baert, 2014; Drydakis, 2009; Laurent & Mihoubi, 2017). 
Next, our fourth dimension was relevant job experience in the past five years (0 years, 
2 years, 5 years)$VDSRVLWLYHDQGVLJQLILFDQWSUHGLFWRURIFDQGLGDWHV¶MRE-related competence 
(Dokko, Wilk, & Rothbard, 2009), experience was another logical addition to ecologically valid 
candidate profiles. WHOLPLWHGWKHSURILOHV¶ experience record to the past five years to avoid 
any unreasonable comparisons of candidates applying to the same vacancy. 
As a fifth dimension, ZHPDQLSXODWHGFDQGLGDWHV¶ODQJXDJHNQRZOHGJH besides English 
(None, French, Spanish). Again, mentioning the FDQGLGDWHV¶ ODQJXDJH PDVWHU\ was an 
ecologically valid addition to the vignettes (Oreopoulos, 2011; Sterkens et al., 2021). 
Furthermore, language mastery may further amplify JD\PHQV¶DQGOHVELDQZRPHQV¶expected 
signalling functions of, for instance, social skills and outspokenness (Appendix Table 1). The 
decision to include French and Spanish as levels was based on Looney and Lusin (2019), who 
found that these languages were popular among Americans. 
Similar to the language dimension, our sixth dimension, namely professional 
achievements at the previous employer (none, diversity ambassador within the organisation, 
employee of the month award) further underlined our aim to construct ecologically valid 
candidate profiles. However, in addition to contributing to the construction of solid candidate 
profiles, the diversity ambassador level enabled methodologically-interesting moderation 
analyses. More specifically, earlier vignette experiments have used involvement in LGBT-
UHODWHGSURIHVVLRQDODFWLYLW\DVDPDQLSXODWLRQRIFDQGLGDWHV¶VH[XDORULHQWDWLRQ (Tilcsik, 2011). 
Consequently, our experimental data created opportunities to test whether discrimination and 
signalling in more ambiguous manipulations of sexual orientation (via involvement in diversity-
related actions) are comparable to the effects of more straightforward manipulations (via 
reference WRWKHSDUWQHU¶VJHQGHU 
The seventh and final dimension of our candidate profiles was extra-curricular activities 
(wrestling, gymnastics, tennis, volunteering to distribute food for the local community, 
volunteering at an LGBTQ rights organisation, none) and was developed analogous to earlier 


 
9
vignette experiments (Di Stasio, 2014; Van Belle et al., 2018). We chose the different levels 
containing sports based on their typical gender assignment (Katsarova, 2019; Smith, Thurston, 
Green, & Lamb, 2007; Sobal & Milgrim, 2017) such that they signal the gender (in)congruent 
behaviours of candidates and may consequently affect recruiters¶ evaluations and perceptions 
(Fric, 2017). Alternatively, practising sports could serve as a positive signal indicating a healthy 
candidate (Schulte-Hostede, Eys, Emond, & Buzdon, 2012) and, thus, counteract the potential 
health stigma surrounding homosexuality. /DVWO\WKHOHYHOµYROXQWHHUing at an LGBTQ rights 
RUJDQLVDWLRQ¶LV\HWDQRWKHUWHFKQLTXHWKDWKDVEHHQXVHGLQSULRUH[SHULPHQWVWRPDQLSXODWH
candidateV¶ sexual orientation (Berger & Kelly, 1981; Everly et al., 2016). As discussed above, 
this creates opportunities to compare whether and how the different manipulations of sexual 
orientation in the literature might affect hiring outcomes and candidate perceptions. 
 
Combined, these manipulations made for a 2 (gender) × 3 (marital status) × 4 (age) × 
3 (relevant experience) × 3 (languages) × 3 (professional achievements) × 6 (extra-curricular 
activities) vignette design. Because it would be unfeasible for recruiters to adequately judge 
all 3888 vignettes (vignette universe), we provided each participant with one systematically 
selected subsample of vignettes (decks). Of the 30 decks we constructed, each one consisted 
out of four different job candidates and was selected using a D-efficiency algorithm (Auspurg 
& Hinz, 2014). This algorithm ensured that the entirety of decks could be analysed with a 
precision similar to that of the vignette universe and established low-to-zero correlations 
between the experimental manipulations. Our application of the D-efficiency algorithm resulted 
in a D-efficiency of 98.494 out of 100 and was, hence, considered successful (Auspurg & Hinz, 
2014). 
[Table 1] 
2.3. Vacancy design 
The experimental assignment required recruiters to evaluate one deck of carefully crafted 
candidates for one out of twelve fictitious vacancies. We developed these vacancies based on 
the literature regarding occupational moderators in hiring discrimination against gay men and 
lesbian women. Our vacancy descriptions varied by three such potential moderators, namely 
gender-type of the occupation (male-dominated, female-dominated, gender-neutral), degree 
of customer contact (high, low) and diversity statement (present, absent). 
According to, among others, Pellegrini and colleagues (2020) and Mishel (2020), 
homosexual and heterosexual job candidates are evaluated differently in gender-typed work 
contexts. To examine whether these propositions hold, we considered a job to be (fe)male-
dominated if, according to The United States Department of Labor (2021), at least 80.0% of its 
incumbents were (fe)male. Likewise, we considered jobs gender-neutral when 45.0 to 55.0% 


 
10 
of the incumbents were (fe)male. 
Next, applying the theory of taste-based discrimination (Section 1), some employers 
discriminate against gay men and lesbian women because of their own prejudices or those of 
WKHRUJDQLVDWLRQ¶VFOLHQWHOH. In line with this argument, Baert (2014) and Mishel (2020) found 
that employers are more prone to discriminate against homosexuals in contexts of high 
customer contact. To identify jobs with high (low) levels of customer contact, we consulted 
21(72QOLQH¶s occupational database and filtered out jobs with the 30.0% highest (lowest) 
scores for WKHµ&XVWRPHU	3HUVRQDO6HUYLFH¶IDFWRU 
Whereas six of the fictitious vacancies contained a diversity statement in their 
descriptions, the other six did not. Our manipulation, namely the addition of µ$V3HWHUVRQ,QF
maintains an equal opportunities and diversity policy, everyone is encouraged to apply for this 
position.¶, was a direct adaptation of a phrase employed in actual university vacancies. Based 
on the findings of Umphress and colleagues (2008) that a directive from an authority could 
suppress discriminatory tendencies in a selection context, a vacancy containing a diversity-
friendly statement might provide recruiters with a comparable stimulus to suppress any 
discriminatory decision-making regarding homosexual candidates¶DSSOLFDWLRQV µMXVWLILFDWLRQ-
suppression PRGHO¶&UDQGDOO	(VKOHPDQ). 
Applying our selection criteria to the occupational data from O*NET and The United 
States Department of Labor (2021), we selected the following job titles: (1) nurse; (2) legal 
secretary and administrative assistant; (3) telecommunication line installer and repairer; (4) 
cabinetmaker and bench carpenter; (5) property, real estate and community association 
manager; and (6) molecular and cellular biologist. Finally, we adapted vacancy texts from each 
RFFXSDWLRQ¶VUHVSHFWLYH21(7GHVFULSWLRQ. The complete vacancy texts can be consulted in 
the online appendix. 
2.4. Data collection 
Our experimental set-up was integrated into an online µ4XDOWULFV¶survey which was distributed 
in May 2021 among recruiters using the professional panel services from Prolific (Palan & 
Schitter, 2018; Peer et al. 2017). To avoid sensitising recruiters to the topic of our study and 
discourage socially desirable responses, the invitation to partake in the experiment contained 
no reference to homosexuality nor to discrimination. Using the same selection criteria as our 
pre-study (Subsection 2.1.1), we collected responses from 206 American and 202 British 
recruiters. Of the 408 participants, four individuals were excluded during the analyses because 


 
11 
they failed the attention check by not indicating µVWURQJO\DJUHH¶DVUHTXHVWHG in a survey item. 
2.5. Procedure 
In the following paragraphs, we discuss the implementation of our experimental materials in 
the flow of our survey. On average, recruiters took 14 minutes to complete all four phases of 
the study, namely the (1) introduction, (2) experimental instructions and vacancy, (3) candidate 
evaluations and (4) post-experimental questionnaire. 
2.5.1 Introduction to the experiment 
An introductory screen informed participants about the expected length of the survey (17 
minutes) and their rights regarding GDWDSURWHFWLRQ$VDUHVXOWRI3UROLILF¶VSROLFLHVZHFRXOG
also assure the participants that their identity remained hidden from the researchers ± and 
further discourage social desirable responding. After providing their consent to study 
participation, recruiters proceeded to the second phase of the study. 
2.5.2 Experimental instructions and vacancy 
On a second screen we outlined the experimental scenario we set up for the current 
experiment. Recruiters were asked to imagine themselves in the following situation:  
µ<RX DUH ZRUNLQJ DV D UHFUXLWHU IRU µ3HWHUVRQ ,QF¶ <RXU RUJDQLVDWLRQ LV FXUUHQWO\
running a project on innovative recruitment practices. More specifically, HR is trialling 
an artificially intelligent web and resume scraper. When someone applies for one of 
the organisDWLRQ¶V YDFDQFLHV WKH VRIWZDUH SDFNDJH VXSSRUWV WKH UHFUXLWHU E\
automaticDOO\VFDQQLQJµVFUDSLQJ¶WKHDSSOLFDQWV¶UHVXPHDQGVRFLDOPHGLDDFFRXQWV 
± when given permission ± and then compiling a brief tabulated candidate summary.¶ 
We carefully considered this scenario to provide recruiters with an ecologically valid 
explanation for having clear NQRZOHGJHRIFDQGLGDWHV¶VH[XDORULHQWDWLRQ,QGHHGSXEOLFVRFLDO
media accounts on, for example, Facebook, often disclose theLURZQHUV¶ sexual orientation and 
are frequently consulted by potential employers (Acquisti & Fong, 2021; Baert, 2018b). Of 
FRXUVHLQGRLQJVRRXUVWXG\¶VILQGLQJVSULPDULO\SHUWDLQWRKRPRVH[XDOFDQGLGDWHVZLWKD
partner in marriage. 
After being immersed in the experimental context, participants were randomly assigned 
to one of the fictitious vacancy descriptions discussed in Subsection 2.3. Subsequently, they 
received the instruction to select candidates for a first job interview. To avoid any confusion 
over FDQGLGDWHV¶D-priori suitability, the recruiters were told that the software package correctly 
compiled the candidate profiles and had already filtered out those candidates who were 


 
12 
unsuitable based on objective job requirements ± such as required educational background 
and professional experiences.  
2.5.3. Candidate evaluations and perceptions  
Following the details of their fictitious hiring assignment, the recruiters evaluated four different 
candidate profiles. As such, they were randomly assigned to one out of the thirty vignette decks 
discussed in Subsection 2.2. The evaluation of the candidates was organised as follows: each 
candidate and its associated question battery was displayed on a separate screen; recruiters 
were then free to move between the four screens.  
The question battery the recruiters completed per candidate consisted of three sets of 
statements: (1) hiring probabilities, (2) perceived attitude towards collaboration and (3) 
candidate perceptions. Their agreement with each statement was rated on 10-point scales, 
ranging from strongly disagree (score 1) to strongly agree (score 10). We include an overview 
of our question battery in Appendix Table 2. First, following Baert (2018a) and Di Stasio (2014), 
we gauged hiring probabilities through two statements, one measuring the likelihood they 
would invite the candidate for a fiUVWMRELQWHUYLHZµLQWHUYLHZSUREDELOLW\¶ and the other the 
likelihood they would eventually hire the VDLGFDQGLGDWHµKLULQJSUREDELOLW\¶  
6HFRQGZHHPSOR\HGWKUHHVWDWHPHQWVĮ WRPHDVXUHSHUFHLYHGDWWLWXGHV
towards collaboration as the theory of taste-based discrimination cites three sources of 
prejudice in collaboration with gay men and lesbian women: the employer, colleagues and 
clients (Sterkens et al. 2021). Given the high correlations between the attitude items, they were 
bundled in a single attitude-towards-collaboration scale. Nonetheless, analyses with separate 
attitude items were also conducted. 
Third, and central to our design, were the 21 statements measuring candidate 
perceptions. In this phase of the experiments, we implemented our systematically-selected list 
of items from the pre-study (Section 2.1) to collect causal evidence for the signalling function 
RIFDQGLGDWHV¶VH[XDORULHQWDWLRQGXULQJWKHKLULQJSURFHVV%DVHGRQWKHWKHRU\RIlevels-based 
statistical discrimination, each of these potential signals might be (part of) the explanation for 
hiring discrimination against gay men and lesbian women. Within this set of statements, we 
wordily aligned all items to exclude noise due to varying item formulations. Furthermore, we 
avoided order effects by randomising the order in which items were presented to recruiters. 
2.5.4. Post-experimental questionnaire 
In a final step, the recruiters filled out a post-experimental questionnaire. We used the data 
collected via these items to explore recruiter-side moderators of hiring discrimination and the 
execution of robustness checks. 


 
13 
Socio-demographic variables surveyed were gender (male, female, non-binary / third 
gender, prefer not to say); age in year, educational degree (primary, lower secondary, higher 
secondary, bachelors, masters, PhD) and sexual orientation (heterosexual, lesbian woman, 
gay man, bisexual, other, prefer not to say). Subsequently, we surveyed UHFUXLWHUV¶
professional experiences, namely hiring tenure (less than 1 year, 1 to 5 years, more than 5 
years) and frequency (none, between 1 and 5 times per year, more than 5 times per year). 
Next, we incorporated two measures of WKHUHFUXLWHUV¶H[SHULHQFHVZLWKgay men and 
lesbian women. As such, we administered the West and Hewstone (2012) scale for contact 
with gay people. This scale contained four items scored on a 7-point Likert scale from no 
contact at all to very frequent contact (under non-COVID circumstances). Each of these items 
referred to different contexts (at school/work, daily superficial social contact, intimate social 
situations, all sorts of social situations) in which participants had contact with gay men and 
lesbian women. 6XEVHTXHQWO\ZHDYHUDJHGSDUWLFLSDQWV¶VFRUHVLQto a single scale score, 
ranging from one to seven.  
However, we not only measured the frequency of contact with homosexuals but also 
WKH UHFUXLWHUV¶ SULYDWH DWWLWXGHV, employing the Modern Homonegativity Scale (MHS), 
developed by Morrison and colleagues (1999$VDYDOLGDWHGPHDVXUHRILQGLYLGXDOV¶DWWLWXGHV
towards homosexuals, it measured the covert negative attitudes of participants towards 
homosexuality, for example µHomosexuals seem to focus on the ways in which they differ from 
heterosexuals and ignore the ways in which they are the same.¶ As such, we asked participants 
to which degree they agreed with each of WKHVFDOH¶V 12 items on a 5-point Likert scale, ranging 
from strongly disagree (score 1) to strongly agree (score 5). We once again merged the 
individual item responses into an average scale score, whereby a higher score indicated a 
stronger endorsement of modern homonegative attitudes (McCutcheon & Morrison, 2015). 
Among these 12 items, we implemented an additional attention check, asking the participants 
WRLQGLFDWHWKHRSWLRQµsWURQJO\DJUHH¶ (Subsection 2.4). 
Another crucial addition to our post-experimental questionnaire was 5H\QROGV¶
shortened Marlowe±Crowne Social Desirability Scale, which we used to measure the 
SDUWLFLSDQW¶V VRFLally desirable response tendencies. For each of the 13 items expressing 
behaviour that is either culturally approved or sanctioned (e.g. µI sometimes try to get even 
rather than forgive¶), we asked participants to indicate whether the statements were applicable 
to them (true, false). This scale is a regularly implemented and validated instrument across 
different contexts (Beretvas, Meyers, & Leite, 2002; Van Borm & Baert, 2018). The total score 
on this scale is calculated as the sum of all statements indicated as true. Subsequently, we 
standardised this number. 
The final scale we administered to the recruiters measured their level of risk aversion. 
We implemented %DHUW¶VDDGDSWDWLRQ of the Domain-Specific Risk-Taking Scale (Blais 


 
14 
& Weber, 2006) when investigating hiring discrimination against gay men. This adaptation 
contained six different items, each describing a professional risk (e.g. µVtarting a new career in 
your mid-thirties¶). Each item was rated by participants for the likelihood they would engage in 
this type of behaviour (1, extremely unlikely; 7, extremely likely). The weighted average of all 
item scores resulted in a global risk-taking score. 
2.6. Data description 
Before presenting the results of our main analyses, we briefly discuss the experimental data 
we collected. Because of the random allocation of our vignette decks and fictitious vacancies, 
ZHH[SHFWHGORZFRUUHODWLRQVEHWZHHQWKHILFWLWLRXVFDQGLGDWHV¶VH[XDORULHQWDWLRQMREDQG
recruiter variables. The statistically insignificant t-tests and chi-squared tests presented in 
Table 2 below confirm the success of our experimental setup. Moreover, the D-efficiency 
DOJRULWKP¶VVXFFHVVLVDOVRGHPRQVWUDWHGE\WKHORZFRUUHODWLRQEHWZHHQFDQGLGDWHdimensions 
(maximum 0.093). 
[Table 2] 
7KHUHFUXLWHUFKDUDFWHULVWLFVSDQHOIURP7DEOHIXUWKHUGHVFULEHVWKHVDPSOH¶VFRPSRVLWLRQ
On average, recruiters were 44.156 years old. They identified themselves as male (50.0%), 
female (49.0%) or other gender identities (1.0%). The vast majority of the recruiters considered 
themselves heterosexual (88.9%). Of the different levels of education, bachelor's degrees 
(47.0%) were the most common. Participants possessed considerable tenure in making hiring 
decisions. In this study, 48.3% of the sample reported having more than five years of 
experience. Notably, 49.5% of the recruiters did not evaluate any candidates in the last year ± 
this substantial share might be explained by hiring freezes initiated because of the COVID-
pandemic (Campello, Kankanhalli, & Muthukrishnan, 2020). Furthermore, our descriptive 
statistics suggest that the average participant had ± at least ± occasional contact with gay men 
and lesbian women (average 3.680, maximum 7) and harboured non-negative attitudes 
towards homosexual individuals (MHS average 2.204, maximum 5). 
3. Results 
3.1. +RPRVH[XDOLW\¶V effect: bivariate analyses 
We commence our analyses with bivariate analyses of WKHHIIHFWRIFDQGLGDWHV¶KRPRVH[XDO
orientation on recruiter evaluations and perceptions. A discussion of evaluation and perception 


 
15 
averages per combination of sexual orientation and gender (KHUHDIWHUUHIHUUHGWRDVµVH[XDO
LGHQWLW\¶) is statistically sensible because the randomisation of the other study variables was 
successful (Subsection 2.6). In Figure 1 below, we present 26 histograms ± one for each of 
the evaluation and perceptions items. Per item, the Kruskal±Wallis equality-of-populations rank 
test determines whether there are statistically significant differences between two or more 
sexual identities. First, the chi-squared test values for interview (Ȥ(3) = 5.867, p = 0.118) and 
hiring (Ȥ (3) = 5.171, p = 0.160) probabilities suggest that, on average, homosexual 
candidates are not disadvantaged in our experiment compared to their heterosexual 
counterparts, though this is not the focus of the present study. 
In contrast, the test results for the three items measuring attitudes towards 
collaboration (each p-value is lower than 0.001) reveal differences between both groups of 
homosexual candidates, which further aligns with the idea of a heterogeneous hiring 
disadvantage of LGBTQ-individuals over heterosexuals. We find that collaborations between 
lesbian job candidates and employers (M = 6.507), other employees (M = 6.548) and clients 
(M = 6.567) are rated the most favourably, whereas collaborations between gay men and 
employers (M = 5.216), other employees (M = 5.280) and clients (M = 5.138) attained the 
lowest average rating across all four sexual identities we investigated. 
 
In general, an examination of the 95% confidence intervals calculated around the 
average perceptions scores (by means of a Kruskal±Wallis test) indicates particularly distinct 
and rather favourable images of gay men and lesbian women. Indeed, on average, both 
homosexual male and female candidates are perceived as more assertive, outspoken, open-
minded, creative and honest than heterosexuals.  
Next, another side-by-side comparison of the confidence intervals calculated around 
the average perceptions scores reveals that lesbian women are perceived as more dominant, 
independent and self-aware than gay men. Gay men, conversely, are perceived as showing 
more empathy in collaborations, having a soft and loving personality, and being more neat and 
talkative. Our finding that gay men possess more traits that are predominantly associated with 
female gender roles ± the opposite applying to lesbian women ± highly corroborates earlier 
research from Blashill & Powlishta (2009). In addition to the differences we find in average 
candidate perceptions, the Kruskal±Wallis tests report no significant differences between 
sexual identities in perceptions of : leadership skills, professionalism, career orientation and 
current health.  
We study these differences in perception by sexual orientation more rigorously based 
on the multivariate analyses presented in the following subsection. Moreover, we describe to 


 
16 
what extent these perceptions are considered in the experimental recruitment decision. 
 
[Figure 1] 
3.2. +RPRVH[XDOLW\¶VHIIHFWPXOWLYDULDWHDQDO\VHV 
In what follows, we first conduct multivariate analyses on (1) the signalling function of sexual 
identity and (2) signalling as an explanation for differences in hiring probabilities (Subsection 
3.2.1). Subsequently, we explore heterogeneity in the effects of sexual identity on interview 
probabilities (Subsection 3.2.2). For all multivariate analyses we conducted, the standard 
errors are corrected for clustering of the observations at the recruiter level. 
From our bivariate analyses we cannot conclude any overall differences in interview 
and hiring probabilities across the four sexual identities. However, when we fit a multivariate 
linear regression model of interview probabilities on the candidate, vacancy and recruiter 
variables discussed in Section 2, we do find a statistically significant difference in interview 
probability between the two identities with the most divergent scores on the interview item 
presented in Figure 1. That is, lesbian job candidates have a 4.2 percentage point higher 
interview probability (ȕ = 0.424 p = 0.012) than WKH UHJUHVVLRQ¶V reference category of 
heterosexual males.3 Interview probabilities of other groups are not (gay men: ȕ = 0.251, p = 
0.134) or marginally (heterosexual women: ȕ = 0.224, p = 0.072) significantly different from 
those of heterosexual males. 7KHPRGHO¶VHVWLPDWHVDUHSUHVHQWHGLQ the first column of Table 
4. 
3.2.1. Multiple mediation analyses 
Multiple mediation analyses enable us to reveal mediation effects that consider the 
associations between the signals and the interview probabilities. We explore such indirect 
effects by multiplying the effect estimates of sexual identity on the perception items with the 
associations between those perception items and interview probability.4 Applied to the data, 
                                               
3 This interpretation is adequate because the evaluation and perception scales ranged from 
0 to 10. 
4 µ,QGLUHFWHIIHFW¶LVFRPPRQWHUPLQRORJ\LQWKHPHGLDWLRQOLWHUDWXUH+D\HV+RZHYHU
these multiplications should be interpreted as associations. More concretely, the data based 
on our experimental setup is limited to the causal interpretation of relationships between (1) 
 


 
17 
the multiple mediation framework consists of 23 linear regressions. Twenty-two of these 
regress candidate perceptions and the attitude scale on the candidate, vacancy and recruiter 
characteristics. The 23rd regression then regresses these scales and the candidate, vacancy 
and recruiter characteristics on interview probability.5 Appendix Table 3 shows the full 
estimation results of this analytical procedure. The estimates of the mediation effects based 
on a bootstrapping procedure are presented in Table 3. 
In our comparison of gay and heterosexual men, the first columns of Appendix Table 3 
provide empirical and causal evidence for the majority of the perceptions identified in the 
literature (Subsection 2.1). Compared to heterosexual men, gay men are perceived as having 
more advanced social skills (ȕ = 0.265, p = 0.020), being more outspoken (ȕ = 0.430, p < 
0.001), having more of a team orientation (ȕ = 0.241, p = 0.043), showing more empathy in 
collaboration (ȕ = 0.299, p = 0.009), having a loving and soft personality (ȕ = 0.450, p < 0.001), 
and being more emotionally sensitive (ȕ = 0.681, p < 0.001), neat (ȕ = 0.433, p < 0.001), 
intelligent (ȕ = 0.242, p = 0.028), open-minded (ȕ = 0.764, p < 0.001), creative (ȕ = 0.447, p < 
0.001), talkative (ȕ = 0.671, p < 0.001), honest (ȕ = 0.276, p = 0.011) and self-aware (ȕ = 
0.396, p = 0.001). Conversely, we also find that, compared to heterosexual men, again, 
collaborations with gay men are regarded more negatively (ȕ = í, p < 0.001) and they 
are ± marginally significantly ± perceived to be less dominant (ȕ = í0189, p = 0.098). Moreover, 
we find no empirical evidence that gay men and heterosexual men are generally perceived as 
differing in assertiveness, independence, competitiveness, leadership skills, professionalism, 
career orientation or current health. 
The mirror image of these comparisons, where additional F-tests contrast the 
perceptions of lesbians against heterosexual women, yields equally interesting results. 
Compared to heterosexual women, lesbian job candidates are generally perceived by 
recruiters as being more pleasant to collaborate with (p < 0.001) and more assertive (p < 
0.001), outspoken (p < 0.001), dominant (p = 0.010), independent (p = 0.005), open-minded 
(p < 0.001) and self-aware (p = 0.002). Notably, only the signal of having a loving and soft 
personality was less applicable than for heterosexual women (p = 0.041). In these 
comparisons, however, we find no empirical evidence for the remaining signal items: advanced 
social skills, competitiveness, possessing effective leadership skills, displaying a team 
orientation, showing empathy in collaborations, emotional sensitivity, being neat, intelligent, 
                                               
sexual identity and perception items, and (2) sexual identity and the interview probability. We 
discuss this matter further in Section 4. 
5 Conclusions are comparable when employing the hiring probability as the dependent 
variable. 


 
18 
creative, talkative, honest, perceived professionalism, having a career orientation and current 
health. 
Taken together, our results show that recruiters ± in general ± derive desirable 
candidate characteristics from homosexuality. It appears that homosexuality could be regarded 
as a subtle complement to most recruiters¶ gender-driven candidate perceptions. This seems 
particularly the case for lesbian women who are perceived as similar to heterosexual women 
in terms of many of the characteristics associated with female-gender role characteristics (e.g. 
displaying empathy in collaborations) but also score higher on certain perceptions associated 
with the male gender role (e.g. dominance).  
 
[Table 3] 
 
The final column of Appendix Table 3 shows, however, that only some of these 
candidate perceptions are significantly associated with interview probabilities. This results in 
only four mediation effects being statistically significant at the 5% significance level. The 
negative perception of collaboration with gay men is associated with lower interview 
probabilities (ȕ = ±0.163, p < 0.001) and the positive perception concerning lesbian women is 
associated with higher interview chances (ȕ = 0.136, p < 0.001). Moreover, interview 
probabilities are negatively associated with the signal of KRPRVH[XDOFDQGLGDWHV¶perceived 
outspokenness (gay men: ȕ = ±0.041, p = 0.040; lesbian women: ȕ = ±0.054, p = 0.038). This 
finding may appear surprising, but it aligns with the recent meta-analysis of the field 
experimental evidence on hiring discrimination by Lippens and colleagues (2021). That is, 
WKHVHDXWKRUV¶ZHLJKWHGDYHUDJH, which indicates substantial hiring discrimination against gay 
men and lesbian women, is mainly driven by field experiments in which same-sex orientation 
is revealed by LGB+ organisation affiliation. This suggests that it is a signal of activism that is 
punished rather than a signal of sexual orientation. Finally, JD\PHQ¶VSHUFHLYHGbetter social 
skills are associated with higher interview probabilities, albeit at the 10% significance level only 
(ȕ = 0.026, p = 0.090). 
3.2.2. Moderation analyses 
At first sight, the predominantly optimistic findings concerning the hiring probabilities and the 
underlying candidate evaluations concerning homosexual candidates might appear to be at 
odds with part of the literature. This, however, is not necessarily the case because moderators 
could be in play. To test the moderating potential of candidate, vacancy and recruiter 
characteristics, Table 4 presents the results of moderation analyses with interview probability 
as the outcome variable. Column (1), as discussed above, contains parameter estimates 


 
19 
without interaction terms; in the subsequent columns, interaction terms with (2) candidate, (3) 
vacancy and (4) recruiters are implemented separately. The fifth and final column contains the 
results from the most complex regression model, in which all interactions are introduced jointly. 
Our discussion below is based on this final model. 
 The analyses with candidate characteristics reveal that, compared to heterosexual 
men, gay men (ȕ = í, p < 0.001) and women (ȕ = í, p = 0.012) experience a lower 
premium of having five years of experience in an occupation. One hypothetical explanation 
could be that employers relate maturity-related perceptions, such as being more self-aware 
and independent, to them anyway given their openness concerning their sexual identity. 
Furthermore, we find evidence that certain professional achievements and extra-curricular 
activities are appreciated differently for gay men and lesbian women. For instance, at the 10% 
significance level, volunteering yields a lower hiring premium for gay men (ȕ = í1.149, p = 
0.079). Conversely, when lesbian women took on diversity ambassadorship in a prior 
workplace, they receive relatively lower interview probabilities (ȕ = í1.230, p = 0.067). The 
latter finding might, again, be explained by a punishment for activism. Among gay men, no 
such trend arises (ȕ = í0.367, p = 0.452).  
We find no heterogeneity by the job vacancy dimension. Our studies herein contradict 
the findings from, for example, Baert (2014) and Mishel (2020), who reported more hiring 
discrimination in jobs where frequent customer contact is required from job incumbents. 
When we examine the interaction terms between thHFDQGLGDWH¶Vsexual identity and 
the recruiter characteristics we find, in particular, that recruiters¶ homonegative attitudes are 
negatively associated with the interview probabilities of homosexual individuals. Although we 
find consistent evidence for this association among lesbian job candidates in the fourth model, 
including recruiter interaction terms (ȕ = í0.393, p = 0.033), and the fifth model with all 
interaction terms (ȕ = í.443, p = 0.016), only the fourth model specifically does so for 
homosexual men (ȕ = í0.414, p = 0.034). In contrast, no interaction effect is found between 
UHFUXLWHUV¶ contact with homosexual individuals and their interview probabilities, which might 
be explained by the fact that this contact experience possibly yields positive as well as negative 
perception adjustments. ,Q DGGLWLRQ QR VLJQLILFDQW HIIHFWV DUH IRXQG EHWZHHQ UHFUXLWHUV¶
nationality (British or American) and the interview probabilities of homosexual job candidates. 
 
[Table 4] 
 
Two trends in the data, namely (1) the overall non-negative effect of being a 
homosexual candidate on hiring outcomes and (2) the small subsample of recruiters who 
answered in the direction of harbouring homonegative attitudes (i.e. 13.6% of the sample 
scoring more than one standard deviation above the average), align with the notion of a 


 
20 
concentrated discrimination account. This concept, as raised in contemporary work from 
Campbell and Brauer (2021), suggests that the majority of discriminatory behaviours are 
committed by a minority of individuals who repeatedly discriminate against homosexuals ± 
which calls for a very focused anti-discrimination policy. 
From the perspective of such a concentrated discrimination account, we complement 
our analyses with an exploration of how recruiters more prone to discriminate ± as derived 
from the interaction with homonegativity ± perceive homosexual candidates similarly and 
differently from our general sample. We do so by employing moderation analyses with the 21 
perception items, the 3 separate attitudes towards collaboration and the bundled attitude-
towards-collaboration scale as outcome variables, and the candidate, vacancy and recruiter 
variables as independent variables. Interaction terms between, on the one hand, the 
FDQGLGDWHV¶VH[XDOLGHQWLWLHVDVJD\Pen and lesbian women and, on the other hand, recruiter 
characteristics are added to our regression models. 
Three notable trends regarding the interaction between homosexual candidates and 
recruiters¶KRPRnegative attitudes emerge from the data presented in Appendix Table 4. We 
find that, compared to the general sample, harbouring homonegative attitudes is associated 
ZLWKLDGGLWLRQDOµQRYHO¶VLJQDOOLQJIXQFWLRQVRIKRPRVH[XDOLW\ and (ii) relatively less positive 
signalling but also (iii) agreement RQ KRPRVH[XDOLW\¶V VLJQDOOLQJ IXQFWLRQ IRU various 
perceptions ± regardless of attitude. 
First, recruiters with homonegative attitudes are significantly more likely (at the 5% 
significance level) to interpret the sexual identity of gay men and lesbian women as relatively 
negative signals for leadership skills (gay men: ȕ   í OHVELDQ ZRPHQ ȕ   í.400), 
professionalism (gay men: ȕ  í80; lesbian women: ȕ  í.416), career orientations (gay 
men: ȕ  íOHVELDQZRPHQȕ  í.350) and current health (gay men: ȕ  í474; lesbian 
women: ȕ   í.371), whereas, in the full sample, recruiters generally do not perceive 
homosexual identities as signalling for these characteristics at all (Subsection 3.2.1). The same 
trend applies to the competitiveness of gay men (ȕ  íEXW not to OHVELDQZRPHQ¶V
competitiveness. 
Second, whereas UHFUXLWHUV JHQHUDOO\ GHULYH SRVLWLYH VLJQDOV IURP FDQGLGDWHV¶
homosexual identities, the recruiters expressing more homonegative attitudes derive relatively 
fewer SRVLWLYHVLJQDOVIURPFDQGLGDWHV¶KRPRVH[XDOLGHQWLWLHV. More concretely, the latter think 
more negatively about the intelligence (gay men: ȕ  í.410; lesbian women: ȕ  í.483), 
social skills (gay men: ȕ  íOHVELDQZRPHQȕ  í.248), honesty (gay men: ȕ  í
lesbian women: ȕ  í.312) and team orientation (gay men: ȕ  íOHVELDQZRPHQȕ = 
í.324) of both homosexual identities. This is also the case for the perceived dominance (ȕ = 
í.333), creativeness (ȕ  í.276) and self-awareness (ȕ  í.424) of homosexual men, and 
for the perceived independence (ȕ   í.229) and employer collaboration (ȕ   í.410) of 


 
21 
homosexual women.  
Third, recruiters with negative attitudes towards homosexuals appear to have similar 
perceptions as other recruiters concerning ERWKJD\PHQ¶VDQGOHVELDQZRPHQ¶Vcollaboration 
with other employees and clients, soft personality, emotional sensitivity, neatness, 
talkativeness, open-mindedness and outspokenness. In conclusion, our data suggest that the 
association between homonegative attitudes and signalling is of a rather complex nature as 
we establish several points of convergence and divergence between the perceptions of 
recruiters which vary in terms of homonegative attitudes. 
 
[Figure 2] 
 
Lastly, in response to vignette H[SHULPHQWV¶NQRZQVXVFHSWLELOLW\WRVRFLDOly desirable 
responding, ZHIROORZ6WHHQNDPSDQGFROOHDJXHV¶JXLGHOLQHVLQIXUWKHUDQDO\VLQJWKH
data for potential social desirability bias. First and foremost, separate moderation analyses 
suggest that the interview and hiring probabilities of gay men and lesbian women are unrelated 
to the social desirability scores of recruiters.6 Second, we calculate that social desirability has 
a limited association ZLWKUHFUXLWHUV¶UHVSRQVHVWRWKHPRGHUQKRPRQHJDWLYLW\VFDOHr = 0.133). 
This indicates that social desirability biases, most likelyGLGQRWFRQWDPLQDWHRXUUHFUXLWHUV¶
reports of homonegative attitudes. From these findings, and in support of our main analyses, 
we conclude that there is no evidence for a social desirability bias in the experimental hiring 
data. 
4. Conclusion 
To investigate the interview probabilities of homosexual candidates through sexual identity¶s 
signalling function, we conducted a vignette experiment in which genuine recruiters evaluated 
fictitious job candidates who expressed their sexual identities. The recruiters evaluated four 
candidates for one out of twelve job vacancies and shared their candidate perceptions through 
24 systematically-selected items distilled from the literature and pre-studied among actual 
recruiters. In addition to providing empirical and causal evidence for a reviewed selection of 
signals recruiters infer from gay men and lesbian women, we tested these signals¶ role in 
explaining interview probabilities. Moreover, we advanced our understanding of the OLWHUDWXUH¶V
contradictory findings UHODWHGWR KRPRVH[XDO FDQGLGDWHV¶ KLULQJ SUREDELOLWLHV by additionally 
                                               
6 The complete results of our social desirability analyses are available upon request. 


 
22 
analysing the different circumstances in which recruiters tend to discriminate more or less 
against gay men and lesbian women. 
 We find evidence that homosexual identities generally emit positive and distinct signals 
for men and women in a hiring context. Specifically, recruiters perceive homosexual compared 
to heterosexual men as being more outspoken, open-minded, self-aware, emotionally 
sensitive, neat, intelligent, creative, talkative and honest, showing more empathy in 
collaborations, and having more advanced social skills, more of a team orientation and a more 
loving and soft personality ± but being less pleasant to collaborate with. In contrast, 
homosexual women are seen as being more pleasant to collaborate with and having a less 
loving and soft personality than their heterosexual counterparts. However, similar to 
homosexual men, recruiters also perceive them as being more outspoken, open-minded and 
self-aware than heterosexual women. In addition, homosexual women are viewed as being 
more assertive, independent and dominant compared to their heterosexual counterparts, 
whereas this is not the case for homosexual men. 
Although homosexuality activates many different signals for men and women, only two 
of these signals are clearly DVVRFLDWHGZLWKKRPRVH[XDOFDQGLGDWHV¶LQWHUYLHZSUREDELOLWLHV: 
outspokenness and collaborations with employers, other employees and customers. The 
perceptions towards collaborating with candidates hold the strongest associations with 
H[SODLQHGKRPRVH[XDOFDQGLGDWHV¶LQWHUYLHZSUREDELOLWLHVThese perceptions might strengthen 
KRPRVH[XDO ZRPHQ¶V LQWHUYLHZ SUREDELOLWLHV as they are perceived as more pleasant to 
collaborate with, whereas the opposite could be true for homosexual men because recruiters 
have negative collaboration perceptions about them. In addition, the signal that homosexual 
men and women are more outspoken than their heterosexual counterparts is also strongly 
negatively associated with their interview probabilities.  
Our moderation analyses with candidate, vacancy and recruiter characteristics provide 
additional insights regarding the circumstances under which hiring discrimination is more likely 
to occur. More specifically, we find tendencies that more experience yields a relatively lower 
hiring premium for gay candidates and that the effects of extracurricular activities (e.g. 
volunteering to distribute food) and professional achievements (diversity ambassadorship) are 
also dependent on a candidate¶V sexual identity. Perhaps more importantly, the generally 
positive reception towards homosexual candidates and a significant interaction effect with 
UHFUXLWHUV¶ homonegative attitudes suggest that our data align well with a concentrated 
discrimination account (Campbell & Brauer, 2021), whereby a minority of employers are 
responsible for most instances of hiring discrimination. Indeed, the generally positive 
perception patterns of homosexuals were frequently inversed among recruiters who privately 
held negative attitudes towards homosexual individuals. 
$VVXJJHVWHGLQ)ULF¶VUHYLHZ policy-makers and organisations that combat 


 
23 
hiring discrimination against homosexuals could benefit from the deployment of 
destigmatisation programmes. The current VWXG\¶V findings compliment this by calling for an 
efficient and targeted approach to such programmes as hiring discrimination against 
homosexuals appears to be centred around the negative attitudes of a limited proportion of 
recruiters. In addition, the detailed perceptual patterns we evidenced for both groups of 
homosexual candidates could guide the development of such targeted interventions for 
specific homosexual identities.  
From a candidate-perspective, homosexual males in particular could anticipate 
UHFUXLWHUV¶QHJDWLYHDWWLWXGHVby implementing stigma-countering strategies when applying for 
a job. For example, Singletary and Hebl (2009) found that candidates presenting themselves 
as homosexual experienced fewer negative interactions with potential employers if they altered 
their behaviour to display more positivity, for instance by emphasising how enthusiastic they 
are and by smiling more often. Indeed, applied to our concrete findings, gay men would want 
to anticipate and counter perceptions of outspokenness and unpleasant collaborations in the 
hiring process. An important caveat is that in anticipation of such discrimination, gay men in 
particular VKRXOGFDUHIXOO\FRQVLGHUWKHWLPLQJRIWKHLULGHQWLW\¶VGLVFORVXUH to effectively apply 
such stigma-countering strategies.  
One limitation we have frequently revisited in this paper is the risk of socially desirable 
responses, which is elevated in a laboratory setting. In acknowledgment of this risk, we took 
measures to limit the impact of such bias. First, to limit the impact of socially desirable 
responding, we simultaneously varied several candidate characteristics. In doing so, our 
experiment mimicked the trade-offs made in actual hiring decisions. Second, we investigated 
the DVVRFLDWLRQV EHWZHHQ UHFUXLWHUV¶ UHVSRQVHV DQG our validated social desirability scale, 
which indicated that the chance of bias was relatively small (Steenkamp, De Jong, & 
Baumgartner, 2010). 
Our RSHUDWLRQDOLVDWLRQ RI WKH FDQGLGDWHV¶ VH[XDO orientation comes with a second 
limitation of this study. In the vignette experiment, sexual orientation was revealed through the 
FDQGLGDWH¶VParital status, namely being married to a same-sex spouse. Although this is an 
unambiguous signal of sexual orientation, it could also come with perceptions associated with 
being married, such as the attributed stability. Moreover, certain stereotypes about single gay 
men and lesbians may not apply to those who have a partner and vice versa. However, as 
mentioned earlier, alternative ways to reveal sexual identity come with similar, if not worse, 
threats to the internal validity. For example, revealing one's homosexuality by stating a 
candidate joined a LGBTQ+ organisation could be ambiguous and generate signals related to 
activism, which could distort the findings.  
A third limitation relates to the perception measures employed in this study. From the 
literature, numerous perceptions appeared to be related to homosexuality, which made it 


 
24 
impossible to include all of them in the vignette experiment. To resolve this issue, a preliminary 
study was set up to reduce the items to a limited but validated set of perceptions. Although the 
delineation of these perceptions is based on empirical survey data, there always is a certain 
researcher-instilled subjectivity to item selection. Therefore, we encourage future researchers 
to further investigate the body of stigma associated with sexual orientation.  
Subsequently, a final limitation of WKHVWXG\¶VGHVLJQLV its inability to draw unbiased and 
causal inferences from the conducted mediation analyses (see Gerber and Green (2012), 
chapter 10 for a thorough discussion of the challenges inherent in mediation analyses). That 
is, although we were able to make causal inferences about the effects of sexual identity on 
candidate evaluations and perceptions, the associations between perceptions and candidate 
evaluations could be confounded as these perceptions and evaluations were not 
experimentally manipulated. Although we carefully selected relevant signal items through a 
specifically designed pre-study (Subsection 2.1), we cannot exclude the possibility that 
additional, unobserved perceptions were in play ± perhaps in particular among the minority of 
discriminating recruiters. TRIXUWKHURXUXQGHUVWDQGLQJRIKRPRVH[XDOLW\¶Vsignalling function, 
future research could uncover complementary perceptions using alternative techniques, such 
as <YRQDQG&RUELqUH¶Vimplementation of a free association technique. 


 
25 
References 
Acquisti, A., & Fong, C. (2020). An experiment in hiring discrimination via online social 
networks. Management 
Science, 66(3), 
1005±1024. 
https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2018.3269 
Ahmed, A. M., Andersson, L., & Hammarstedt, M. (2013). Are gay men and lesbians 
discriminated against in the hiring process? Southern Economic Journal, 79(3), 565±585. 
https://doi.org/10.4284/0038-4038-2011.317 
Arrow, K. J. (1973). The theory of discrimination. Princeton: Princeton University. 
Auspurg, K., & Hinz, T. (2014). Factorial survey experiments. SAGE Publications Ltd. 
Badgett, M. V. (1995). The wage effects of sexual orientation discrimination. ILR 
Review, 48(4), 726±739. https://doi.org/10.1177/001979399504800408. 
Badgett, M. V., Carpenter, C. S., & Sansone, D. (2021). LGBTQ economics. Journal of 
Economic Perspectives, 35(2), 141±70. https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.35.2.141 
Baert, S. (2014). Career lesbians. Getting hired for not having kids? Industrial Relations 
Journal, 45(6), 543±561. https://doi.org/10.1111/irj.12078 
Baert, S. (2018a). Hiring a gay man, taking a risk? A lab experiment on employment 
discrimination and risk aversion. Journal of Homosexuality, 65(8), 1015±1031. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00918369.2017.1364950 
Baert, S. (2018b). Facebook profile picture DSSHDUDQFH DIIHFWV UHFUXLWHUV¶ ILUVW KLULQJ
decisions. New 
Media 
& 
Society, 20(3), 
1220±1239. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1461444816687294 
Barron, L. G. (2009). Sexual orientation employment anti-discrimination legislation and hiring 
discrimination and prejudice. Academy of Management Proceedings, 1, 1±6. 
https://doi.org/10.5465/ambpp.2009.44243452 
Barron, L. G., & Hebl, M. (2013). The force of law: The effects of sexual orientation 
antidiscrimination legislation on interpersonal discrimination in employment. Psychology, 
Public Policy, and Law, 19(2), 191±205. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0028350 
Becker, G. S. (1957). The economics of discrimination. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago 
Press. 
Beretvas, S. N., Meyers, J. L., & Leite, W. L. (2002). A reliability generalization study of the 
Marlowe 
Crowne 
Social 
Desirability 
Scale. Educational 
and 
Psychological 


 
26 
Measurement, 62(4), 570±589. https://doi.org/10.1177%2F0013164402062004003 
Berger, R. M., & Kelly, J. J. (1981). Do social work agencies discriminate against homosexual 
job applicants? Social Work, 26(3), 193±198. https://doi.org/10.1093/sw/26.3.193  
Bethlehem, J., & Biffignandi, S. (2012). Handbook of web surveys. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley & 
Sons.  
Binder, K., & Ward, L. M. (2016). Can heterosexist music cause hiring discrimination against 
sexual minority men? Testing the effects of prejudicial media messages. Journal of Sex 
Research, 53(6), 666±677. https://doi.org/10.1080/00224499.2015.1013602 
Blais, A. R., & Weber, E. U. (2006). A domain-specific risk-taking (DOSPERT) scale for adult 
populations. Judgment and Decision Making, 1(1), 33±47. https://doi.org/10.1037/t13084-
000  
Blashill, A. J., & Powlishta, K. K. (2009). Gay stereotypes: The use of sexual orientation as a 
cue 
for 
gender-related 
attributes. 
Sex 
Roles, 
61(11±12), 
783±793. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11199-009-9684-7 
Burn, I. (2018). Not all laws are created equal: legal differences in state non-discrimination 
laws and the impact of LGBT employment protections. Journal of Labor Research, 39(4), 
462±497. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12122-018-9272-0 
Burn, I. (2019). The relationship between prejudice and wage penalties for gay men in the 
United States. ILR Review, 73(3), 650±675. https://doi.org/10.1177/0019793919864891 
Burn, I., & Martell, M. (2020). The role of work values and characteristics in the human capital 
investment 
by 
gays 
and 
lesbians. 
Education 
Economics, 
28(4), 
351±369. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/09645292.2020.1758039 
Campbell, M. R., & Brauer, M. (2021). Is discrimination widespread? Testing assumptions 
about bias on a university campus. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 150(4), 
756±777. https://doi.org/10.1037/xge0000983 
Campello, M., Kankanhalli, G., & Muthukrishnan, P. (2020). Corporate hiring under COVID-19: 
Labor market concentration, downskilling, and income inequality (No. w27208). National 
Bureau of Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w27208 
Chonody, J. M. (2013). Measuring sexual prejudice against gay men and lesbian women: 
Development of the Sexual Prejudice Scale (SPS). Journal of Homosexuality, 60(6), 895±
926. https://doi.org/10.1080/00918369.2013.774863 
Crandall, C. S., & Eshleman, A. (2003). A justification-suppression model of the expression 
and 
experience 
of 
prejudice. 
Psychological 
Bulletin, 129(3), 
414±446. 
https://psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1037/0033-2909.129.3.414 
Cunningham, G. B., Sartore, M. L., & McCullough, B. P. (2010). The influence of applicant 


 
27 
sexual orientation, applicant gender, and rater gender on ascribed attributions and hiring 
recommendations of personal trainers. Journal of Sport Management, 24(4), 400±415. 
https://doi.org/10.1123/jsm.24.4.400 
Di Stasio, V. (2014). Education as a signal of trainability: results from a vignette study with 
Italian 
employers. European 
Sociological 
Review, 30(6), 
796±809. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/esr/jcu074 
Dokko, G., Wilk, S. L., & Rothbard, N. P. (2009). Unpacking prior experience: How career 
history 
affects 
job 
performance. 
Organization 
Science, 
20(1), 
51±68. 
https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.1080.0357 
Drydakis, N. (2009). Sexual orientation discrimination in the labour market. Labour Economics, 
16(4), 364±372. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.labeco.2008.12.003 
'U\GDNLV16H[XDORULHQWDWLRQGLVFULPLQDWLRQLQWKH8QLWHG.LQJGRP¶VODERXUPDUNHW
a 
field 
experiment. 
Human 
Relations, 
68(11), 
1769±1796. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0018726715569855 
Drydakis, N. (2021). Sexual orientation and earnings: a meta-analysis 2012±2020. Journal of 
Population Economics, 35(2), 409±440. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00148-021-00862-1  
Everly, B. A., Unzueta, M. M., & Shih, M. J. (2016). Can being gay provide a boost in the hiring 
process? Maybe if the boss is female. Journal of Business and Psychology, 31(2), 293±
306. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10869-015-9412-y 
Fiske, S. T., Cuddy, A. J., & Glick, P. (2007). Universal dimensions of social cognition: Warmth 
and 
competence. Trends 
in 
Cognitive 
Sciences, 11(2), 
77±83. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2006.11.005 
Florence, Y., & Marc, C. (2021). Implicit and explicit attitudes of employers toward hiring people 
who have experienced depression. Journal of Occupational Rehabilitation, 31(4), 903±
915. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10926-021-09977-4 
Fric, K. (2017). Access to the labour market for gays and lesbians: research review. Journal of 
Gay 
& 
Lesbian 
Social 
Services, 
29(4), 
319±361. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10538720.2017.1365671 
Geiger, W., Harwood, J., & Hummert, M. L. (2006). College students' multiple stereotypes of 
lesbians. 
Journal 
of 
Homosexuality, 
51(3), 
165±182. 
https://doi.org/10.1300/J082v51n03_08  
Gerber, A. S., & Green, D. P. (2012). Field experiments: Design, analysis, and interpretation. 
New York: WW Norton. 


 
28 
Gurwitz, S. B., & Marcus, M. (1978). Effects of anticipated interaction, sex, and homosexual 
stereotypes on first impressions. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 8(1), 173±183. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1559-1816.1978.tb00764.x  
Haddock, G., Zanna, M. P., & Esses, V. M. (1993). Assessing the structure of prejudicial 
attitudes: the case of attitudes toward homosexuals. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 65(6), 1105±1118. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.65.6.1105  
Hammarstedt, M., Ahmed, A., & Andersson, L. (2015). Sexual prejudice and labor market 
outcomes for gays and lesbians: Evidence from Sweden. Feminist Economics, 21(1), 90±
109. https://doi.org/10.1080/13545701.2014.937727 
Hayes, A. F. (2017). Introduction to mediation, moderation, and conditional process analysis: 
A regression-based approach. New York: Guilford publications.  
Hebl, M. R., Foster, J. B., Mannix, L. M., & Dovidio, J. F. (2002). Formal and interpersonal 
discrimination: A field study of bias toward homosexual applicants. Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 28(6), 815±825. https://doi.org/10.1177%2F0146167202289010 
Horvath, M., & Ryan, A. M. (2003). Antecedents and potential moderators of the relationship 
between attitudes and hiring discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. Sex Roles, 
48(3±4), 115±130. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1022499121222 
Jackson, L. A., & Sullivan, L. A. (1989). Cognition and affect in evaluations of stereotyped 
members. 
The 
Journal 
of 
Social 
Psychology, 
129(5), 
659±672. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00224545.1989.9713783  
Jepsen, C., & Jepsen, L. K. (2015). Labor-market specialization within same-sex and 
difference sex couples. Journal of Economy and Society, 54(1), 109±130. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/irel.12078 
Katsarova, I. (2019). Gender equality in sport: Getting closer every day. PE 635.560. Report 
from 
European 
Parliamentary 
Research 
Service. 
Retrieved 
from 
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/BRIE/2019/635560/EPRS_BRI(2019)6
35560_EN.pdf  
Kübler, D., Schmid, J., & Stüber, R. (2018). Gender discrimination in hiring across occupations: 
a 
nationally-representative 
vignette 
study. Labour 
Economics, 55, 
215±229. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.labeco.2018.10.002 
Laurent, T., & Mihoubi, F. (2017). Sexual orientation, unemployment and participation: Are 
gays less employable than straights? Journal of Labor Research, 38(1), 1±44. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12122-016-9237-0  


 
29 
Levitt, E. E., & Klassen, J. A. (1976). Public attitudes toward homosexuality: part of the 1970 
national survey by the institute for sex research. Journal of Homosexuality, 1(1), 29±43. 
https://doi.org/10.1300/J082v01n01_03  
Lippens, L., Vermeiren, S., & Baert, S. (2021). The state of hiring discrimination: A meta-
analysis of (almost) all recent correspondence experiments. IZA Discussion Paper, No. 
14966. 
Looney, D., & Lusin, N. (2019). Enrollments in languages other than English in United States 
institutions of higher education, Summer 2016 and Fall 2016: Final report. Modern 
Language 
Association. 
Retrieved 
from 
https://www.mla.org/content/download/110154/2406932/2016-Enrollments-Final-
Report.pdf  
Madon, S. (1997). What do people believe about gay males? A study of stereotype content 
and strength. Sex Roles, 37(9), 663±685. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02936334  
Martell, M. E. (2014). How ENDAs extend the workweek: Legal protection and the labor supply 
of 
behaviorally 
gay 
men. 
Contemporary 
Economic 
Policy, 
32(3), 
560±577. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/coep.12035 
McCutcheon, J., & Morrison, M. A. (2015). The effect of parental gender roles on students' 
attitudes 
toward 
lesbian, 
gay, 
and 
heterosexual 
adoptive 
couples. Adoption 
Quarterly, 18(2), 138±167. https://doi.org/10.1080/10926755.2014.945702  
Mishel, E. (2020). Contextual prejudice: How occupational context and stereotypes shape bias 
against 
gay 
and 
lesbian 
employees. Social 
Currents, 7(4), 
371±391. 
https://doi.org/10.1177%2F2329496520919912 
Mize, T. D., & Manago, B. (2018). The stereotype content of sexual orientation. Social 
Currents, 5(5), 458±478. https://doi.org/10.1177/2329496518761999  
Morrison, T. G., Parriag, A. V., & Morrison, M. A. (1999). The psychometric properties of the 
homonegativity 
scale. Journal 
of 
Homosexuality, 37(4), 
111±126. 
https://doi.org/10.1300/J082v37n04_07 
Nadler, J. T., & Kufahl, K. M. (2014). Marital status, gender, and sexual orientation: Implications 
for employment hiring decisions. Psychology of Sexual Orientation and Gender Diversity, 
1(3), 270±278. https://doi.org/10.1037/sgd0000050 
Neumark, D. (2018). Experimental research on labor market discrimination. Journal of 
Economic Literature, 56(3), 799±866. https://doi.org/10.1257/jel.20161309 
Niedlich, C., & Steffens, M. C. (2015). On the interplay of (positive) stereotypes and prejudice: 
Impressions of lesbian and gay applicants for leadership positions. Sensoria: A Journal of 
Mind, Brain & Culture, 11(1), 70±80. https://doi.org/10.7790/sa.v11i1.408 


 
30 
OECD (2020). Over the Rainbow? The Road to LGBTI Inclusion. Paris: OECD. Retrieved from 
https://www.oecd.org/social/over-the-rainbow-the-road-to-lgbti-inclusion-8d2fd1a8-
en.htm. 
Oreopoulos, P. (2011). Why do skilled immigrants struggle in the labor market? A field 
experiment with thirteen thousand resumes. American Economic Journal: Economic 
Policy, 3(4), 148±71. https://doi.org/10.1257/pol.3.4.148 
Page, S., & Yee, M. (1986). Conception of male and female homosexual stereotypes among 
university 
undergraduates. 
Journal 
of 
Homosexuality, 
12(1), 
109±118. 
https://doi.org/10.1300/J082v12n01_06  
Palan, S., & Schitter, C. (2018). Prolific. ac±A subject pool for online experiments. Journal of 
Behavioral 
and 
Experimental 
Finance, 17, 
22±27. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbef.2017.12.004 
Peer, E., Brandimarte, L., Samat, S., & Acquisti, A. (2017). Beyond the Turk: Alternative 
platforms for crowdsourcing behavioral research. Journal of Experimental Social 
Psychology, 70, 153±163. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2017.01.006 
Pellegrini, V., De Cristofaro, V., Giacomantonio, M., & Salvati, M. (2020). Why are gay leaders 
perceived as ineffective? The role of the type of organization, sexual prejudice and gender 
stereotypes. Personality 
and 
Individual 
Differences, 157, 
109817. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2020.109817 
Phelps, E. S. (1972). The statistical theory of racism and sexism. American Economic Review, 
62(4), 659±661. Retrieved from https://www.jstor.org/stable/1806107 
Pichler, S., Varma, A., & Bruce, T. (2010). Heterosexism in employment decisions: The role of 
job 
misfit. Journal 
of 
Applied 
Social 
Psychology, 40(10), 
2527±2555. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1559-1816.2010.00669.x 
Powdthavee, N., & Wooden, M. (2014). What can life satisfaction data tell us about 
discrimination against sexual minorities? A structural equation model for Australia and the 
United Kingdom (Melbourne Institute of Applied Economic & Social Research Working 
Paper Series No. 09/14). Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2461051  
Reynolds, W. M. (1982). Development of reliable and valid short forms of the MarloweǦCrowne 
Social 
Desirability 
Scale. Journal 
of 
Clinical 
Psychology, 38(1), 
119±125. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/1097-4679(198201)38:1%3C119::AID-
JCLP2270380118%3E3.0.CO;2-I 
Rivera, L. A. (2020). Employer decision making. Annual Review of Sociology, 46(1), 215±232. 
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-soc-121919-054633 
Schulte-Hostedde, A. I., Eys, M. A., Emond, M., & Buzdon, M. (2012). Sport participation 


 
31 
influences perceptions of mate characteristics. Evolutionary Psychology, 10(1), 78±94. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/147470491201000109 
Simmons, J. (1965). Public stereotypes of deviants. Social Problems, 13(2), 223±232. 
https://doi.org/10.2307/798906  
Singletary, S. L., & Hebl, M. R. (2009). Compensatory strategies for reducing interpersonal 
discrimination: The effectiveness of acknowledgments, increased positivity, and 
individuating 
information. 
Journal 
of 
Applied 
Psychology, 
94(3), 
797±805. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0014185 
Smith, A., Thurston, M., Green, K., & Lamb, K. (2007). Young people's participation in 
extracurricular physical education: A study of 15±16 year olds in North-West England and 
North-East 
Wales. European 
Physical 
Education 
Review, 13(3), 
339±368. 
https://doi.org/10.1177%2F1356336X07081997 
Sobal, J., & Milgrim, M. (2019). Gendertyping sports: social representations of masculine, 
feminine, and neither-gendered sports among US university students. Journal of Gender 
Studies, 28(1), 29±44. https://doi.org/10.1080/09589236.2017.1386094 
Spence, M. (1978). Job market signaling. In Uncertainty in economics (pp. 281±306). New 
York: Academic Press. 
Staats, G. R. (1978). Stereotype content and social distance: changing views of 
homosexuality. 
Jounal 
of 
Homosexuality, 
4(1), 
15±27. 
https://doi.org/10.1300/J082v04n01_02  
Stangor, C., Sullivan, L. A., & Ford, T. E. (1991). Affective and cognitive determinants of 
prejudice. Social Cognition, 9(4), 359±380. https://doi.org/10.1521/soco.1991.9.4.359  
Steenkamp, J. B. E., De Jong, M. G., & Baumgartner, H. (2010). Socially desirable response 
tendencies in survey research. Journal of Marketing Research, 47(2), 199±214. 
https://doi.org/10.1509%2Fjmkr.47.2.199 
Steffens, M. C., Niedlich, C., Beschorner, R., & Köhler, M. C. (2019). Do positive and negative 
stereotypes of gay and heterosexual men affect job-related impressions? Sex Roles, 
80(9), 548±564. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11199-018-0963-z  
6WHUNHQV3%DHUW65RRPDQ&	'HURXV($VLILWZHUHQ¶WKDUGHQRXJKDOUHDG\
Breaking down hiring discrimination following burnout. Economics & Human Biology, 43, 
101050. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ehb.2021.101050 
Stern, C., West, T. V., Jost, J. T., & Rule, N. O. (2013). The politics of gaydar: ideological 
differences in the use of gendered cues in categorizing sexual orientation. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 104(3), 520±541. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0031187  


 
32 
United States Department of Labor. (2021). Labor Force Statistics from the Current Population 
Survey. 
Retrieved 
from 
U.S. 
Bureau 
of 
Labor 
Statistics: 
https://www.bls.gov/cps/cpsaat11.htm 
Tilcsik, A. (2011). Pride and prejudice: Employment discrimination against openly gay men in 
the 
United 
States. 
American 
Journal 
of 
Sociology, 
117(2), 
586±626. 
https://doi.org/10.1086/661653 
Umphress, E. E., Simmons, A. L., Boswell, W. R., & Triana, M. D. C. (2008). Managing 
discrimination in selection: The influence of directives from an authority and social 
dominance 
orientation. Journal 
of 
Applied 
Psychology, 93(5), 
982±993. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.93.5.982 
Van Belle, E., Di Stasio, V., Caers, R., De Couck, M., & Baert, S. (2018). Why are employers 
put off by long spells of unemployment? European Sociological Review, 34(6), 694±710. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/esr/jcy039 
Van Borm, H., & Baert, S. (2018). What drives hiring discrimination against 
transgenders? International 
Journal 
of 
Manpower, 
39(4), 
581±599. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/IJM-09-2017-0233 
Van BoUP + %XUQ , 	 %DHUW 6  :KDW GRHV D MRE FDQGLGDWH¶V DJH VLJQDO WR
employers? 
Labour 
Economics, 
71, 
102003. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.labeco.2021.102003 
Van Hoye, G., & Lievens, F. (2003). The effects of sexual orientation on hirability ratings: An 
experimental 
study. Journal 
of 
Business 
and 
Psychology, 18(1), 
15±30. 
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1025078819951 
West, K., & Hewstone, M. (2012). Culture and contact in the promotion and reduction of anti-
gay prejudice: Evidence from Jamaica and Britain. Journal of Homosexuality, 59(1), 44±
66. https://doi.org/10.1080/00918369.2011.614907 
 


 
33 
Figures  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Histograms for each of the evaluation and perception items
5,628
5,010
5,885
6,016
5,920
6,348
6,243
5,981
5,874
5,953
5,351
5,766
5,803
5,789
6,574
6,298
6,106
5,773
5,824
5,213
5,216
5,280
5,138
6,646
6,451
6,481
5,772
6,048
5,378
6,507
6,548
6,567
6,659
6,656
6,533
6,041
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Interview probability (p = 0.118)
Hiring probability (p = 0.160)
Perceived collaboration with employer (p < 0.001)
Perceived collaboration with coworkers (p < 0.001)
Perceived collaboration with clients (p < 0.001)
Perceived social skills (p = 0.035)
Perceived assertiveness (p = 0.160)
Perceived outspokenness (p < 0.001)
Perceived dominance (p = 0.207)
Heterosexual male
Heterosexual female
Homosexual male
Homosexual female


 
34 
6,263
6,006
6,465
6,416
5,842
6,021
6,138
6,576
6,572
6,271
6,103
6,747
6,785
6,296
6,512
6,287
6,716
6,819
6,377
6,052
6,701
6,728
6,299
6,709
6,571
6,813
7,366
6,367
6,222
6,596
6,733
6,052
6,630
6,278
6,878
7,470
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Perceived independence (p = 0.014)
Perceived competitiveness (p = 0.903)
Perceived leadership (p = 0.471)
Perceived team orientation (p = 0.038)
Perceived empathy (p = 0.001)
Perceived softness (p < 0.001)
Perceived emotional sensitivity (p < 0.001)
Perceived neatness (p = 0.009)
Perceived intelligence (p = 0.049)
Heterosexual male
Heterosexual female
Homosexual male
Homosexual female
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Histograms for each of the evaluation and perception items (continued) 
 


 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Histograms for each of the evaluation and perception items (continued) 
5,848
6,554
6,837
6,479
6,235
6,665
6,305
6,823
6,949
6,752
6,340
6,807
6,552
6,847
6,974
6,888
6,396
6,724
6,322
6,981
7,011
7,122
6,456
6,763
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Perceived open-mindedness (p < 0.001)
Perceived creativity (p < 0.001)
Perceived talkativeness (p < 0.001)
Perceived honesty (p = 0.003)
Perceived professionalism (p = 0.223)
Perceived self-awareness (p < 0.001)
Heterosexual male
Heterosexual female
Homosexual male
Homosexual female


 
36 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Interaction effects between sexual identity and the MHS on interview probability, 
where *** (**) ((*)) indicates significance at the 1% (5%) ((10%)) significance level 
 
0
2
4
6
8
10
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
Standardized values of the Modern Homonegativity Scale (MHS)
Interview probability
Homosexual man *
Homosexual woman ***
Heterosexual man
Heterosexual woman


 
37 
Tables 
Table 1. Dimensions and levels 
Dimensions 
Levels 
Gender 
{man; woman} 
Marital status 
{married to (male name); married to (female name); married} 
Age 
{33 years old; 38 years old; 43 years old; 48 years old} 
Job experience in the past five years 
{0 years; 2 years; 5 years} 
Foreign language knowledge 
{none; French; Spanish} 
Professional achievements at previous 
employer 
{none; diversity ambassador; employee of the month} 
Extra-curricular activities 
{wrestling; gymnastics; tennis; volunteers to distribute food for 
the local community; volunteers at LGBTQ rights organisation; 
none} 


 
38
Table 2. Description of the experimental recruiters by experimental condition 
 
Proportion (indicator variables) or mean (continuous variables) 
Independence test [p-value] 
Full sample 
 
Experimental condition 
Heterosexual 
male 
Heterosexual 
female 
Homosexual 
male 
Homosexual 
female 
Female 
49.0% 
50.4% 
47.2% 
46.6% 
52.6% 
0.369 
Not heterosexual 
11.1% 
11.3% 
11.7% 
10.8% 
10.0% 
0.982 
Age 
44.156 
44.261 
44.108 
44.063 
44.148 
1.000 
No tertiary education 
25.5% 
24.9% 
23.9% 
28.0% 
27.4% 
0.530 
%DFKHORU¶VGHJUHH 
47.0% 
47.7% 
47.5% 
47.0% 
44.8% 
0.919 
0DVWHU¶VGHJUHH 
22.8% 
23.4% 
23.2% 
20.5% 
23.0% 
0.920 
British 
49.5% 
49.0% 
50.5% 
51.1% 
46.7% 
0.697 
Hired people in the past year 
50.5% 
49.8% 
50.0% 
48.5% 
48.9% 
0.974 
Hiring experience of more than five years 
48.3% 
48.1% 
48.8% 
48.5% 
47.4% 
0.985 
Contact with homosexuals (standardised) 
0.000 
í 
0.001 
0.079 
0.015 
0.449 
Homonegativity (standardised) 
0.000 
0.011 
0.004 
0.004 
í 
0.852 
Social desirability (standardised) 
0.000 
0.022 
0.019 
í 
í 
0.786 
Risk aversion (standardised) 
0.000 
0.006 
í 
0.046 
í 
0.647 
Notes. To test the independence between the participant characteristic and the experimental condition, a Chi-Square (indicator variable) or Kruskal-Wallis (continuous 
variable) test is conducted. 


 
39
Table 3. Mediation effects for both homosexual identities with interview probability as the outcome and heterosexual male as the reference 
category 
Mediators 
Homosexual male candidate 
Homosexual female candidate 
ȕ 
p 
ȕ 
p 
Perceived collaborationa 
í0.163 
0.000 
0.136 
0.000 
Perceived social skills 
0.026 
0.090 
0.028 
0.109 
Perceived assertiveness 
0.003 
0.763 
0.008 
0.684 
Perceived outspokenness 
í0.041 
0.040 
í0.054 
0.038 
Perceived dominance 
0.001 
0.958 
0.001 
0.965 
Perceived independence 
í0.006 
0.671 
í0.017 
0.573 
Perceived competitiveness 
0.001 
0.943 
0.002 
0.811 
Perceived leadership 
0.007 
0.794 
0.040 
0.115 
Perceived team orientation 
0.031 
0.116 
0.012 
0.495 
Perceived empathy 
í0.002 
0.879 
í0.003 
0.876 
Perceived softness of personality 
0.013 
0.592 
0.005 
0.698 
Perceived emotional sensitivity 
í0.009 
0.798 
í0.008 
0.803 
Perceived neatness 
í0.028 
0.194 
í0.008 
0.444 
Perceived intelligence 
0.005 
0.755 
0.005 
0.761 
Perceived open-mindedness 
í0.035 
0.369 
í0.040 
0.342 
Perceived creativity 
0.045 
0.157 
0.041 
0.128 
Perceived talkativeness 
í0.029 
0.259 
í0.020 
0.314 
Perceived honesty 
í0.019 
0.263 
í0.028 
0.280 
Perceived professionalism 
0.014 
0.372 
0.014 
0.383 
Perceived self-awareness 
í0.023 
0.318 
í0.037 
0.260 
Perceived career orientation 
0.040 
0.193 
0.052 
0.165 
Perceived current health 
0.001 
0.992 
0.001 
0.881 
Total effect of sexual identity 
0.251 
0.134 
0.424 
0.012 
Notes. p-values are corrected for clustering of observations at the participant level. Coefficient estimatesUHODWHGWRSYDOXHVEHORZDUHLQEROG୹LQGLFDWHVPHGLDWRUVZLWK
scales comprising multiple items. 


 
40
Table 4. Moderation effects with interview probability as the outcome  
 
Interview probability 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
A. CANDIDATE CHARACTERISTICS 
 
 
 
 
 
Sexual orientation (ref. = heterosexual male) 
 
 
 
 
 
Heterosexual female 
0.223* (0.125) 
0.206 (0.125) 
0.223 (0.125) 
0.228* (0.125) 
0.208* (0.126) 
Homosexual male 
0.250 (0.167) 
1.662 (1.656) 
0.437 (0.377) 
1.203* (0.653) 
3.008 (1.823) 
Homosexual female 
0.424** (0.168) 
0.624 (2.400) 
0.388 (0.350) 
0.646 (0.638) 
1.031 (2.475) 
Age (c.) 
í.001 (0.008) 
0.004 (0.010) 
í0.001 (0.008) 
í.000 (0.008) 
0.003 (0.011) 
Experience (ref. = none) 
 
 
 
 
 
Two years 
2.988*** (0.143) 
3.074*** (0.186) 
3.007*** (0.143) 
2.973*** (0.145) 
3.086*** (0.189) 
Five years 
4.059*** (0.164) 
4.521*** (0.195) 
4.066*** (0.164) 
4.047*** (0.165) 
4.525*** (0.197) 
Foreign language knowledge (ref. = none) 
 
 
 
 
 
French 
0.089 (0.125) 
0.029 (0.145) 
0.087 (0.126) 
0.059 (0.124) 
0.035 (0.147) 
Spanish 
0.164 (0.123) 
í.017 (0.155) 
0.166 (0.123) 
0.165 (0.124) 
í.020 (0.157) 
Professional achievements (ref. = none) 
 
 
 
 
 
Diversity ambassador 
0.837*** (0.121) 
1.285*** (0.159) 
0.832*** (0.121) 
0.864*** (0.122) 
1.286*** (0.159) 
Employee of the month 
0.760*** (0.116) 
0.944*** (0.151) 
0.762*** (0.115) 
0.777*** (0.117) 
0.949*** (0.151) 
Hobbies (ref. = none mentioned) 
 
 
 
 
 
Wrestling 
0.597*** (0.193) 
0.700*** (0.227) 
0.605*** (0.191) 
0.582*** (0.189) 
0.714*** (0.228) 
Gymnastics 
0.462** (0.201) 
0.573** (0.255) 
0.469** (0.199) 
0.455** (0.202) 
0.571** (0.256) 
Tennis 
0.365* (0.193) 
0.656*** (0.238) 
0.372* (0.192) 
0.390** (0.193) 
0.660*** (0.240) 
Volunteers to distribute food for local community 
0.716*** (0.176) 
1.025*** (0.213) 
0.731*** (0.175) 
0.698*** (0.176) 
1.024*** (0.215) 
Volunteers at LGBTQ rights organisation 
0.409** (0.189) 
0.443* (0.229) 
0.427** (0.187) 
0.415** (0.192) 
0.443* (0.231) 
B. VACANCY CHARACTERISTICS 
 
 
 
 
 
Gender-type (ref. = neutral job) 
 
 
 
 
 
Male-dominated job 
0.230 (0.192) 
0.195 (0.190) 
0.352* (0.208) 
0.214 (0.192) 
0.308 (0.208) 
Female-dominated job 
0.035 (0.193) 
í.000 (0.191) 
0.038 (0.210) 
0.045 (0.193) 
0.038 (0.211) 
Customer contact: high 
0.168 (0.157) 
0.169 (0.156) 
0.203 (0.173) 
0.202 (0.156) 
0.236 (0.175) 
Diversity statement: included 
0.132 (0.154) 
0.111 (0.153) 
0.068 (0.168) 
0.130 (0.153) 
0.062 (0.169) 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
41
C. PARTICIPANT CHARACTERISTICS 
Gender (ref. = male) 
 
 
 
 
 
Female 
í.048 (0.163) 
í.084 (0.160) 
í.044 (0.163) 
í.066 (0.174) 
í.066 (0.175) 
Sexual orientation (ref. = heterosexual) 
 
 
 
 
 
Not heterosexual 
í.549** (0.244) 
í.533** (0.239) 
í.565** (0.246) 
í.450* (0.254) 
í.440* (0.255) 
Age (cont.) 
0.000 (0.006) 
í.001 (0.007) 
í.000 (0.007) 
0.004 (0.007) 
0.004 (0.007) 
Educational degree (ref. = lower than tertiary) 
 
 
 
 
 
Tertiary education 
í.382** (0.182) 
í.396** (0.182) 
í.387** (0.182) 
í.293 (0.201) 
í.305 (0.204) 
Nationality (ref. = USA) 
 
 
 
 
 
UK 
í.039 (0.157) 
í.031 (0.158) 
í.039 (0.157) 
í.088 (0.172) 
í.065 (0.173) 
Hiring experience (ref. = less than five years) 
 
 
 
 
 
More than five years 
0.081 (0.160) 
0.083 (0.158) 
0.081 (0.160) 
0.027 (0.175) 
0.014 (0.176) 
Contact with homosexuals (s.) 
0.187** (0.087) 
0.185** (0.085) 
0.180** (0.087) 
0.174* (0.095) 
0.181* (0.094) 
Homonegativity (s.) 
í.454*** (0.093) 
í.442*** (0.092) 
í.455*** (0.093) 
í.314*** (0.093) 
í313*** (0.093) 
Risk aversion (s.) 
0.168* (0.094) 
0.149 (0.094) 
0.174* (0.094) 
0.144 (0.111) 
0.135 (0.112) 
D. INTERACTIONS WITH CANDIDATE CHARACTERISTICS 
 
 
 
 
 
Homosexual male × age 
 
í.009 (0.035) 
 
 
í.003 (0.036) 
Homosexual male × two years 
 
í.048 (0.466) 
 
 
í 
Homosexual male × five years 
 
í1.379** (0.564) 
 
 
í1.533*** (0.573) 
Homosexual male × French 
 
0.349 (0.488) 
 
 
0.283 (0.501) 
Homosexual male × Spanish 
 
0.306 (0.459) 
 
 
0.341 (0.449) 
Homosexual male × diversity ambassador 
 
í.447 (0.485) 
 
 
í.367 (0.487) 
Homosexual male × employee of the month 
 
í.060 (0.410) 
 
 
í.014 (0.414) 
Homosexual male × wrestling 
 
í1.004 (0.629) 
 
 
í.978 (0.631) 
Homosexual male × gymnastics 
 
0.050 (0.646) 
 
 
0.143 (0.654) 
Homosexual male × tennis 
 
í1.044 (0.638) 
 
 
í.987 (0.652) 
Homosexual male × volunteers to distribute food for local community  
í1.063 (0.648) 
 
 
í1.149* (0.652) 
Homosexual male × volunteers at LGBTQ rights organisation 
 
í.816 (0.733) 
 
 
í.688 (0.764) 
Homosexual female × age 
 
0.021 (0.050) 
 
 
0.022 (0.049) 
Homosexual female × two years 
 
í.257 (0.555) 
 
 
í.211 (0.554) 
Homosexual female × five years 
 
í1.251** (0.500) 
 
 
í1.272** (0.506) 
Homosexual female × French 
 
í.436 (0.512) 
 
 
í.607 (0.502) 


 
42
Homosexual female × Spanish 
 
0.149 (0.485) 
 
 
0.144 (0.496) 
Homosexual female × diversity ambassador 
 
í1.172* (0.678) 
 
 
í1.230 (0.670) 
Homosexual female × employee of the month 
 
í.334 (0.481) 
 
 
í.252 (0.479) 
Homosexual female × wrestling 
 
0.205 (0.679) 
 
 
0.124 (0.704) 
Homosexual female × gymnastics 
 
0.758 (0.905) 
 
 
0.966 (0.919) 
Homosexual female × tennis 
 
í.348 (0.655) 
 
 
í.252 (0.672) 
Homosexual female × volunteers to distribute food for local 
community 
 
í.218 (0.601) 
 
 
í.166 (0.610) 
Homosexual female × volunteers at LGBTQ rights organisation 
 
í.044 (0.923) 
 
 
í.009 (0.959) 
E. INTERACTIONS WITH VACANCY CHARACTERISTICS 
 
 
 
 
 
Homosexual male × male-dominated job 
 
 
í.179 (0.392) 
 
í.294 (0.373) 
Homosexual male × female-dominated job 
 
 
í.494 (0.351) 
 
í.518 (0.358) 
Homosexual male × high customer contact 
 
 
0.052 (0.299) 
 
í.088 (0.305) 
Homosexual male × diversity statement included 
 
 
0.020 (0.294) 
 
í.035 (0.292) 
Homosexual female × male-dominated job 
 
 
0.220 (0.375) 
 
0.209 (0.380) 
Homosexual female × female-dominated job 
 
 
í.210 (0.391) 
 
í.336 (0.375) 
Homosexual female × high customer contact 
 
 
í.276 (0.307) 
 
í.130 (0.310) 
Homosexual female × diversity statement included 
 
 
0.370 (0.310) 
 
0.314 (0.306) 
F. INTERACTIONS WITH RECRUITER CHARACTERISTICS 
 
 
 
 
 
Homosexual male × female 
 
 
 
0.350 (0.307) 
0.270 (0.317) 
Homosexual male × not heterosexual 
 
 
 
í.283 (0.458) 
í.406 (0.461) 
Homosexual male × age (cont.) 
 
 
 
í.018 (0.015) 
í.025 (0.016) 
Homosexual male × tertiary education 
 
 
 
í.520 (0.326) 
í.503 (0.340) 
Homosexual male × UK 
 
 
 
0.043 (0.315) 
0.127 (0.316) 
Homosexual male × more than five years of hiring experience 
 
 
 
0.158 (0.313) 
0.263 (0.316) 
Homosexual male × contact with homosexuals (s.) 
 
 
 
í.154 (0.172) 
í.181 (0.183) 
Homosexual male × homonegativity (s.) 
 
 
 
í.414** (0.194) 
í.322 (0.204) 
Homosexual male × risk aversion (s.) 
 
 
 
0.081 (0.177) 
0.046 (0.179) 
Homosexual female × female 
 
 
 
í.322 (0.319) 
í.408 (0.321) 
Homosexual female × not heterosexual 
 
 
 
í.230 (0.480) 
í.212 (0.500) 
Homosexual female × age (cont.) 
 
 
 
í.008 (0.013) 
í.010 (0.013) 
Homosexual female × tertiary education 
 
 
 
0.161 (0.349) 
0.098 (0.367) 


 
43
Homosexual female × UK 
 
 
 
0.296 (0.326) 
0.078 (0.336) 
Homosexual female × more than five years of hiring experience 
 
 
 
0.139 (0.310) 
0.172 (0.316) 
Homosexual female × contact with homosexuals (s.) 
 
 
 
0.217 (0.183) 
0.140 (0.184) 
Homosexual female × homonegativity (s.) 
 
 
 
í.393** (0.184) 
í.443** (0.184) 
Homosexual female × risk aversion (s.) 
 
 
 
0.014 (0.179) 
0.044 (0.181) 
N 
1,616 
 
 
 
 
Notes. Abbreviations used: s. (scale consisting of multiple items), ref. (reference category). The presented statistics are coefficient estimates and their standard errors in 
parentheses for the mediation model outlined in Subsection 3.2. Standard errors are corrected for clustering of the observations at the participant level. *** (**) ((*)) indicates 
significance at the 1% (5%) ((10%)) significance level. 
 
  


 
44
Appendix 
Appendix Table 1. Items list literature review 
Item 
Source 
Characteristic 
Item Reduction Process 
 1 
Madon (1997) 
A lot of female friends 
Step 1: Irrelevant 
 2 
Stangor, Silluvan, & Ford (1991) 
Abnormal 
Step 1: Irrelevant 
 3 
Levitt & Klassen (1976) 
Afraid of the opposite sex 
Step 1: Irrelevant 
 4 
Geiger, Harwood, & Hummert (2006) 
Angry 
Step 1: Irrelevant 
 5 
Geiger et al. (2006) 
Athletic 
Step 1: Irrelevant 
 6 
Geiger et al. (2006) 
Confused 
Step 1: Irrelevant 
 7 
Madon (1997) 
Dainty 
Step 1: Irrelevant 
 8 
Geiger et al. (2006) 
Defensive 
Step 1: Irrelevant 
 9 
Geiger et al. (2006) 
Eccentric 
Step 1: Irrelevant 
 10 
Haddock, Zanna, & Esses (1993), Simmons (1965) 
Effeminate 
Step 1: Irrelevant 
 11 
Ahmed et al. (2013) 
Family-oriented 
Step 1: Irrelevant 
 12 
Madon (1997), Steffens, Niedlich, Beschorner, & Köhler (2019) 
Fashionable 
Step 1: Irrelevant 
 13 
Stangor et al. (1991) 
Fussy 
Step 1: Irrelevant 
 14 
Mishel (2020) 
Gender nonconforming 
Step 1: Irrelevant 
 15 
Geiger et al. (2006) 
Humourless 
Step 1: Irrelevant 
 16 
Geiger et al. (2006), Mishel (2020) 
Immoral 
Step 1: Irrelevant 
 17 
Madon (1997) 
Liberal 
Step 1: Irrelevant 
 18 
Blashill & Powlishta (2009), Geiger et al. (2006), Stern et al. (2013) 
Masculine 
Step 1: Irrelevant 
 19 
Madon (1997) 
Melodramatic 
Step 1: Irrelevant 
 20 
Geiger et al. (2006), Simmons (1965) 
Mentally Ill 
Step 1: Irrelevant 
 21 
Madon (1997) 
Sentimental 
Step 1: Irrelevant 
 22 
Gurwitz & Marcus (1978) 
Theatrical 
Step 1: Irrelevant 
 23 
Madon (1997) 
Touchy-feely 
Step 1: Irrelevant 
 24 
Everly et al. (2016), Mize & Manago (2018) 
Competent 
Step 1: Criterion 
 25 
Steffens et al. (2019) 
Effective performance of job-related tasks 
Step 1: Criterion 


 
45
 26 
Geiger et al. (2006) 
Successful 
Step 1: Criterion 
 27 
Fric (2017) 
Task-related competence 
Step 1: Criterion 
 28 
Gurwitz & Marcus (1978) 
Passive 
Step 2: 2SSRVLWHRIµDVVHUWLYH¶ 
 29 
Geiger et al. (2006) 
Nonconformist 
Step 2: Deviant from factor structure 
 30 
Page & Yee (1986) 
Strong need for security 
Step 3: Limited relevance 
 31 
Madon (1997) 
Gentle 
Step 3: Limited relevance 
 32 
Steffens et al. (2019) 
Good taste 
Step 3: Limited relevance 
 33 
Everly et al. (2016), Madon (1997) 
Open about their feelings 
Step 3: Limited relevance 
 34 
Jackson & Sullivan (1989), Madon (1997), Steffens et al. (2019) 
Artistic 
Step 3: Merged to Creativity 
 35 
Geiger et al. (2006), Jackson & Sullivan (1989), Steffens et al. (2019) 
Creative 
Step 3: Merged to Creativity 
 36 
Staats (1978) 
Imaginative 
Step 3: Merged to Creativity 
 37 
Madon (1997) 
Emotional 
Step 3: Merged to Emotionally sensitive 
 38 
Madon (1997), Staats (1978) 
Sensitive 
Step 3: Merged to Emotionally sensitive 
 39 
Fric (2017) 
Approachable 
Step 3: Merged to Empathy 
 40 
Jackson & Sullivan (1989), Madon (1997) 
Compassionate 
Step 3: Merged to Empathy 
 41 
Everly et al. (2016), Madon (1997), Steffens et al. (2019) 
Good listener 
Step 3: Merged to Empathy 
 42 
Jackson & Sullivan (1989) 
Sensitive to the needs of others 
Step 3: Merged to Empathy 
 43 
Everly et al. (2016) 
Tactful 
Step 3: Merged to Empathy 
 44  
Madon (1997) 
Understanding 
Step 3: Merged to Empathy 
 45 
Madon (1997) 
Affectionate 
Step 3: Merged to Loving & soft 
 46 
Stangor et al. (1991) 
Loving 
Step 3: Merged to Loving & soft 
 47 
Madon (1997) 
Soft-hearted 
Step 3: Merged to Loving & soft 
 48 
Madon (1997), Everly et al. (2016) 
Warm-hearted 
Step 3: Merged to Loving & soft 
 49 
Madon (1997) 
In touch with themselves 
Step 3: Merged to Self-aware 
 50 
Geiger et al. (2006) 
Strong sense of self 
Step 3: Merged to Self-aware 
 51 
Steffens (2019) 
Emotional intelligence 
Step 4: Face validity 
 52 
Madon (1997), Staats (1978) 
Individualistic 
Step 4: Face validity 
 53 
Geiger et al. (2006) 
Powerful 
Step 4: Face validity 
 54 
Geiger et al. (2006) 
Proud 
Step 4: Face validity 
 55 
Everly et al. (2016) 
Self-confident 
Step 4: Face validity 
 56 
Everly et al. (2016), Geiger et al. (2006) 
Assertive 
Final  
 57 
Everly et al. (2016), Geiger et al. (2006) 
Career-oriented 
Final  


 
46
 58 
Everly et al. (2016) 
Competitive 
Final  
 59 
Geiger et al. (2006) 
Dominating 
Final  
 60 
Pellegrini et al. (2020) 
Effective leader 
Final  
 61 
Staats (1978) 
Honest 
Final  
 62 
Everly et al. (2016) 
Independent 
Final  
 63 
Staats (1978) 
Intelligent 
Final  
 64 
Staats (1978) 
Neat 
Final  
 65 
Geiger et al. (2006), Madon (1997) 
Open-minded 
Final  
 66 
Geiger et al. (2006) 
Outspoken 
Final  
 67 
Geiger et al. (2006) 
Professional 
Final  
 68 
Fric (2017) 
Social skills 
Final  
 69 
Madon (1997) 
Talkative 
Final  
 70 
Steffens et al. (2019) 
Team-oriented 
Final  
 71 
Input from labour market expert 
Current health 
Final 
Notes. This should be read as: <Item> was based on the previous research of <Source> which indicated that homosexuals are perceived as <Characteristic>. The fourth column 
indicates whether the item was dropped, merged or added to the final list. Table 1 provides a summary of all retained items used for the main study. 
 


 
47
Appendix Table 2. Statements employed for candidate profile evaluations 
Evaluative dimension 
Statement 
A. HIRING INTENTION 
 
Interview probability 
I will invite this candidate for a job interview. 
Hiring probability 
There is a high chance that I will eventually hire this candidate for this position. 
B. CANDIDATE PERCEPTIONS OF COLLABORATION 
 
Attitude towards collaboration with employer 
I think I, myself would enjoy collaborating with this applicant. 
Attitude towards collaboration with other employees 
I think other employees would enjoy collaborating with this applicant. 
Attitude towards collaboration with clients 
I think clients or third parties would enjoy collaborating with this applicant. 
C. CANDIDATE PERCEPTIONS OF CHARACTERISTICS 
 
Perceived Social skills 
I believe this applicant to possess advanced social skills. 
Perceived Assertiveness 
I believe this applicant to be assertive. 
Perceived Outspokenness 
I believe this applicant to be outspoken. 
Perceived Dominance 
I believe this applicant to be dominant at the workplace. 
Perceived Independence 
I believe this applicant to be independent. 
Perceived Competitiveness 
I believe this applicant to be competitive. 
Perceived Leadership abilities 
I believe this applicant to be an effective leader. 
Perceived Team orientation 
I believe this applicant to be team-oriented. 
Perceived Empathy 
I believe this applicant to show empathy in collaboration. 
Perceived Softness of personality 
I believe this applicant to have a loving & soft personality. 
Perceived Emotional sensitivity 
I believe this applicant to be emotionally sensitive. 
Perceived Neatness 
I believe this applicant to be neat. 
Perceived Intelligence 
I believe this applicant to be intelligent. 
Perceived Open-mindedness 
I believe this applicant to be open-minded. 
Perceived Creativity 
I believe this applicant to be creative. 
Perceived Talkativeness 
I believe this applicant to be talkative. 
Perceived Honesty 
I believe this applicant to be honest. 
Perceived Professionalism 
I believe that this applicant behaves in a professional manner. 
Perceived Self-awareness 
I believe this applicant to be self-aware. 
Perceived Career orientation 
I believe this applicant to be career-oriented. 
Perceived Current health 
I believe this applicant to be healthy. 
Notes. Each item was rated on an 11-point response scale, ranging from 0 (Strongly disagree) to 10 (Strongly agree). 


 
48
Appendix Table 3. Mediation analysis with interview probability as the outcome 
Mediators 
Collaboration 
Social skills 
Assertiveness 
Outspokenness 
Dominance 
Independency 
A. CANDIDATE CHARACTERISTICS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sexual orientation (ref. = heterosexual male) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Heterosexual female 
í.143 (0.102) 
0.195** (0.091) 
0.001 (0.095) 
0.082 (0.096) 
í.159* (0.096) 
0.067 (0.090) 
Homosexual male 
í647*** (0.180) 
0.265** (0.114) 
0.136 (0.118) 
0.430*** (0.115) 
í.189* (0.114) 
0.154 (0.113) 
Homosexual female 
0.541*** (0.126) 
0.282** (0.123) 
0.415*** (0.126) 
0.564*** (0.127) 
0.167 (0.121) 
0.402*** (0.120) 
Age (c.) 
í.017** (0.007) 
0.005 (0.006) 
0.002 (0.006) 
í.001 (0.006) 
í.001 (0.006) 
0.003 (0.005) 
Experience (ref. = none) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Two years 
0.697*** (0.132) 
0.790*** (0.086) 
0.589*** (0.087) 
0.469*** (0.085) 
0.540*** (0.091) 
0.614*** (0.082) 
Five years 
1.053*** (0.138) 
0.879*** (0.094) 
0.917*** (0.090) 
0.639*** (0.089) 
0.882*** (0.089) 
0.949*** (0.091) 
Foreign language knowledge (ref. = none) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
French 
0.514*** (0.136) 
0.014 (0.085) 
í.007 (0.079) 
í.012 (0.084) 
í.026 (0.081) 
0.013 (0.081) 
Spanish 
0.819*** (0.128) 
0.262*** (0.082) 
0.120 (0.083) 
0.096 (0.081) 
0.108 (0.084) 
0.090 (0.083) 
Professional achievements (ref. = none) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Diversity ambassador 
0.732*** (0.130) 
0.787*** (0.085) 
0.489*** (0.085) 
0.615*** (0.085) 
0.526*** (0.082) 
0.360*** (0.077) 
Employee of the month 
0.874*** (0.096) 
0.445*** (0.081) 
0.309*** (0.084) 
0.164* (0.089) 
0.379*** (0.090) 
0.323*** (0.079) 
Hobbies (ref. = none mentioned) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wrestling 
í.321 (0.200) 
0.111 (0.137) 
0.878*** (0.128) 
0.497*** (0.130) 
0.922*** (0.130) 
0.694*** (0.135) 
Gymnastics 
í.208 (0.177) 
0.325** (0.131) 
0.229* (0.128) 
0.224* (0.129) 
0.384*** (0.138) 
0.360*** (0.134) 
Tennis 
0.435*** (0.152) 
0.088 (0.135) 
0.058 (0.135) 
0.004 (0.126) 
0.099 (0.130) 
0.128 (0.131) 
Volunteers to distribute food for local community 
0.693*** (0.138) 
0.615*** (0.133) 
0.170 (0.130) 
0.142 (0.135) 
0.107 (0.131) 
0.487*** (0.127) 
Volunteers at LGBTQ rights organisation 
í.127 (0.158) 
0.583*** (0.132) 
0.383*** (0.129) 
0.753*** (0.143) 
0.247* (0.130) 
0.525*** (0.134) 
B. VACANCY CHARACTERISTICS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gender-type (ref. = neutral job) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Male-dominated job 
0.267 (0.179) 
í 
0.011 (0.141) 
0.107 (0.149) 
í.079 (0.138) 
0.016 (0.157) 
Female-dominated job 
í.118 (0.186) 
í.070 (0.149) 
í.030 (0.146) 
0.006 (0.152) 
í.059 (0.138) 
0.025 (0.159) 
Customer contact: high 
0.152 (0.148) 
0.114 (0.124) 
0.089 (0.120) 
0.080 (0.123) 
í.013 (0.115) 
0.091 (0.130) 
Diversity statement: included 
0.091 (0.148) 
0.111 (0.123) 
0.193 (0.120) 
0.056 (0.123) 
0.170 (0.114) 
0.072 (0.131) 


 
49
C. PARTICIPANT CHARACTERISTICS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gender (ref. = male) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Female 
í.234 (0.151) 
í.268** (0.130) 
í.059 (0.127) 
í.084 (0.129) 
í.218* (0.119) 
í.090 (0.141) 
Sexual orientation (ref. = heterosexual) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Not heterosexual 
0.014 (0.238) 
í.317* (0.177) 
í.084 (0.188) 
0.051 (0.202) 
0.021 (0.184) 
í.232 (0.222) 
Age (c.) 
0.006 (0.006) 
0.010* (0.006) 
0.009 (0.006) 
0.005 (0.006) 
0.002 (0.005) 
0.009 (0.006) 
Educational degree (ref. = lower than tertiary) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tertiary education 
í.160 (0.179) 
í.568*** (0.151) 
í.459*** (0.148) 
í.507*** (0.151) 
í.427*** (0.137) 
í.469*** (0.158) 
Nationality (ref. = USA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UK 
0.063 (0.148) 
í.154 (0.130) 
í.081 (0.127) 
í.425*** (0.129) 
0.006 (0.121) 
í.226 (0.136) 
Hiring experience (ref. = less than five years) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
More than five years 
í.131 (0.166) 
í.059 (0.140) 
í.103 (0.134) 
í.115 (0.135) 
í.167 (0.127) 
0.097 (0.142) 
Contact with homosexuals (s.) 
0.096 (0.088) 
0.136* (0.073) 
0.069 (0.076) 
0.112 (0.076) 
0.071 (0.070) 
0.048 (0.077) 
Homonegativity (s.) 
í.433*** (0.089) 
í.288*** (0.080) 
í.075 (0.077) 
0.095 (0.075) 
í.009 (0.073) 
í.153* (0.083) 
Risk aversion (s.) 
0.038 (0.084) 
0.017 (0.067) 
0.035 (0.068) 
0.060 (0.068) 
í.006 (0.064) 
0.032 (0.069) 
N 
1,616 
 
 
 
 
 
Notes. Abbreviations used: s. (scale consisting of multiple items), ref. (reference category), req. (required) and tert. edu. (tertiary education). The presented statistics are coefficient 
estimates and their standard errors in parentheses for the mediation model outlined in Subsection 3.2. Standard errors are corrected for clustering of the observations at the 
participant level. *** (**) ((*)) indicates significance at the 1% (5%) ((10%)) significance level. 
 


 
 
50
Appendix Table 3. Mediation analysis with interview probability as the outcome (continued) 
Mediators 
Competitiveness 
Leadership 
Team  
orientation 
Empathy 
Softness of  
personality 
Emotional 
sensitivity 
A. CANDIDATE CHARACTERISTICS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sexual orientation (ref. = heterosexual male) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Heterosexual female 
í.044 (0.103) 
0.063 (0.098) 
0.270*** (0.092) 
0.330*** (0.094) 
0.420*** (0.098) 
0.465*** (0.107) 
Homosexual male 
0.017 (0.121) 
0.031 (0.121) 
0.241** (0.119) 
0.299*** (0.114) 
0.450*** (0.116) 
0.681*** (0.128) 
Homosexual female 
0.080 (0.134) 
0.197 (0.119) 
0.095 (0.118) 
0.281** (0.127) 
0.176 (0.123) 
0.589*** (0.133) 
Age (c.) 
í.002 (0.006) 
0.009 (0.006) 
í.002 (0.005) 
í.005 (0.006) 
í.008 (0.006) 
í.004 (0.006) 
Experience (ref. = none) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Two years 
0.630*** (0.094) 
0.797*** (0.089) 
0.620*** (0.089) 
0.610*** (0.094) 
0.471*** (0.094) 
0.479*** (0.094) 
Five years 
0.825*** (0.097) 
1.157*** (0.093) 
0.749*** (0.089) 
0.600*** (0.091) 
0.371*** (0.096) 
0.454*** (0.099) 
Foreign language knowledge (ref. = none) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
French 
0.069 (0.091) 
í.069 (0.086) 
í.037 (0.086) 
0.017 (0.077) 
0.080 (0.086) 
0.157* (0.093) 
Spanish 
0.188** (0.090) 
0.091 (0.084) 
0.186** (0.086) 
0.215** (0.086) 
0.199** (0.088) 
0.239** (0.093) 
Professional achievements (ref. = none) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Diversity ambassador 
0.341*** (0.087) 
0.768*** (0.081) 
0.555*** (0.088) 
0.602*** (0.084) 
0.252*** (0.083) 
0.539*** (0.088) 
Employee of the month 
0.484*** (0.093) 
0.485*** (0.086) 
0.493*** (0.078) 
0.254*** (0.081) 
0.168** (0.079) 
0.253***(0.084) 
Hobbies (ref. = none mentioned) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wrestling 
1.533*** (0.145) 
0.489*** (0.133) 
0.122 (0.130) 
0.022 (0.134) 
í.040 (0.130) 
í.233 (0.149) 
Gymnastics 
0.895*** (0.146) 
0.458*** (0.134) 
0.364*** (0.126) 
0.199 (0.125) 
0.137 (0.126) 
0.036 (0.127) 
Tennis 
0.712*** (0.136) 
0.305** (0.132) 
0.159 (0.131) 
0.152 (0.128) 
0.355*** (0.129) 
0.115 (0.135) 
Volunteers to distribute food for local community 
0.052 (0.142) 
0.457*** (0.132) 
0.584*** (0.128) 
0.914*** (0.131) 
0.953*** (0.135) 
0.736*** (0.141) 
Volunteers at LGBTQ rights organisation 
0.246* (0.133) 
0.525*** (0.126) 
0.424*** (0.127) 
0.690*** (0.129) 
0.690*** (0.123) 
0.777*** (0.140) 
B. VACANCY CHARACTERISTICS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gender-type (ref. = neutral job) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Male-dominated job 
í.001 (0.151) 
0.047 (0.143) 
0.071 (0.148) 
í 
0.157 (0.150) 
í.037 (0.144) 
Female-dominated job 
í.051 (0.160) 
í.007 (0.152) 
í.049 (0.146) 
0.032 (0.155) 
0.238 (0.153) 
0.171 (0.148) 
Customer contact: high 
í.011 (0.127) 
0.079 (0.122) 
0.059 (0.117) 
0.161 (0.124) 
0.088 (0.122) 
0.056 (0.122) 
Diversity statement: included 
0.164 (0.126) 
0.158 (0.121) 
0.120 (0.118) 
0.062 (0.122) 
0.150 (0.122) 
0.053 (0.120) 


 
 
51
C. PARTICIPANT CHARACTERISTICS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gender (ref. = male) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Female 
í.199 (0.133) 
í.148 (0.128) 
í.072 (0.122) 
í.238* (0.128) 
í.407*** (0.133) 
í.292** (0.130) 
Sexual orientation (ref. = heterosexual) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Not heterosexual 
í.219 (0.178) 
í.209 (0.190) 
í.283 (0.194) 
í.366* (0.188) 
í.569*** (0.194) 
í.309 (0.191) 
Age (c.) 
0.014** (0.006) 
0.003 (0.006) 
0.010* (0.006) 
0.014** (0.006) 
0.003 (0.006) 
0.011* (0.006) 
Educational degree (ref. = lower than tertiary) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tertiary education 
í.519*** (0.153) 
í.591*** (0.145) 
í.519*** (0.142) 
í.387** (0.150) 
í.569*** (0.148) 
í.421*** (0.149) 
Nationality (ref. = USA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UK 
í.146 (0.134) 
í.275** (0.127) 
í.362*** (0.124) 
í.206 (0.127) 
í.031 (0.127) 
í.084 (0.125) 
Hiring experience (ref. = less than five years) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
More than five years 
0.035 (0.139) 
í.022 (0.132) 
0.063 (0.131) 
0.031 (0.138) 
í.052 (0.133) 
í.015 (0.134) 
Contact with homosexuals (s.) 
0.062 (0.077) 
0.036 (0.076) 
0.044 (0.072) 
0.115 (0.072) 
0.131* (0.076) 
0.131* (0.072) 
Homonegativity (s.) 
í.129 (0.084) 
í.374*** (0.074) 
í.331*** (0.074) 
í.285*** (0.075) 
í.234*** (0.079) 
í.108 (0.075) 
Risk aversion (s.) 
í.024 (0.070) 
0.047 (0.073) 
0.020 (0.064) 
0.053 (0.066) 
0.038 (0.067) 
í.004 (0.071) 
N 
1,616 
 
 
 
 
 
Notes. Abbreviations used: s. (scale consisting of multiple items), ref. (reference category), req. (required) and tert. edu. (tertiary education). The presented statistics are coefficient 
estimates and their standard errors in parentheses for the mediation model outlined in Subsection 3.2. Standard errors are corrected for clustering of the observations at the 
participant level. *** (**) ((*)) indicates significance at the 1% (5%) ((10%)) significance level. 
 
 
 


 
 
52
Appendix Table 3. Mediation analysis with interview probability as the outcome (continued) 
Mediators 
Neatness 
Intelligence 
Open-
mindedness 
Creativity 
Talkativeness 
Honesty 
A. CANDIDATE CHARACTERISTICS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sexual orientation (ref. = heterosexual male) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Heterosexual female 
0.151* (0.083) 
0.127 (0.084) 
0.218** (0.095) 
0.239*** (0.093) 
0.424*** (0.109) 
0.244*** (0.081) 
Homosexual male 
0.433*** (0.108) 
0.242** (0.110) 
0.764*** (0.126) 
0.447*** (0.109) 
0.671*** (0.121) 
0.276** (0.108) 
Homosexual female 
0.118 (0.120) 
0.270** (0.128) 
0.883*** (0.124) 
0.413*** (0.114) 
0.470*** (0.124) 
0.397*** (0.122) 
Age (c.) 
0.002 (0.005) 
0.009* (0.005) 
í.010 (0.006) 
í.008 (0.006) 
í.011* (0.006) 
0.002 (0.005) 
Experience (ref. = none) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Two years 
0.540*** (0.083) 
0.804*** (0.081) 
0.574*** (0.094) 
0.626*** (0.086) 
0.253*** (0.095) 
0.465*** (0.081) 
Five years 
0.496*** (0.085) 
1.002*** (0.088) 
0.709*** (0.092) 
0.692*** (0.090) 
0.539*** (0.088) 
0.635*** (0.084) 
Foreign language knowledge (ref. = none) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
French 
0.117 (0.074) 
0.096 (0.077) 
0.102 (0.088) 
0.130 (0.085) 
0.041 (0.086) 
0.128* (0.073) 
Spanish 
0.089 (0.074) 
0.159** (0.080) 
0.238*** (0.089) 
0.180** (0.081) 
0.068 (0.089) 
0.249*** (0.073) 
Professional achievements (ref. = none) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Diversity ambassador 
0.256*** (0.075) 
0.487*** (0.079) 
0.714*** (0.094) 
0.529*** (0.081) 
0.759*** (0.093) 
0.295*** (0.081) 
Employee of the month 
0.316*** (0.075) 
0.381*** (0.071) 
0.311*** (0.084) 
0.345*** (0.080) 
0.525*** (0.091) 
0.244*** (0.072) 
Hobbies (ref. = none mentioned) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wrestling 
í.067 (0.120) 
0.102 (0.127) 
0.059 (0.127) 
0.118 (0.130) 
0.410*** (0.138) 
0.078 (0.114) 
Gymnastics 
0.152 (0.116) 
0.241* (0.126) 
0.035 (0.133) 
0.272** (0.124) 
0.310** (0.127) 
í.092 (0.124) 
Tennis 
0.021 (0.112) 
0.138 (0.127) 
í.057 (0.137) 
0.025 (0.125) 
0.288** (0.127) 
í.128 (0.122) 
Volunteers to distribute food for local 
community 
0.236** (0.114) 
0.338*** (0.119) 
0.375*** (0.139) 
0.360*** (0.127) 
0.316** (0.149) 
0.435*** (0.117) 
Volunteers at LGBTQ rights organisation 
0.215* (0.113) 
0.217* (0.122) 
0.829*** (0.140) 
0.398*** (0.131) 
0.706*** (0.135) 
0.166 (0.120) 
B. VACANCY CHARACTERISTICS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gender-type (ref. = neutral job) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Male-dominated job 
0.034 (0.147) 
í 
0.034 (0.155) 
0.272* (0.141) 
0.136 (0.145) 
í.029 (0.155) 
Female-dominated job 
0.088 (0.157) 
í.206 (0.152) 
0.135 (0.160) 
0.144 (0.152) 
0.226 (0.157) 
í.073 (0.162) 
Customer contact: high 
0.148 (0.124) 
0.058 (0.126) 
0.215* (0.129) 
0.020 (0.121) 
0.131 (0.124) 
0.071 (0.134) 
Diversity statement: included 
0.173 (0.124) 
0.095 (0.126) 
í.008 (0.127) 
0.081 (0.119) 
0.057 (0.122) 
0.068 (0.134) 


 
 
53
C. PARTICIPANT CHARACTERISTICS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gender (ref. = male) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Female 
í.304** (0.131) 
í.220 (0.135) 
í.022 (0.133) 
í.274** (0.126) 
í.243* (0.127) 
í.285** (0.141) 
Sexual orientation (ref. = heterosexual) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Not heterosexual 
í.499*** (0.192) 
í.264 (0.186) 
í.310 (0.200) 
í.380** (0.180) 
í.253 (0.200) 
í.389* (0.211) 
Age (c.) 
0.006 (0.006) 
0.016*** (0.006) 
0.015** (0.006) 
0.006 (0.006) 
0.006 (0.006) 
0.011 (0.007) 
Educational degree (ref. = lower than tertiary) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tertiary education 
í.507*** (0.154) 
í.530*** (0.146) 
í.395** (0.157) 
í.501*** (0.150) 
í.353** (0.151) 
í.463*** (0.164) 
Nationality (ref. = USA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UK 
í.531*** (0.128) 
í.417*** (0.131) 
í.247* (0.130) 
í.320** (0.125) 
í.189 (0.128) 
í.208 (0.136) 
Hiring experience (ref. = less than five years) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
More than five years 
0.067 (0.137) 
0.061 (0.140) 
0.010 (0.141) 
0.071 (0.134) 
0.003 (0.137) 
0.113 (0.146) 
Contact with homosexuals (s.) 
0.090 (0.075) 
0.094 (0.076) 
0.069 (0.076) 
0.058 (0.074) 
0.042 (0.079) 
0.050 (0.078) 
Homonegativity (s.) 
í.126* (0.075) 
í.297*** (0.081) 
í.229*** (0.082) 
í.217*** (0.070) 
í.027 (0.073) 
í.300*** (0.082) 
Risk aversion (s.) 
0.014 (0.068) 
í.034 (0.065) 
0.018 (0.063) 
í.031 (0.068) 
0.018 (0.069) 
0.011 (0.068) 
N 
1,616 
 
 
 
 
 
Notes. Abbreviations used: s. (scale consisting of multiple items), ref. (reference category), req. (required) and tert. edu. (tertiary education). The presented statistics are coefficient 
estimates and their standard errors in parentheses for the mediation model outlined in Subsection 3.2. Standard errors are corrected for clustering of the observations at the 
participant level. *** (**) ((*)) indicates significance at the 1% (5%) ((10%)) significance level. 
 
 


 
 
54
Appendix Table 3. Mediation analysis with interview probability as the outcome (continued) 
Mediators 
Interview probability 
Professionalism 
Self-awareness 
Career orientation 
Current health 
A. CANDIDATE CHARACTERISTICS 
 
 
 
 
 
Sexual orientation (ref. = heterosexual male) 
 
 
 
 
 
Heterosexual female 
0.107 (0.085) 
0.251*** (0.087) 
0.068 (0.101) 
0.111 (0.085) 
0.215** (0.106) 
Homosexual male 
0.154 (0.113) 
0.396*** (0.120) 
0.152 (0.116) 
0.003 (0.111) 
0.424*** (0.142) 
Homosexual female 
0.158 (0.125) 
0.637*** (0.123) 
0.197 (0.126) 
0.058 (0.131) 
0.292** (0.141) 
Age (c.) 
0.003 (0.006) 
í.000 (0.005) 
0.000 (0.006) 
í.002 (0.006) 
0.001 (0.007) 
Experience (ref. = none) 
 
 
 
 
 
Two years 
0.759*** (0.089) 
0.621*** (0.081) 
1.173 (0.094) 
0.416 (0.078) 
2.210*** (0.138) 
Five years 
1.010*** (0.093) 
0.719*** (0.094) 
1.661 (0.112) 
0.454 (0.084) 
2.983*** (0.162) 
Foreign language knowledge (ref. = none) 
 
 
 
 
 
French 
í.124 (0.080) 
0.092 (0.078) 
0.031 (0.093) 
0.035 (0.086) 
í.010 (0.105) 
Spanish 
0.033 (0.082) 
0.078 (0.083) 
0.206 (0.097) 
0.096 (0.081) 
í.144 (0.106) 
Professional achievements (ref. = none) 
 
 
 
 
 
Diversity ambassador 
0.578*** (0.085) 
0.418*** (0.081) 
0.675 (0.087) 
0.141 (0.079) 
0.238** (0.111) 
Employee of the month 
0.557*** (0.082) 
0.271*** (0.080) 
0.820 (0.089) 
0.205 (0.080) 
0.122 (0.102) 
Hobbies (ref. = none mentioned) 
 
 
 
 
 
Wrestling 
í.005 (0.133) 
0.146 (0.128) 
0.633 (0.150) 
0.964 (0.134) 
0.403** (0.163) 
Gymnastics 
0.280** (0.129) 
0.161 (0.126) 
0.508 (0.144) 
0.926 (0.136) 
0.169 (0.180) 
Tennis 
0.008 (0.134) 
í 
0.377 (0.149) 
0.537 (0.131) 
0.027 (0.165) 
Volunteers to distribute food for local community 0.305** (0.122) 
0.337** (0.132) 
0.396 (0.146) 
0.356 (0.123) 
0.246 (0.153) 
Volunteers at LGBTQ rights organisation 
0.292** (0.127) 
0.421* (0.133) 
0.426 (0.142) 
0.224 (0.120) 
0.230 (0.163) 
B. VACANCY CHARACTERISTICS 
 
 
 
 
 
Gender-type (ref. = neutral job) 
 
 
 
 
 
Male-dominated job 
í.087 (0.164) 
0.073 (0.149) 
í.043 (0.153) 
0.180 (0.155) 
0.161 (0.144) 
Female-dominated job 
í.121 (0.163) 
0.053 (0.156) 
í.100 (0.155) 
0.096 (0.161) 
0.124 (0.149) 
Customer contact: high 
0.103 (0.133) 
0.142 (0.129) 
0.140 (0.125) 
0.007 (0.132) 
0.094 (0.122) 
Diversity statement: included 
0.110 (0.133) 
0.114 (0.127) 
0.159 (0.124) 
0.057 (0.132) 
0.009 (0.120) 


 
 
55
C. PARTICIPANT CHARACTERISTICS 
 
 
 
 
 
Gender (ref. = male) 
 
 
 
 
 
Female 
í.061 (0.142) 
í.188 (0.136) 
í.201 (0.132) 
í.127 (0.141) 
0.107 (0.122) 
Sexual orientation (ref. = heterosexual) 
 
 
 
 
 
Not heterosexual 
í.361* (0.198) 
í.260 (0.209) 
í.197 (0.189) 
í.575 (0.207) 
í.392** (0.197) 
Age (c.) 
0.013* (0.006) 
0.020*** (0.006) 
0.008 (0.006) 
0.015 (0.006) 
í.005 (0.005) 
Educational degree (ref. = lower than tertiary) 
 
 
 
 
 
Tertiary education 
í.437*** (0.158) 
í.536*** (0.159) 
í.473 (0.150) 
í.474 (0.163) 
í.033 (0.143) 
Nationality (ref. = USA) 
 
 
 
 
 
UK 
í.343** (0.137) 
í.382*** (0.132) 
í.388 (0.129) 
í.233 (0.135) 
0.103 (0.121) 
Hiring experience (ref. = less than five years) 
 
 
 
 
 
More than five years 
0.131 (0.147) 
0.101 (0.138) 
0.097 (0.136) 
0.012 (0.141) 
0.085 (0.124) 
Contact with homosexuals (s.) 
0.037 (0.079) 
0.029 (0.078) 
0.118 (0.078) 
0.074 (0.079) 
0.117* (0.064) 
Homonegativity (s.) 
í.356*** (0.085) 
í.249*** (0.077) 
í.245 (0.081) 
í.190 (0.083) 
í.114* (0.067) 
Risk aversion (s.) 
0.071 (0.071) 
0.088 (0.067) 
í.029 (0.071) 
0.072 (0.070) 
0.163** (0.069) 
D. MEDIATIORS 
 
 
 
 
 
Collaboration 
 
 
 
 
0.252*** (0.034) 
Social skills 
 
 
 
 
0.100** (0.047) 
Assertiveness 
 
 
 
 
0.019 (0.049) 
Outspokenness 
 
 
 
 
í.096** (0.039) 
Dominance 
 
 
 
 
0.003 (0.042) 
Independency 
 
 
 
 
í.041 (0.062) 
Competitiveness 
 
 
 
 
0.023 (0.042) 
Leadership 
 
 
 
 
0.204*** (0.059) 
Team orientation 
 
 
 
 
0.128*** (0.048) 
Empathy 
 
 
 
 
í.009 (0.053) 
Soft personality 
 
 
 
 
0.028 (0.043) 
Emotional sensitivity 
 
 
 
 
í.013 (0.040) 
Neatness 
 
 
 
 
í.065 (0.047) 
Intelligence 
 
 
 
 
0.020 (0.059) 
Open-mindedness 
 
 
 
 
í.046 (0.045) 
Creativity 
 
 
 
 
0.100* (0.056) 


 
 
56
Talkativeness 
 
 
 
 
í.043 (0.035) 
Honesty 
 
 
 
 
í.070 (0.054) 
Professionalism 
 
 
 
 
0.091* (0.053) 
Self-awareness 
 
 
 
 
í.057 (0.051) 
Career orientation 
 
 
 
 
0.263*** (0.047) 
Current health 
 
 
 
 
0.019 (0.045) 
N 
1,616 
 
 
 
 
Notes. Abbreviations used: s. (scale consisting of multiple items), ref. (reference category), req. (required), c. (continuous) and tert. edu. (tertiary education). The presented 
statistics are coefficient estimates and their standard errors in parentheses for the mediation model outlined in Subsection 3.2. Standard errors are corrected for clustering of the 
observations at the participant level. *** (**) ((*)) indicates significance at the 1% (5%) ((10%)) significance level. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
57
Appendix Table 40RGHUDWLRQDQDO\VHVEHWZHHQFDQGLGDWHV¶KRPRVH[XDOLGHQWLWLHVDQGSDUWLFLSDQWV¶KRPRQHJDWLYHDWWLWXGHV, with perception 
items as outcomes 
Dependent variable 
Homosexual male × Homonegativity (s.) 
Homosexual female × Homonegativity (s.) 
Ǻ 
p 
ȕ  
p 
Perceived collaborationa 
í 
0.462 
í 
0.078 
Perceived collaboration towards employers 
í 
0.532 
í 
0.024 
Perceived collaboration towards coworkers 
í 
0.460 
í 
0.171 
Perceived collaboration towards clients 
í 
0.418 
í 
0.166 
Perceived social skills 
í 
0.005 
í 
0.049 
Perceived assertiveness 
í 
0.049 
í 
0.077 
Perceived outspokenness 
í 
0.675 
0.103 
0.449 
Perceived dominance 
í 
0.010 
í 
0.201 
Perceived independence 
í 
0.165 
í 
0.028 
Perceived competitiveness 
í 
0.002 
í 
0.066 
Perceived leadership 
í 
0.001 
í 
0.002 
Perceived team orientation 
í 
0.010 
í 
0.011 
Perceived empathy 
í 
0.162 
í 
0.069 
Perceived softness of personality 
í 
0.747 
í 
0.253 
Perceived emotional sensitivity 
0.077 
0.624 
í 
0.977 
Perceived neatness 
0.004 
0.970 
í 
0.196 
Perceived intelligence 
í 
0.001 
í 
0.001 
Perceived open-mindedness 
0.050 
0.730 
0.108 
0.448 
Perceived creativity 
í 
0.043 
í 
0.863 
Perceived talkativeness 
í 
0.327 
í 
0.833 
Perceived honesty 
í 
0.001 
í 
0.036 
Perceived professionalism 
í 
0.001 
í 
0.005 
Perceived self-awareness 
í 
0.003 
í 
0.533 
Perceived career orientation 
í 
0.016 
í 
0.005 
Perceived current health 
í 
0.001 
í 
0.010 
Notes. 7KHDEEUHYLDWLRQVVFDOHFRQVLVWLQJRIPXOWLSOHLWHPVLVXVHG&RHIILFLHQWHVWLPDWHVRILQWHUDFWLRQWHUPVUHODWHGWRSYDOXHVEHORZDUHLQEROG୹LQGLFDWHVRXWFRPH
YDULDEOHVZLWKVFDOHVFRPSULVLQJPXOWLSOHLWHPV7KHUHJUHVVLRQPRGHO¶VSUHGLFWRUV DUHLGHQWLFDOWRWKRVHRI7DEOH¶VFROXPQ6WDQGDUGHUURUVDUHFRUUHFWHGIRUFOXVWHULQJRI
the observations at the participant level.