7 Key Takeaways
Low Incomes, a Lack of Affordable Housing, and Weak Safety Nets Drive Record High Homelessness
When people cannot afford to pay rent, homelessness increases. America’s housing affordability crisis is caused by deeply rooted challenges:
- not enough deeply affordable housing development and preservation;
- inadequate rental assistance programs, persistently low incomes, and weak safety nets like social security that help people pay for housing;
- the end of federal COVID-19 relief funds, which temporarily expanded assistance programs and household incomes; and
- discriminatory policies and practices that make it even harder for certain groups to find housing.
The lack of deeply affordable housing is the primary cause of homelessness. For many, rising costs create an impossible choice between paying for housing and other necessities like healthcare, groceries, or clothing.
Only 35 affordable and available rental homes exist for every 100 extremely low-income renter households. Year after year, this number stays the same or shifts incrementally as the development and preservation of affordable housing does not keep up with demand. Meanwhile, elected officials have failed to fix the problem, especially by allocating too few resources to programs that help people pay for increasingly expensive rents.
Failing Systems Push Affordable Housing Further Out of Reach
In this context, people across the country, from every demographic group and geography, are unable to find housing. But discriminatory policies, stigma, and a lack of coordinated support services make it even harder for specific groups. People of color; gender-expansive peopleGender Expansive
People whose identity differs from their birth sex and/or who don’t solely identify as male or female. HUD asks people experiencing homelessness to select their gender identity, but the categories have changed over time.; and people who are in the immigration system, the child welfare system, the criminal-legal system, and the healthcare system face different but significant barriers to finding stable housing. For example, people who have a criminal record often experience discrimination when applying for a lease or a job. In a scarce affordable housing markets with minimal social safety nets, any policies and practices that create additional obstacles can push people into homelessness.  
In 2023 and 2024, the already-stretched homeless response system was also responding to a new development. Large numbers of new arrivals, including many children, entered the United States, seeking economic opportunity and often fleeing persecution and unsafe conditions in their home countries. Underfunded housing and resettlement programs — together with policies that prevent asylum seekers from being able to work for nearly a year — forced many to turn to local homeless service providers for assistance. As a result, homeless services systems became a part of a political storm that too often pits vulnerable groups against one another. However, experts on homelessness have long known that America has the resources and know-how to end homelessness for all people, including recent arrivals.
These barriers to housing are reflected in the data. According to the 2024 PIT CountPoint-in-Time (PIT) Count
HUD’s annual census of people experiencing homelessness — both sheltered and unsheltered — on a single night in January., the following was true about homelessness in America:
- More people in the United States were experiencing homelessness compared with any year since 2007 (when data collection began) — a total of 771,480 people.
- Overall homelessness increased by 18 percent since the previous year (2023).
- More people (118,376) did not have a home in 2024 than in 2023.
- The overwhelming majority (82 percent) of Continuums of Care (CoCs)Continuum of Care (CoC)
The planning bodies that coordinate housing and supportive services to families and individuals experiencing homelessness in a particular locality, region, or geographic area. experienced increases in homelessness.
- First-time homelessness has also been on the rise (increasing 23 percent since 2019)1. Federal and state resources for people experiencing homelessness are not keeping up with demand in most communities.
It is imperative to focus the most attention on the central issues that drive the homelessness crisis: housing costs and low incomes. Research demonstrates the relationship between high housing costs and homelessness. According to the U.S. Government Accountability Office, when a CoC’s median rent increased $100, homelessness rose by 9 percent. From 2001–2023, median rents increased 23 percent (after adjusting for inflation) while renters’ median incomes rose just 5 percent.
Rising housing costs and low incomes are causing more people to experience homelessness for the first time2. While the PIT Count captures data from a point in time, the most recent data collected over the course of a year — in 2022 — indicated that approximately 686,000 households experiencing homelessness and seeking shelter did so for the first time. Without solutions to address the housing affordability crisis, it is likely that more people will continue to experience housing insecurity and flow into homelessness systems.
Millions of People Are on the Brink of Homelessness
If a household cannot find housing or afford to pay for it, they would be described as housing insecure and at risk of experiencing homelessness. Rising housing insecurity is reflected in the number of households spending 50 percent or more of their income on housing costs (referred to as severely housing cost-burdened households) and the number of people who live in overcrowded homes with friends, family, or acquaintances due to financial reasons (referred to as doubled up individuals). These indicators point to an underlying problem: people face systemic barriers to finding a stable home.
Severe housing cost burden is common.
Two out of three extremely low-income renter households live in poverty and are severely housing cost-burdened Housing Cost Burdened
Cost-burdened households spend 30 percent or more of income on housing; severely cost-burdened spend 50 percent or more.  (over 7.2 million households).
Severe housing cost burden is increasing.
From 2022 to 2023, the number of severely housing cost-burdened households increased in more than half of states.
Cost burdens do not impact all groups equally.
Black and Native American communities consistently face the most significant challenges.
Current and historic discrimination in federal housing programs, employment, education, and the economy have made it more difficult for all groups of color to rent or own housing. Large increases in rental costs impact these groups more.
Many people live doubled up out of financial necessity.
In addition to those who are cost-burdened, nearly 3.2 million people live doubled upDoubled Up
A person who is living in overcrowded housing out of financial necessity.. This is another indicator that a person may be at risk of literal homelessness (i.e., living in shelters or in unsheltered locations).
Nearly half of survey participants in the recent California Statewide Study of People Experiencing Homelessness reported living in doubled up situations before experiencing homelessness. Some contributed to the rent, while others did not; but all doubled up arrangements were temporary and lacked the legal protections that being a leaseholder could provide.
The number of people living doubled up is increasing in some places.
In 21 states (including Texas, Florida, Illinois, Hawaii, and the District of Columbia), the number of people living doubled up increased from 2022 to 2023. It is not always ideal to move in with friends or family: multiple people may be crammed into small spaces, live with an abusive host, or be put at risk of eviction if additional residents violate a host’s lease. While some households may prefer to live together, the Alliance’s methodology to calculate doubled up homelessness only counts those people who are likely doubling up due to financial necessity.
How do Systems and Communities Respond to Homelessness?
Nationally, systems and communities are responding to increases in homelessness by expanding their numbers of shelter beds, permanent housingPermanent Housing
HUD defines permanent housing as community-based housing with no set time limit, where participants hold a lease of at least one year, renewable monthly, and terminable only for cause. units, and services. However, it is not nearly enough to keep up with demand. In 2024, no state had enough permanent housing for everyone experiencing homelessness.  
Rather than addressing those needs, some elected officials are fining, jailing, and punishing people experiencing homelessness. This wastes taxpayer dollars, and it makes it harder for providers to help people exit homelessness.
The U.S. Department of Housing & Urban Development (HUD) data for 2024 indicate:
While there have been reductions in their capacity to shelter and house people, workers and leaders in the homelessness response system are serving more people than ever before. On the night of the annual PIT CountPoint-in-Time (PIT) Count
HUD’s annual census of people experiencing homelessness — both sheltered and unsheltered — on a single night in January., more than 1.1 million people relied on the response system for shelter or permanent housing.3
While the total number of people experiencing unsheltered homelessness increased, a greater share of people experiencing homelessness are sheltered. This indicates that when response workers are given more resources, they use them to serve more people in need.
Still, given shortages in affordable housing, many of these workers are overcoming tremendous challenges when they try to move people from sheltered or unsheltered homelessness into permanent housing.
Current Policy Shifts May Exacerbate Challenges, Especially for Vulnerable Groups
As described above, an ongoing affordable housing crisis and other factors are causing millions of Americans to be homeless or on the brink of homelessness, and homeless services systems are under-resourced to serve everyone in need. It is within this context that the federal policy world has begun a noticeable shift. In 2025, the Executive and Legislative branches took steps to dramatically reduce the size of the federal government, including reducing investments in housing and other anti-poverty programs. Furthermore, the President has urged other shifts in homelessness policy, including ending the federal CoCContinuum of Care (CoC)
The planning bodies that coordinate housing and supportive services to families and individuals experiencing homelessness in a particular locality, region, or geographic area. program and upending proven solutions to homelessness in favor of approaches that do not work. The dangers are apparent:
- An estimated 218,000 people (often older adults, people with disabilities, and people with health challenges) relied on the federal CoC program for housing and services through Permanent Supportive Housing (PSH)Permanent Supportive Housing (PSH)
Permanent housing with housing assistance and supportive services to help households with a disabled member maintain housing stability. in 2024.
- More than 9 million people who struggle to afford market-rate housing rely on federal rental assistance.
- Rural and suburban communities, including in many southern and midwestern states, disproportionately rely on federal government resources to provide housing.
The current policy environment could cause untold numbers of housed low-income people to lose their housing. Cutting resources for proven solutions while increasing resources toward punitive approaches (like jailing people experiencing homelessness) will make it especially difficult for people who use substances and people with severe mental illness to stay housed and connect with the care they need. Not all areas of the country would be impacted equally, but states on both sides of the political aisle could be devastated. The goal of ending homelessness may become further out of reach.
Who Does Homelessness Impact?
Without enough affordable housing units, income support, and emergency response resources to reach everyone in need, one medical bill, job loss, or natural disaster can cause someone to experience homelessness. However, certain groups are more likely to face challenges accessing the resources they need to stay housed. Once homeless, many of these same groups also face challenges accessing emergency resources. This section describes these important demographic trends among people experiencing homelessness.
Many of the demographic trends outlined in this section were also impacted by changes in immigration. The United States is a nation of immigrants, with immigration rates fluctuating over time. At the time 2024 data were published, these numbers temporarily increased as more new residents were fleeing violence, persecution, economic displacement, and climate disaster to seek refuge in the United States.
However, research indicates that the United States’ approach to engaging with new arrivals is inadequate. Policies and regulations in the United States cause asylum seekers to face unique challenges accessing housing. These may include policies that exclude them from the workforce; obstacles acquiring the documentation that is necessary to access housing, nutrition or health support; and language barriers. They may also face discrimination from landlords and not fully understand their rights. In some instances, asylum seekers were also intentionally sent to communities where they did not know people, making it impossible for them to rely on family or friends for support. Without robust social networks to fall back on, the homeless response system may be their only option. To meet the growing need for affordable housing and homeless services across all communities, the response system needs more resources.
Stark racial and ethnic disparities in homelessness: people of color are overrepresented.
Homelessness disproportionately impacts people of color. It is a racial justice issue. Historical and contemporary discrimination and exclusion from housing, education, employment, and wealth-building, and discriminatory practices in the criminal-legal system make it harder for Black, Indigenous, and people of color (BIPOC) to access financial resources and safe, stable housing. Twentieth-century policies like redlining and legally sanctioned segregation systematically excluded people from buying homes that could be passed down to their children, as well as other housing opportunities. This continues to have negative impacts today. For example, as noted below, people of color are still less likely to be homeowners than White people.
Many groups of color are more likely than the overall population to be severely rent-burdened, paying more than half of their incomes on rent. Renters of color, and especially Black renters, experience higher eviction rates than White renters. Research from the Eviction Lab and the U.S. Census Bureau show that more than half of all eviction filings are against Black renters despite the group representing only 18 percent of renters.
Additionally, the nation’s social safety net does not distribute resources in ways that meaningfully address the impacts of systemic and individual discrimination and exclusion. This is reflected in high, and growing, rates of overall homelessness and unsheltered homelessnessUnsheltered Homelessness
HUD defines “unsheltered” as sleeping in places not designed for, or ordinarily used as, a regular sleeping accommodation — such as tents, train stations, sheds, or garages unfit for habitation. among Black and Indigenous people in particular. Although it is illegal to exclude a person from housing based on their race, data indicate that people of color face more harassment and discrimination when searching for a place to live. To ensure that everyone has an opportunity to access safe, stable housing, organizations and local officials need funding to enforce existing protections against discrimination. Communities of color also need targeted housing and economic support to address the impacts of systemic and deliberate efforts to withhold resources from them.
Most subgroups experienced large increases in homelessness in the years since the COVID-19 pandemic, but because of the reasons outlined above, Hispanic/Latino, Asian American, Black and Native communities experienced the largest increases. Groups already more likely to be severely housing cost-burdened Housing Cost Burdened
Cost-burdened households spend 30 percent or more of income on housing; severely cost-burdened spend 50 percent or more. were impacted by rising rents and a slower jobs recovery rate. It is also likely that more Latino, Black, and Asian new arrivals are experiencing homelessness as a result of antiquated and failing immigration systems. These factors exacerbate existing inequities among these racial groups. Increasing resources for the homeless response system to better address these disparities would help build local economies and create more abundant communities for everyone.
Once homeless, some racial groups face greater challenges accessing emergency resources. This leads to higher rates of unsheltered homelessness. Even as unsheltered homelessness decreased between the 2023 and 2024 PIT CountsPoint-in-Time (PIT) Count
HUD’s annual census of people experiencing homelessness — both sheltered and unsheltered — on a single night in January., multi-racial and Indigenous people remained most likely to experience unsheltered homelessness.
These trends are important. It is also important to acknowledge that trends within these groups are less visible because government agencies tend to use broad race categories. For example, there are big differences in rates of housing insecurity within the umbrella term “Asian American.” Additionally, HUD added the category “Middle Eastern or North African” to the PIT Count for the first time in 2024. This may have impacted trends in other categories.
From 2023 to 2024, families with children experienced the largest year-over-year increase in homelessness of any group.
During the decade leading up to 2023, many communities were driving large decreases in homelessness among families because policymakers and practitioners often prioritize them for resources. These reductions quickened during the COVID-19 pandemic as investments in child care, healthcare, nutrition, and income programs for families with children grew. This created more economic stability for low-income families and lowered childhood poverty rates significantly. However, the end of increased investments tied to COVID-19 relief, coupled with a demand for affordable housing that greatly exceeds existing supply, is contributing to reversals of this progress.
Individuals remain the single largest group of people experiencing homelessness.
Individuals represent the largest subgroup of people experiencing homelessness. Since 2017, as housing costs rose and people faced greater challenges paying for rent, more individuals entered into homelessness. They simply had fewer housing options. Over the last couple of decades, the disappearance ofSingle Room Occupancy (SRO) units has coincided with rapid growths in single-person households. The lack of SROs impacts housing for people in various types of transitions, including young adults leaving their homes or foster care, those exiting relationships that involved co-habitating, people exiting institutions (prisons, jails, rehabilitation programs), or recent immigrants starting their lives in America. In 2024, 66 percent (512,007) of people experiencing homelessness were individuals. Among those living unshelteredUnsheltered Homelessness
HUD defines “unsheltered” as sleeping in places not designed for, or ordinarily used as, a regular sleeping accommodation — such as tents, train stations, sheds, or garages unfit for habitation., 93 percent were individuals.
Recurring homelessness among disabled people, most of whom are individuals, continues to rise in response to a shortage of accessible, affordable housing units.
People who have experienced homelessness for at least a year — or four separate times in the past three years, totaling one year — while having a disabling condition (such as a physical disability, chronic illness, or a challenge with their behavioral health or substance use) are considered chronically homeless.
- According to the 2024 PIT CountPoint-in-Time (PIT) Count
 HUD’s annual census of people experiencing homelessness — both sheltered and unsheltered — on a single night in January., 61 percent of people experiencing chronic homelessnessChronic Homelessness
 The status of being homeless for at least a year — or on at least four separate occasions in the past three years — while experiencing a disabling condition such as a physical disability, serious mental illness or substance use disorder. were unshelteredUnsheltered Homelessness
HUD defines “unsheltered” as sleeping in places not designed for, or ordinarily used as, a regular sleeping accommodation — such as tents, train stations, sheds, or garages unfit for habitation..
- A large share (37 percent) of individuals experiencing chronic homelessness lived in a suburban or a rural area. These areas also experienced the largest increases in chronic homelessness from 2023 to 2024 (12.7 percent and 21.6 percent respectively).
Funding for deeply subsidized housing and services has not kept up with this population’s needs. Disabled people are often at a disadvantage when trying to access stable housing — they are paid subminimum wages and benefits, excluded from economic and housing opportunities, and face a high risk of eviction. Often, available housing does not meet their needs. As more people needed assistance and elected officials failed to invest enough resources to keep pace with this demand, people experiencing chronic homelessness increased rapidly.
As this population increased, some lawmakers endorsed ineffective approaches to chronic and unsheltered homelessness — like stigmatizing and punishing people who use substances or have mental health conditions but failed to enact real solutions. Abundant evidence demonstrates that homelessness is caused by a shortage of affordable housing and services for people in need. Punishing people experiencing homelessness only makes it more difficult to house them and does not improve public health or public safety. In fact, these policies waste money that could be used to address deep shortages in healthcare and affordable housing, as they further traumatize individuals who are simply trying to survive.
On the other hand, the solutions to chronic homelessness are clear. Permanent housingPermanent Housing
HUD defines permanent housing as community-based housing with no set time limit, where participants hold a lease of at least one year, renewable monthly, and terminable only for cause., paired with wraparound voluntary services like healthcare, is most successful at keeping this population stably housed. Data suggest Permanent Supportive Housing (PSH)Permanent Supportive Housing (PSH)
Permanent housing with housing assistance and supportive services to help households with a disabled member maintain housing stability. consistently keeps over 90 percent of its residents housed. It is likely that this also saves the public money. Because of how difficult it is to live outside, people experiencing chronic homelessness come into contact with costlier systems, including emergency rooms and jails, more frequently than the overall population. These costs go down when lawmakers invest in approaches grounded in the Housing First model, like PSH.
Despite PSH being well-supported by evidence, proposals from the current administration seek to limit funding to programs using the Housing First model. This will be worsened by the funding expiration for Emergency Housing Vouchers, an extraordinarily successful investment introduced in 2021 to more rapidly connect vulnerable populations with housing. The United States could end chronic homelessness with a greater investment in PSH and other evidence-based strategies.
Children experienced the largest increases in homelessness, but adults continue to be more likely to experience it.
Key data points related to homelessness vary by age group:
- The number of childrenChildren
 The term “children” refers to all people who are under the age of 18. The term “Youth” includes people who are under the age of 25. Both categories include youth who are in families and youth who are unaccompanied. experiencing homelessness increased 33 percent between 2023 and 2024 — the highest annual increase across all age groups. During the 2024 PIT CountPoint-in-Time (PIT) Count
HUD’s annual census of people experiencing homelessness — both sheltered and unsheltered — on a single night in January., 148,238 people experiencing homelessness were under the age of 18.
- Among adults, 35 out of every 10,000 people aged 35–44 experienced homelessness during the 2024 PIT Count — the highest rate of homelessness across all age groups.
- Adults over 45 years of age experienced higher rates of unsheltered homelessnessUnsheltered Homelessness
HUD defines “unsheltered” as sleeping in places not designed for, or ordinarily used as, a regular sleeping accommodation — such as tents, train stations, sheds, or garages unfit for habitation. than their younger counterparts.
Youth (Under Age 25)
During the 2024 PIT Count, 205,878 people (or 27 percent of all people who experienced homelessness) were under the age of 25. This is a 29 percent increase since 2023. According to research by Chapin Hall, one out of every 10 people 18 to 25 years of age experience homelessness at some point over the year.
Not all young people are equally impacted. While the total number of unaccompanied youthUnaccompanied Youth
HUD defines “unaccompanied youth” as people under the age of 25 who do not have children and are living without a parent or guardian present. Unaccompanied gender-expansive youth are also a part of this group. experiencing homelessness has increased 9 percent since the 2019 PIT Count, the number who are gender-expansiveGender Expansive
People whose identity differs from their birth sex and/or who don’t solely identify as male or female. HUD asks people experiencing homelessness to select their gender identity, but the categories have changed over time. increased 57 percent. Research also indicates that Latino, Black, Asian, and Multiracial youth all experience homelessness at higher rates than youth overall.
Currently, less than 8 percent of children experience unsheltered homelessness, which is the lowest share among all age groups. Programs that target resources toward children and youth, including the federal Youth Homelessness Demonstration Program (YHDP) and Runaway Homeless Youth Act, have been significantly successful in stabilizing the housing of youth throughout the country. However, some youth still go without shelter and recent federal-level policy proposals threaten to reduce or eliminate their funding.
Parenting Youth
Of new concern is the fact that the number of parenting youthParenting Youth
People under age 25 who are the parents or legal guardians of one or more children (under age 18) and live with their child(ren) without anyone above the age of 24. experiencing homelessness also increased 28 percent since 2023, reversing a downward trend since HUD began reporting data on parenting youth in 2015.
Older Adults
Older adults — those 55 and older — face unique challenges. They are the fastest-growing group of people experiencing homelessness in America and are increasingly cost-burdened Housing Cost Burdened
Cost-burdened households spend 30 percent or more of income on housing; severely cost-burdened spend 50 percent or more. as rising costs of living exceed Social Security Income. This is a growing crisis: the number of older adults experiencing homelessness is estimated to triple between 2017 and 2030.
The majority of people experiencing homelessness are men, but the number of women experiencing homelessness is growing quickly.
- According to the 2024 PIT CountPoint-in-Time (PIT) Count
HUD’s annual census of people experiencing homelessness — both sheltered and unsheltered — on a single night in January., 60 percent of people experiencing homelessness were men.
- 28 out of every 10,000 men experienced homelessness, a 15 percent increase from 2023.
- 18 out of every 10,000 women experienced homelessness, a 19 percent increase from 2023.
Individual men make up the majority of people experiencing homelessness, and men of color are overrepresented among individual men experiencing homelessness. However, homelessness among women is increasing at a faster pace than among men. Unsheltered homelessnessUnsheltered Homelessness
HUD defines “unsheltered” as sleeping in places not designed for, or ordinarily used as, a regular sleeping accommodation — such as tents, train stations, sheds, or garages unfit for habitation. among both men and women decreased from 2023–2024, but men remained more likely to be unsheltered. Responding to the increased housing challenges among women addresses an emerging concern before it has an opportunity to worsen. At the same time, focusing on men living on their own (the largest subgroup within homelessness) would significantly reduce homelessness.
HUD does not report data at the intersection of race and gender; however, men and women of color face specific challenges accessing safe and deeply affordable housing. Ensuring that people of color, and especially individuals of color, have access to housing will be an important step toward ensuring that everyone has the housing they need to contribute to more prosperous communities.
Gender-expansive people — people who identify as transgender, nonbinary, more than one gender, gender questioning, or a culturally specific identity — face discrimination, exclusion, and violence. Evidence suggests that these experiences push them into homelessness at higher rates.
Since data reporting about this population began in 2015, gender-expansive peopleGender Expansive
People whose identity differs from their birth sex and/or who don’t solely identify as male or female. HUD asks people experiencing homelessness to select their gender identity, but the categories have changed over time. have consistently experienced faster increases in homelessness and higher rates of unsheltered homelessnessUnsheltered Homelessness
HUD defines “unsheltered” as sleeping in places not designed for, or ordinarily used as, a regular sleeping accommodation — such as tents, train stations, sheds, or garages unfit for habitation. than cisgender people. Gender-expansive people face housing discrimination, harassment, violence, employment discrimination, and barriers to accessing social safety nets. This leads to a heightened risk of homelessness. While it is likely that these systemic barriers have always caused high rates of gender-expansive homelessness, data collection is only beginning to capture the full impact that these barriers have on housing security.
Since 2015, homelessness among gender-expansive people increased 618 percent, compared with a 35 percent increase among cisgender men and women. In part, these increases are attributable to HUD adding new categories to the PIT CountPoint-in-Time (PIT) Count
HUD’s annual census of people experiencing homelessness — both sheltered and unsheltered — on a single night in January. that do a better job capturing the gender-expansive community. However, gender-expansive people are consistently overrepresented in the unsheltered population, indicating that they also continue to face greater challenges accessing shelter and permanent housingPermanent Housing
HUD defines permanent housing as community-based housing with no set time limit, where participants hold a lease of at least one year, renewable monthly, and terminable only for cause.. Among gender questioning people and people with a culturally specific gender identity experiencing homelessness, 8 in 10 did not stay in shelter. These trends emphasize that gender-expansive people experiencing homelessness have not been reflected in policy and practice to the degree that is necessary to meet their needs.
Based on independent analyses, it is also likely that gender-expansive people experience high rates of homelessness relative to their population size. A 2022 national survey of transgender people found that 34 percent of respondents were currently experiencing poverty, and 30 percent experienced homelessness during their lifetime. These factors point to the urgent need to create and expand policies that make services more accessible and inclusive for gender-expansive households.
Where People Experiencing Homelessness Live and Why It Matters
People experience homelessness in every part of the United States. Large cities, small towns, wealthy communities, and under-resourced communities all have residents who are struggling and need support. Still, we could greatly accelerate progress toward ending homelessness in America by mobilizing effective interventions targeting a few geographic categories. This includes:
States with the Largest Homeless Populations
In January 2024, 64 percent of people experiencing homelessness lived in 7 states with significantly large urban areas: California, Illinois, Texas, Massachusetts, Florida, Washington, and New York.
States with the Fastest Growing Homeless Populations
The fastest increases in the number of people experiencing homelessness from 2023 to 2024 occurred in Colorado, West Virginia, Alabama, Hawaii, Illinois, and New York.
Non-Urban Areas Struggling to Serve Everyone Living Outside
In January of 2024, 37 percent of people experiencing homelessness in suburban areas and 45 percent of people experiencing homelessness in (often geographically large) rural areas live unshelteredUnsheltered Homelessness
HUD defines “unsheltered” as sleeping in places not designed for, or ordinarily used as, a regular sleeping accommodation — such as tents, train stations, sheds, or garages unfit for habitation.. When compared to urban areas, rural, and suburban communities tend to rely on federal resources the most.
Thus, Congress holds a significant role in bringing everyone in non-urban areas inside.
Targeting attention on key categories of communities is helpful. But totally ending homelessness requires focusing on every community in America and charting their progress toward housing everyone in need. Therefore, a national strategy must incorporate the needs of all states and communities.
One way to understand these local needs is to examine the state population counts. Population counts reveal that, in 2024, many states experienced setbacks rooted in high housing costs, low-income growth, and weak safety nets. With the end of pandemic assistance to households, rising inflation, slower income growth, and an increase in natural disasters, more people faced challenges staying housed. Even states that had made progress reducing homelessness over the last decades saw increases in their homeless populations between 2023 and 2024. But some states were able to sustain progress.
A second way to understand every state’s progress toward ending homelessness is to focus on experiences of homelessness per capita (i.e., comparing the size of the homeless and overall populations). High housing costs and a weak safety net can cause a greater percentage of a state’s residents to fall into homelessness. For example, states like California and Washington that have high housing costs also have relatively high percentages of people experiencing homelessness.
The United States Can End Homelessness — Communities Need Sustained Investments from Lawmakers
The homeless services sector provides shelter, housing and services to people experiencing homelessness with incredible success. Despite having too few resources and being consistently underpaid, they continue to serve more than a million people each year. Undoubtedly, without their work, far more people would remain homeless for much longer periods of time.
Dramatic cuts to programs will make it harder for people to access the support they need to stay housed. Efforts to fine, cite, arrest, and jail people experiencing unsheltered homelessnessUnsheltered Homelessness
HUD defines “unsheltered” as sleeping in places not designed for, or ordinarily used as, a regular sleeping accommodation — such as tents, train stations, sheds, or garages unfit for habitation. will waste resources and temporarily hide, rather than permanently solve, the problem. By allocating more state and federal investments to expand the crisis response system, building and preserving affordable housing, and ensuring that people have access to voluntary supportive services like healthcare, the United States can end homelessness.
How do we know that ending homelessness is possible? At least two pieces of evidence help answer that question.
First, the homelessness response system has a track record of success. It reduced overall homelessness and unsheltered homelessness from 2010 to 2019. It also ensured that homelessness did not spike during the pandemic, despite large increases in financial hardship. This is because Congress made large investments in Emergency Rental Assistance and income support. Although there have been large increases in the number of people experiencing homelessness in the past two years due to rising housing costs and inadequate incomes, past results suggest that investments can reduce homelessness. Investment levels have simply never been enough to completely end the need for a homelessness response.
A second source of evidence for the United States’ ability to end homelessness is the “Ending Veteran Homelessness Initiative.” In 2009, the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) collaborated with HUD to implement specific services for veterans experiencing homelessness.
During this initiative, a federal evaluation found that veteran homelessness decreased 55 percent (compared to the 8 percent decrease among the overall population) from 2009 to 2022. To achieve this significant reduction, the VA and HUD:
The Housing First approach also saved taxpayers money. A VA analysis found that robust housing plus services was significantly less expensive than various costs associated with being unhoused (including for emergency healthcare, criminal legal system costs, and other social services).
From 2022 to 2023, the resources to support this approach did not keep up with increases in veteran homelessness. Lawmakers noticed and responded with a small increase in the number of housing vouchers available to veterans in 2024. Lawmakers can sustain and expand these increases to fully meet the needs of veterans. They should also offer similar housing and services to the rest of the population experiencing homelessness. People need affordable housing and services to stay housed and contribute to their communities.
The U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs approach demonstrates that when it is sustainably funded to meet communities’ needs, the homelessness response system can rehouse people experiencing homelessness and help to keep them housed. Lawmakers need to learn from this success and ensure that the response system has the resources required to serve everyone currently experiencing homelessness. Like the VA, they also need to reduce the number of people becoming homeless and make it easier for the response system to rehouse people more quickly. They can do this by expanding deeply affordable housing development, preserving the affordability of existing housing, and expanding rental assistance and other safety net programs, like income support and affordable healthcare programs.
The VA was successful because it provided deeply affordable permanent housing, accessible temporary shelter, rental assistance, and programs that provide wraparound services with the funds they require to make these life-saving resources universally available to people in need. Keeping people housed, quickly rehousing people when homelessness does occur, and targeting programs to those communities and populations who are most at risk of homelessness can help to promote more prosperous communities for everyone.
Endnotes
- Department of Housing and Urban Development, “CoC System Performance Measures” (Accessed May 2025). People experiencing homelessness for the first time have either never been homeless or have not experienced homelessness for 2 or more years at the time of their most recent experience of homelessness. ↩︎
- People experiencing homelessness for the first time have either never been homeless or have not experienced homelessness for 2 or more years at the time of their most recent experience of homelessness. ↩︎
- People who formerly experienced homelessness but are now living in permanent housing provided by the homeless response system are not considered homeless but they are receiving services from the homeless response system. This number is therefore higher than the PIT Count of people sleeping unsheltered or in a shelter. ↩︎
Interested in
learning more?
Subscribe today to stay informed and get regular updates from the Alliance.