Definition of Arrest and Police Custody
An arrest happens when a suspect feels like he or she is not free to leave, the point at which his or her liberty has imposed limits placed by the law.
Although there is no single, universally accepted standard for what constitutes an arrest, it starts when the officer deprives a suspect of freedom of action in a meaningful way. There cannot be an arrest without restraint, and for some form of restraint, an arrest is required to take place.
Situations Leading to Arrest Procedure
An arrest may take place through a variety of situations, like when an officer physically touches or restrains the suspect, indicating an intention to take the suspect into police custody, or when the suspect agrees to some form of arrest.
Other circumstances include the suspect being put in handcuffs or a law enforcement vehicle or being told outright that they are under arrest. The actions that lead to that point, when the suspect is no longer free to leave, define an arrest.
Probable Cause and Arrest Warrants
An arrest must be grounded in probable cause, a reasonable belief, backed by facts, that a suspect has committed a crime. This can be determined through an officer's observations, witness statements, or physical evidence.
An arrest warrant is an official document signed by a judge that allows for the arrest of a specified person. Arrest warrants aren't simply issued; they have to be supported by evidence presented to a prosecuting attorney and a judge.
Police Procedure for Arresting Someone
To arrest someone legally, an officer must impede that person's freedom of movement in some way, but that doesn't only mean a suspect has to be handcuffed, put in the back of a law enforcement vehicle, or expressly informed that he's under arrest.
Arrests also vary based on jurisdiction, and while it's common in movies to see officers reading Miranda rights during an arrest, they are not required for the arrest to be valid. However, officers must adhere to protocols that vary by locale.
Moreover, officers may not use excessive force, which is defined as using more force than necessary to effect the arrest. If the amount of force used is greater than necessary, it may violate the suspect's constitutional rights, and in certain situations, the suspect may have the legal right to resist the arrest.
What Happens After Arrest
Following an arrest, a suspect goes through a series of administrative tasks. These tasks include photographing and fingerprinting the suspect and officers consulting databases to determine whether the suspect has any outstanding cases or warrants. It helps with the consolidation of the suspect's matters if need be.
Concluding these tasks, the suspect will be given their first appearance  before a judge within 48 hours. He or she must go for an appearance before a judge, where that judge reads the suspect the charges and discusses bail conditions and where the suspect pleads "guilty or not guilty." This makes the criminal trial process official.
		
		
			Read Police Procedure for Arresting Someone | Definition & Process Lesson