Factors Associated with Academic Achievement for Sexual and Gender Minority and 
Heterosexual Cisgender Students: Implications from a Nationally Representative Study 
 
 
Abstract 
 
Research on sexual and gender minority student achievement indicates that such students report 
lowered achievement relative to other students. Increased victimization and less school 
belonging, amongst other factors, have been identified as contributing to these inequalities. 
However, supportive schooling structures and caregiver support may support their achievement. 
A nationally representative survey of secondary school students was used to identify specific 
factors that support achievement for sexual minority (n = 485), gender minority (n = 298), and 
heterosexual cisgender (where one’s sex assigned at birth “matches” a binary gender identity, 
i.e., a male assigned at birth identifies as a boy/man, n = 7,064) students in New Zealand. While 
reported victimization did not affect achievement for sexual and gender minority students, 
school belonging, and teacher expectations of success emerged as significant factors. 
Differences emerged between sexual minority and gender minority achievement factors, 
suggesting a range of detailed policy implications and recommendations.   
Keywords: ⚫LGBTQIA+ Students ⚫Academic Achievement ⚫Teacher Expectations ⚫ 
School Belonging.  
 


2 
 
Factors Associated with Academic Achievement for Sexual and Gender Minority and 
Heterosexual Cisgender students: Implications from a Nationally Representative Study 
 
Introduction 
Despite decades of evidence demonstrating significant inequalities for sexual and gender 
minority young people (Russell and Fish 2016), only a handful of quantitative studies, 
predominantly from the United States of America (USA), have focused on sexual and gender 
minority student achievement in depth. Findings indicate that sexual and gender minority 
students’ learning is significantly compromised relative to heterosexual and cisgender (where 
one’s sex assigned at birth “matches” a binary gender identity, i.e., a male assigned at birth 
identifies as a boy/man) peers. Disparities are apparent in Grades 7 through 12 in four major 
USA cities and some smaller states (Birkett et al. 2014); for those in the Midwest (Aragon et al. 
2014); for students in rural communities (Rostosky et al. 2003a); and among students in both 
waves of a nationally representative USA study (Pearson et al. 2007; Russell et al. 2001). The 
experiences of gender minority students in this research has usually not been explicitly explored 
or, if gender minority students are recognized, their experiences are combined with the more 
prevalent sexual minority students. It is important to note, that, of course, sexual and gender 
minority young people are not inherently inferior in terms of academic ability in comparison to 
their peers. Meyer’s minority stress model (2003) has been used to explain compromised 
outcomes and issues reported by sexual and gender minority young people. According to this 
model, it is the mistreatment and resulting distress that sexual and gender minority youth 
experience that increases their risk for a range of negative outcomes, including scholastically. 
The goal of this research is to understand the factors associated with achievement for sexual 
minority and gender minority students, as well as heterosexual cisgender students, to identify 
policy and practice recommendations to address these inequalities. Data from a nationally 
representative New Zealand sample provides an international perspective on this issue.   
Demographics: Socioeconomic Status, Ethnicity, and Sex Assigned at Birth 
Global research emphasizes the significance of socioeconomic status and deprivation on 
achievement (UNESCO 2017). In New Zealand, this pattern is also obvious, with the number of 
Year 13 students who received University Entrance (i.e., the highest school qualification in the 
country) being a third lower in the most deprived schools, at 30%, compared to those in the least 
deprived schools, where 65.3% of students achieved University Entrance (New Zealand 
Qualifications Authority 2017). The effects of systematic racism closely intertwine ethnicity 
with social economic status, making ethnicity the second major factor for predicting 
achievement in New Zealand. Achievement disparities are evident for “Pasifika” (30.7% 
achieving University Entrance) and indigenous Māori (31.4% achieving University Entrance) 


3 
 
students, compared to the European settler majority (57.8% achieving University Entrance). 
Conversely, “Asian” identified students are more likely to achieve (with 66.5% achieving 
University Entrance) than all other ethnicities. Following ethnicity, students’ sex assigned at 
birth is the next most significant demographic factor in relation to achievement, with 13.2% 
more female students achieving University Entrance than male students (i.e., 55.7% for females 
versus 42.5% for males) (New Zealand Qualifications Authority 2017).  
While the majority of the studies on sexual and gender minority achievement specifically 
control for social economic status and ethnicity, evidence from the USA suggests that parents’ 
highest education level, a potential proxy for social economic status, is correlated with female 
sexual minority student achievement but not male sexual minority student achievement (Pearson 
et al. 2007). Additionally, Pearson et al. (2007) found that sex assigned at birth was also 
associated with achievement differences, with male sexual minority students more likely to 
report disparities in comparison to heterosexual males than between female sexual minority and 
female heterosexual students. Conversely, in Birkett and colleagues’ (2014) study, male and 
female identified sexual minority students both had higher odds of poor grades compared to 
heterosexual students, however disparities here were greater for female sexual minority 
students.  
In reviewing the USA literature, Russell and Truong (2001) indicated that, on average, ethnic 
minority sexual minority youth report different experiences of school victimization than white 
sexual minority youth. They found that ethnic minority sexual minority youth were less likely to 
experience victimization from other students but more discrimination from teachers. In their 
nationally representative sample, Russell and Truong (2001) further found that ethnic minority 
sexual minority students were significantly less likely to differ from their ethnic minority 
heterosexual peers around negative attitudes towards schools, negative experiences, and lowered 
school expectations, whereas white sexual minority students were significantly more likely to be 
negatively impacted compared to their white heterosexual peers. Significant differences were 
also reflected in grade point average (GPA) scores between sexual minority white students and 
their white heterosexual peers, but not within other ethnic groups (though, the small sample size 
prevented statistical analysis of Asian American identified students). The reasons for ethnicity 
differences for sexual minority student experiences may reflect that students of color have 
developed strategies for managing racism, which may facilitate their resilience to later 
heterosexist victimization when compared to white sexual minority students who may have little 
earlier life experience with managing prejudice and mistreatment (Russell et al. 2001).    


4 
 
School Victimization  
A meta-analysis of longitudinal research demonstrates that students who report school 
victimization are more likely to report psychological distress (Reijntjes et al. 2010). 
Psychological distress from school victimization can include lowered self-worth and esteem, 
which is associated with reduced achievement (Juvonen et al. 2000). The mechanisms for 
psychological distress reducing achievement include decreased engagement and classroom 
participation (Buhs et al. 2006), especially if students are concerned for their physical safety, 
and avoid school due to fear for their safety.  
Concerns about physical safety at school are reported by sexual and gender minority students 
across the USA (Kosciw et al. 2018). A meta-analysis of 18 large scale USA studies from 2003 
to 2008 found that sexual minority students have significantly increased odds of missing school, 
due to fear for their safety, relative to heterosexual students (Friedman et al. 2011). In New 
Zealand’s Youth’12 research (i.e., the third survey wave from Youth 2000 series), 57.9% of 
sexual minority students in this nationally representative study of 8,166 school students  
reported feeling afraid that someone would hurt or bother them at school compared to 39.7% of 
heterosexual students (Lucassen et al. 2014). Further disparities were apparent in relation to 
reports of feeling safe at school all or most of the time, with twice as many sexual minority 
students (25.2%) not reporting feeling safe at school compared to their heterosexual peers 
(12.5%) (Lucassen et al. 2014). Furthermore, gender minority students from Youth’12 had 1.9 
times the odds of reporting feeling afraid that someone would hurt or bother them at school 
compared to their non-gender minority peers (Clark et al. 2014).  
Research from two large USA studies demonstrates that sexual minority students who 
experience more school victimization are significantly more likely to report a lower grade point 
average (Aragon et al. 2014), particularly for male sexual minority students (Birkett et al. 2014). 
The negative effects of victimization on achievement is also reflected in a predominantly multi-
ethnic USA sample (Craig and Smith 2014) and for gender minority as well as sexual minority 
students (Kosciw et al. 2018). Birkett and colleagues (2014) demonstrated that sexual and 
gender minority students who withdraw from school in relation to victimization may, 
understandably, do so out of concerns for their personal safety. Similar findings are found for 
various forms of school victimization, including verbal slurs, for sexual minority students in 
Israel and sexual and gender minority students in the USA (Pizmony-Levy and Kosciw 2016). 
A study by Poteat et al. (2011) found that homophobic school victimization versus general 
school victimization was associated with worse school outcomes for sexual minority students. A 
study of New Zealand sexual minority adults (N = 2,269) also found that retrospective reports of 
school bullying and physical assault were related to lower educational attainment and 
aspirations in adulthood (Henrickson 2008).  


5 
 
School Belonging  
Osterman’s (2000) review on the concept of school belonging describes it as a personal sense of 
being valued, accepted and included at school. School belonging is related to academic 
achievement through increased educational engagement (Fredricks et al. 2004), intrinsic 
motivation, and positive attitudes towards school, teachers, and students, as well as reduced 
levels of anxiety (Osterman 2000). Research on school belonging for sexual minority students 
in the USA demonstrates a significant association with achievement (Rostosky et al. 2003b) and 
educational attainment (Watson and Russell 2016), often mediated by reduced school avoidance 
(Birkett et al. 2014) and increased educational engagement (Seelman et al. 2015). Poteat and 
colleagues’ (2011a) study included gender minority as well as sexual minority students in 
grades 7 through 12, and found significant links between reported school belonging, GPA, and 
truancy.  
Supportive School Structures 
Whereas self-reports of school belonging, and victimization, are individual-level variables 
associated with achievement, structural features of schools are also associated with sexual and 
gender minority achievement. Nationwide research in the USA (Kosciw et al. 2018) linked 
sexual and gender minority discrimination at school to lowered graduation rates for sexual and 
gender minority students, via the production of a “hostile school climate” (p. 44). Furthermore, 
Kosciw and colleagues (2018) found that the negative effects of school “institutional 
discrimination” (p. 46) persisted when individual experiences of victimization were controlled 
for. Institutional discrimination can include policies and practices that prevent sexual and 
gender minority students from: writing about sexual and gender minority issues in assignments; 
wearing clothing or personal articles that match their gender identity and/or supports sexual and 
gender minority related causes; taking a same-gender partner to a dance or function; and being 
disciplined for public displays of affection that are not banned for heterosexual couples (Kosciw 
et al. 2018). Kosciw et al. (2018) further detailed that gender minority students often 
experienced further discrimination, including policies and practices preventing the use of their 
preferred names, correct pronouns and appropriate-gender bathrooms, as well as oppressive, 
gendered clothing requirements for school activities (e.g., dresses for graduation for all students 
assigned female at birth, etc.).  
Earlier work by Kosciw et al. (2010) emphasized that supportive school structures, including 
teachers and school staff avoiding homophobic language, and an expectation that schools would 
take action when sexual and gender minority students reported bias-related mistreatment and 
victimization, were associated with increased academic achievement and aspiration for sexual 
and gender minority students. Concerningly, since 2010, a higher proportion of participants in 
the three subsequent School Climate Surveys have reported hearing negative remarks from 


6 
 
teachers about gender expression, while the proportion reporting hearing homophobic remarks 
has remained relatively stable at around 50% of all participants (Kosciw et al. 2018). While a 
causal relationship cannot be established in a cross-sectional survey, the latest School Climate 
Survey found that sexual and gender minority students who reported that sexual and gender 
minority people and issues were represented in the curriculum had higher GPAs than those 
without such curriculum inclusion (Kosciw et al. 2018). Additionally, sexual and gender 
minority students who reported the presence of supportive teachers were more likely to report 
increased academic achievement and aspirations than those with fewer supportive teachers 
(Kosciw et al. 2018).  
Supportive school structures may also include the provision of Gay–Straight Alliances, also 
known as Queer–Straight Alliances, Rainbow Diversity groups, or, locally in New Zealand, as 
simply “diversity” groups. Kosciw and colleagues (2018) demonstrated that sexual and gender 
minority students at schools with such groups were less likely to report severe victimization 
related to their sexual and gender minority status compared to similar students in schools 
without such groups. Other USA research has focused attention on other protective factors 
linked to such groups, which offers insights into intervention strategies that include the ability 
for such groups to increase sexual minority students’ school belonging (Toomey and Russell 
2013) and student engagement (Seelman et al. 2012). 
Teacher Expectations 
Teacher expectations, potentially through the mechanism of “self-fulfilling prophecies” (Merton 
1948), have consistently been found to be associated with student achievement (Jussim and 
Harber 2005). While the effects of teacher expectation on achievement are of mild to moderate 
predictive strength for students as a whole, they are much stronger for students “considered to 
be at risk” (Hinnant et al. 2009, p. 664) and/or in “stigmatized social groups” (Jussim and 
Harber, 2005, p. 143). To date, the research has demonstrated negative teacher expectation 
effects based on social economic status and ethnic stigmatization (Jussim and Harber 2005), but 
no research has been published on teachers’ expectations in relation to sexual and gender 
minority students. However, other teacher expectation research suggests that teachers may use a 
student’s perceived social competence as a proxy factor in estimating a student’s academic 
abilities (Hinnant et al. 2009). Therefore, students from stigmatized groups, or those 
experiencing higher rates of challenges and stress relative to other students, may be viewed as 
less academically able if such stigma and stress negatively affects their perceived social 
competence from the teacher’s perspective. Additionally, Hinnant et al. (2009) suggest that “it 
may be that teachers tend to overestimate the academic competence of children they like and 
find easy to manage in the classroom” (p. 610).  


7 
 
Data from the USA indicate that large numbers of sexual and gender minority students report 
hearing homophobic and transphobic comments from teachers (Kosciw et al. 2018). Therefore, 
sexual and gender minority student achievement in the USA may be impacted by low teacher 
expectations, via the mechanism of increased teacher dislike of such students due to their sexual 
and gender minority identity, regardless of their academic potential. Furthermore, the 
disproportionate additional stressors that sexual and gender minority students are more likely 
experience relative to other young people, including increased school victimization, may place 
them at greater risk of low teacher-expectations as such situations may falsely imply they lack 
social competence, a predictor of teacher-expectation (Hinnant et al. 2009). Additionally, the 
increased classroom management required of teachers to address the victimization that such 
students report, may potentially decrease a teacher’s positive feelings towards victimized sexual 
and gender minority students. Findings from the School Climate Survey (Kosciw et al. 2018) 
support this potential mechanism, where nearly a quarter (21.4%) of victimized sexual and 
gender minority students who informed teachers about being victimized were told by those 
teachers to change themselves “in relation to their sexual orientation or gender identity” (p. 33), 
potentially implying “that they somehow brought the problem upon themselves for simply being 
who they are” (p. 33). Teachers who believe that sexual and gender minority students are 
intentionally difficult or socially incompetent, especially as evidenced during periods of school 
victimization, may therefore have lower expectations of these students regardless of their actual 
ability.   
Parent and Caregiver Support 
Parental support and positive affect are associated with academic achievement (King et al. 
2005). One mechanism through which such support is hypothesized to support academic 
achievement is in its ability to buffer the negative effects of stressors (Nettles et al. 2000) which 
can otherwise result in scholastic inattention and decreased achievement (Pomerantz et al. 
2007). Another mechanism may stem from such support fostering the development of positive 
attitudes and aptitudes that may assist learning. For instance, parental support is associated with 
increased confidence that people can and will assist them in times of need (Cutrona et al. 1994); 
as well as increased curiosity, novel thinking, flexibility and autonomy in the classroom; and 
student beliefs that challenges in learning can be addressed and overcome (Pomerantz et al. 
2007).  
Although parental support is associated with less depression and/or higher self-esteem for a 
range of sexual minority (Watson et al. 2019) and sexual and gender minority (Kosciw et al. 
2018) young people, the relationship with sexual and gender minority student achievement is 
less clear. For instance, Murdock and Bolch (2005) found that, on its own, a lack of family 
support was not predictive of achievement, however when combined with negative school 


8 
 
environments and low levels of social support from peers, it did predict lower achievement. 
Whereas Poteat et al. (2011) noted that while parental support was associated with heterosexual 
student achievement via increased school belonging, the same relationship was much weaker for 
sexual and gender minority students. Poteat and colleagues (2011) hypothesized that general 
parental support may have been inadequate to support sexual and gender minority students in 
schools, particularly when such students experience cisheterosexist discrimination and bullying. 
Conversely, Craig and Smith’s (2014) study of 255 minority ethnic sexual minority students 
found that family support, including parental support, was significantly associated with 
academic achievement.  
The Current Study 
The literature demonstrates that academic achievement is patterned by sexual and gender 
minority-status, ethnicity, social economic status, experiences of school victimization, school 
belonging, supportive school structures, teacher expectation, and parent and caregiver support. 
However, the research is unable to determine which of these aspects is most significant, how 
they interact, and whether such patterns are similar for both gender minority and sexual 
minority students. This study hypothesizes that all of these factors will be significant for sexual 
and gender minority achievement, and that gender minority student achievement will be 
particularly affected by the higher rates of reported school victimization and reduced parental 
support that have previously been reported by such young people. Further, the complex 
interactions of ethnicity with sexual minority student achievement are hypothesized to be 
replicated with gender minority students, resulting in increased achievement for ethnic minority 
sexual and gender minority students relative to their ethnic majority peers. Given that sexual 
and gender minority young people are more likely to experience increased bullying at school, as 
well as reduced parental support, the study hypothesizes that reports of school belonging and 
high teacher expectations will be particularly significant protective factors for these students 
compared to heterosexual cisgender students. Additionally, the presence of supportive school 
structures are hypothesized to increase achievement for sexual and gender minority students.   
Methods 
Data from Youth’12, a nationally representative cross-sectional survey of students aged 12–19 
years old in New Zealand, was used for analysis. The self-completed survey was administered 
via 91 schools that were randomly selected to participate, resulting in 8,500 participants (a 
response rate of 68%). The survey was administered via tablet computers in English or Māori 
with personal headphones so questions could be communicated audibly if desired. Following 
the student survey, a letter was sent to principals requesting their consent to participate in a 
school climate survey. Of the 91 schools that participated in the Youth’12 student survey, 80 


9 
 
schools agreed to take part in the school climate survey. Senior school managers (i.e., 
principals, deputy principals, and deans) completed an on-line questionnaire about various 
aspects of their school environment, including school polices and information on support 
services for students. The full methodology and ethical approval is detailed elsewhere (Denny et 
al. 2016). 
 
 
Measures 
  Sex. Sex was assessed with one forced choice item, “What sex are you?”, with responses of 
“male” or “female” only.  
  Ethnicity. Ethnicity data were collected by asking students to select their ethnic identities 
from the list used for the New Zealand Census (Statistics New Zealand 2005). Participants who 
selected more than one ethnic identity were assigned a single ethnic group, based on the 
Statistics New Zealand ethnicity prioritization method (Lang 2002). The decision to use this 
prioritization method reflects that New Zealand’s health and education funding and policy 
decisions are based on these prioritized ethnicities, as well as the fact that other research from 
the same sample uses these cut-offs (e.g., Chiang et al. 2016; Clark et al. 2014; Lucassen et al. 
2015), enabling comparison across studies. Ethnicity was grouped as New Zealand/NZ 
European, Māori, Pacific, Asian, and an “Other” ethnicity.  
  Social Economic Status. Household social economic status settings were assessed through 
nine indicators of socioeconomic deprivation, specifically: no car; no phone; no computer; their 
parent/s worry about not having enough money for food; more than two people sharing a 
bedroom; no holidays with their families; moving home more than twice that year; garages or 
living rooms used as bedrooms; and no parent in employment at home. Students who reported at 
least two indicators of socioeconomic deprivation were categorized as being from homes with 
high levels of socioeconomic deprivation (Denny et al. 2016).  
  Sexual minority category. Although there is some disagreement amongst researchers 
regarding how sexual orientation is defined and measured in adolescence (e.g., Friedman et al. 
2004), three non-exclusive groups were constructed to explore similarities and differences 
between sexual minority, gender minority, and heterosexual cisgender students. Sexual minority 
status was identified via self-reported sexual attraction, where the question “Which are you 
sexually attracted to?” was followed with the responses “opposite sex”, “same sex”, “both 
sexes”, “not sure”, “neither” or “I don’t understand this question”. Students who indicated they 
were attracted to the same sex, both sexes, or who were “not sure” about their sexual 
attraction/s, were classed as sexuality diverse and questioning, and included in the group sexual 


10 
 
minority students. The “not sure” participants were included in this group as prior research has 
indicated that they have a similar “risk profile” to same- and both-sex-attracted young people 
(Lucassen et al. 2011). Although individuals who identify as asexual are considered sexual 
minority people, the current item, as a measure of attraction towards males, females or neither 
sex, was not a measure of asexual identity per se, but is more likely to  represent a number of 
students who due to their age may not have yet experienced sexual attractions or recognize their 
attractions for developmental reasons (Lucassen et al. 2014). Thus, “neither” sex attracted 
students were excluded from this category, as well as the heterosexual category below. 
  Gender minority category. Gender minority status was identified from a question asking “Do 
you think you are transgender? This is a girl who feels like she should have been a boy, or a boy 
who feels like he should have been a girl (e.g., Trans, Queen, Fa’afafine, Whakawahine, 
Tangata ira Tane, Genderqueer)?”. Responses included “yes”, “no”, “not sure”, or “I don’t 
understand this question”. Students who indicated yes, or said they were unsure if they were 
transgender, were classed as gender diverse and questioning, and included in the group gender 
minority students. Students who selected “not sure” in relation to the transgender question were 
classed as a gender minority because other research has indicated that they strongly mirror 
gender-minority youth in relation to their mental health and other psycho-social needs (Clark et 
al. 2013).  
  Heterosexual cisgender category. Students who indicated that they were only sexually 
attracted to the opposite sex and were not questioning their sexual attractions, and who said that 
they were not transgender or questioning their gender identity, were classed as heterosexual 
cisgender students.  
Participants were excluded from all three of the above categories and analyses if they did not 
answer the sexual-attraction question or the question about whether or not they were 
transgender, or if they responded “I don’t understand this question” to either of these two 
questions.     
  Academic achievement. The dependent variable was self-reported academic achievement, 
generated from the question “How well do you do at school?” Students could select one answer: 
(1) “near the top”; (2) “above middle”; (3) “about the middle”; (4) “below the middle”; or (5) 
“near the bottom”. The item is self-reported and norm-referenced (i.e., the responses are 
measured against the perceived average rather than their actual achievement) as New Zealand 
has multiple officially sanctioned achievement frameworks that include criterion-based (i.e., 
“achieved” versus “not achieved”) as well as merit-based models (i.e., “Excellence”, “Merit”, 
“Achieved”, “Not Achieved”, International Baccalaureate Grades 1–7, Cambridge 
International Examination A’s, B’s, etc.) (Ministry of Education n.d.; Nusche et al. 2012) that 


11 
 
preclude a universal question on actual grades or standards earned. Given the mix of assessment 
standards, and the additional possibility for students to sit advanced credits beyond their year 
level if they are willing and able (which may result in lower grades but in advanced subjects), a 
norm-referenced item is useful to enable a broad range of participants to answer one question in 
a commensurate way. 
Academic achievement was dichotomized via those who reported average or better achievement 
(responses 1, 2 or 3) versus those who reported below average achievement (responses 4 or 5). 
The decision to dichotomize responses reflected methodological concerns (e.g., the limited scale 
of the measure and the significant skew in the data) and pragmatic considerations related to the 
national and policy context of the research. This dichotomy is designed to focus on students 
who were achieving versus those who were not, enabling the analysis to foreground equity 
considerations. The dichotomous variable thus presents very clear policy implications, 
particularly by taking a broader approach to identifying students who are not achieving.     
  Educational intentions. To contextualize the measure of self-reported and norm-referenced 
academic achievement, data about intentions to pursue further education after secondary school 
was collected via the question “What do you plan to do when you leave secondary school?”. 
The response options included: (1) “Get more training or education”; (2) “Start work or look for 
a job”; (3) “Start a family”; (4) “Go overseas to study”; (5) “Go overseas to work”; (6) “Go 
back to my country of birth”; (7) “Do nothing”; or (8) “I don’t know/I have no idea”. 
Participants who selected responses 1 or 4 were classed as intending to pursue further education, 
and participants who did not were dichotomized as not intending to pursue further education.  
  School belonging. A series of self-reported items assessed attitudes towards school. School 
belonging was assessed via the item “Do you feel like you are a part of your school?” which 
involved a “yes” or “no” response.  
  Teacher expectations. One item, “Do people at your school expect you to do well?” was used 
to assess teacher expectation. This item included “yes” or “no” dichotomous responses.  
  Bullying. Bullying was assessed by a preamble in the survey: “Bullying is when another 
student or group of students say, write, text or message nasty and unpleasant things to another 
student. Or the student is hit, kicked, threatened, pushed or shoved around. Bullying also means 
when a group of students completely ignores somebody and leaves them out of things on 
purpose” and the question, “In the last 12 months how often have you been bullied in school?” 
with the following responses: (1) “I haven't been bullied in school”; (2) “I haven't been bullied 
in the past 12 months”; (3) “It has happened once or twice”; (4) “About once a week”; (5) 
“Several times a week”; or (6) “Most days”. To ensure that the repetitive nature of bullying, 
rather than occasional or one-off victimization was assessed, participants who selected 


12 
 
responses 4, 5 or 6 were classed as experiencing weekly or more frequent bullying, and those 
who did not were classed as not bullied.  
  Sexual minority supportive structures. An item in the school climate survey for school 
leaders and management asked “To what extent has your school developed support structures 
for students who are gay or lesbian?” with the following responses: (1) “Not in our school”; (2) 
“To a slight extent”; (3) “To some extent”; (4) “To a great extent”; (5) “To a very great extent”. 
Responses were dichotomized from the presence of supportive structures to “some extent” to “a 
very great extent” (responses 3, 4, or 5) versus few or no structures present (responses 1 or 2).  
  High parental care. Participants were asked “How much do you feel the following people 
care about you?” including their “Mum (or someone who acts as your mum)” and “Dad (or 
someone who acts as your dad)” with the following response options: (1) “Not at all”; (2) “A 
little”; (3) “Some”; (4) “A Lot”; and (5) “Does not apply to me”. Participants were coded as 
having a parent who cared about them a lot if they selected option 4 for either or both of these 
questions, and those who selected options 5, 1–3 for both questions were coded as not having a 
parent who cared about them a lot.    
Results 
The data were analyzed using IBM SPSS Statistics (version 25). The analysis involved 
comparing students who reported achieving versus those who reported not-achieving within 
each sexual and gender category of students (e.g., “achieving” gender minority students were 
compared to non-achieving gender minority students, etc.). In total, 8,500 participants were 
recruited for the study; however, some did not answer (n = 334 and n = 333 respectively), or 
reported not understanding (n = 137 and n = 178 respectively) the items on whether they 
identified as transgender or gender questioning, or what their sexual attractions were, or 
reported having no sexual attractions (n = 167). In total, only 28 participants did not answer the 
item on achievement, however of those 28 students who answered the sexual attraction (n = 10) 
and transgender identity (n = 8) items, all identified as heterosexual cisgender students, thus 
suggesting that sexual and gender minority students were not disproportionately missing from 
the achievement item that formed the independent variable for analysis.  
Within this sample, the numbers of participants who answered items that formed the dependent 
variables in the analysis also varied. Chi-Square tests of independence and Fisher’s Exact tests 
(where appropriate) were calculated on the effects of these missing data on reported 
achievement. These analyses demonstrated no significant interactions for missing data in any of 
the dependent variables, including within each of the three categories of students, in relation to 
reported achievement. The final sexual minority category included 60 same-sex and 243 both-
sex-attracted young people, along with 182 participants who were not sure of their attraction(s), 


13 
 
totaling 485 students. The gender minority student category included 96 participants who 
identified as transgender and 202 students who were not sure if they were transgender, totaling 
298 participants. Some students identified as a gender and sexual minority (n = 39) and were 
included in both the gender and sexual minority categories. Young people classed as 
heterosexual cisgender totaled 7,064.  
Descriptive statistics on sex, ethnicity, and social economic status, for the three categories of 
students (Table 1) show differential rates of achievement, with heterosexual cisgender students 
reporting the highest levels of achievement, followed by sexual minority, and then gender 
minority students. Intention to pursue further education after leaving school also differed within 
these groups. Unsurprisingly, students who self-reported average or above achievement (for 
brevity “achieving”) were more likely to report intending to pursue further education than those 
who did not. Self-reported achieving was greatest for the heterosexual cisgender students (n = 
4,472 [68.8%]), closely followed by the sexual minority achieving students (n = 287 [66.7%]), 
and then the gender minority achieving students (n = 146 [59.8%]). In contrast, only 214 
(38.6%) of the non-achieving heterosexual cisgender students, 20 (38.2%) of the sexual 
minority non-achieving students, and 20 (39.7%) of the gender minority non-achieving students 
reported an intention to pursue further education after finishing school. 
Table 1 demonstrates that achievement is more common for students with lower social 
economic deprivation. Descriptively the difference is greatest for gender minority students, for 
whom 13.9% more students in low social economic deprivation settings reported achieving, 
than those in high social economic deprivation settings. The descriptive findings indicate that 
sexual minority students reported a 10.4% difference in achievement rates by social economic 
status, while heterosexual cisgender students reported a 6.4% difference. The outcomes of three 
logistic regressions for each status category of students (see Table 2) confirmed that, holding all 
other factors in the model constant, students from high social economic deprivation settings had 
lower odds of achievement compared to those not living in social economic deprivation. The 
effects of social economic status were more pronounced within the sexual minority student 
category (sexual minority students who reported high social economic deprivation had 2.94 the 
odds of not reporting achievement compared to other sexual minority students), and the gender 
minority student category (where high social economic deprivation was associated with 2.56 the 
odds of not reporting achievement), than between heterosexual cisgender students (for whom 
high social economic deprivation increased their odds by 1.5 of not reporting achievement 
compared to their peers).  
The results demonstrate differential patterns of achievement by ethnicity and sexual and gender 
minority-status. Controlling for other factors in the model, ethnicity was not a significant 
predictor of achievement among gender minority students (Table 2). However, Table 1 


14 
 
demonstrates that the rates of New Zealand European gender minority students reporting 
achievement (85.8%) are 7.1% lower than New Zealand European heterosexual cisgender 
students (92.9%). Table 1 suggests that, while ethnicity does not reduce or improve 
achievement of gender minority students relative to the New Zealand European gender minority 
student majority, gender minority students, regardless of their ethnicity, are disadvantaged 
compared to New Zealand European heterosexual cisgender students. While there were no 
significant differences in odds of achievement for Māori and Asian sexual minority students 
compared to New Zealand European sexual minority students in the logistic regression, both 
Pacific and Other ethnicity sexual minority students had nearly three times the odds of reporting 
achievement than New Zealand European sexual minority students (Table 2). Conversely, Table 
2 shows that Māori heterosexual cisgender students had significantly lower odds of reporting 
achievement (being 64% more likely to not report achievement) than New Zealand European 
heterosexual cisgender peers, and Asian and other ethnicity students had 68% increased odds of 
reporting achievement than their New Zealand European peers.  
Table 1 demonstrates that students in all categories who report bullying are less likely to report 
achieving, with the greatest disparities in achievement apparent for gender minority students 
(where 13.3% more students who were not bullied reported achieving who compared to those 
who were bullied) and sexual minority students (a 13.2% disparity by bullying status against 
achievement), followed by heterosexual cisgender students (where there was a 6.7% difference 
in those reporting achievement by bullied-status). Interestingly, when holding the other factors 
in the logistic regression model constant (Table 2), bullying was not associated with decreased 
achievement for sexual and gender minority students. In fact, only heterosexual cisgender 
students who were bullied had statistically significant lower odds of achievement, and then only 
by 16% compared to heterosexual cisgender students who had not been bullied. 
Of all the descriptive variables (Table 1), school belonging was the second most divergent 
factor amongst heterosexual cisgender students who reported achievement, with 12.9% more 
students who reported belonging at school also reporting achievement (93.5%) compared to 
those who did not report school belonging (80.6%). Reports of school belonging diverged 
further for sexual minority young people, for whom 92.8% of those that experienced this 
reported achievement, compared to 15.8% fewer students (77.0%) who did not report school 
belonging, reporting achievement. The difference for gender minority students was particularly 
high, with 17.5% more students who reported belonging at school also reporting achievement 
(87.0%), compared to 69.5% of gender minority students who reported achievement but did not 
report belonging at school. The multivariable-logistic regressions (Table 2) confirmed the 
significance of school belonging for achievement for all categories of students, making this one 
of the three significant factors distinguishing gender minority student achievement. However, 


15 
 
holding all variables in the model stable (Table 2), the effects of school belonging on the odds 
of achievement was strongest for sexual minority students (Odds Ratio/OR = 3.75), then 
heterosexual cisgender students (OR = 2.95), and finally for gender minority students (OR = 
2.50).    
According to Table 1, supportive structures in schools for sexual minority students seemed to 
make little difference to heterosexual cisgender student and gender minority student 
achievement, but more difference for sexual minority students (where 7.8% more sexual 
minority students in such schools reported achievement compared to sexual minority students in 
schools without such structures). These differences were confirmed in the logistic regression 
analyses (Table 2), where holding all other factors in the model stable, sexual minority 
supportive structures at schools were associated with nearly three and a half times increased 
odds of sexual minority student achievement, and yet had no significant effect on gender 
minority or heterosexual cisgender student achievement. 
Students in all categories who reported low teacher expectations were less likely to report 
achieving (Table 1), with the greatest disparities in achievement apparent for sexual minority 
achieving students (where 38.9% more sexual minority achieving students reported high teacher 
expectations compared to achieving sexual minority students without such support) and gender 
minority students (where 27.2% more of achieving gender minority students had such teachers 
compared to achieving students without such teachers), followed by heterosexual cisgender 
students (where 16% of achieving students with such teachers reported achievement compared 
to achieving students without such teachers). Unsurprisingly, when controlling for the other 
factors in the logistic regression (Table 2), teacher expectation is strongly associated with 
achievement for all categories of students, however the odds of achievement for sexual minority 
students (over 14 times) eclipses that for heterosexual cisgender and gender minority students, 
for whom teacher expectation was nonetheless associated with an approximate threefold 
increased odds of reporting achievement (at OR = 3.03 and 2.82 respectively).  
For heterosexual cisgender students, Table 1 demonstrates that the next highest differences 
between students who report achieving is whether they experience high parental care, with 
92.3% of those who received such support reporting achievement, compared to 81.3% who did 
not receive such care reporting achievement (a difference of 11%). However, for both gender 
minority and sexual minority students, the difference in proportions of those who reported high 
parental care and achievement was less than 4% (Table 1). When controlling for other factors in 
the model (Table 2), high parental care was associated with twice the odds of heterosexual 
cisgender student achievement (OR = 2.10) and was not significantly associated with increased 
odds of sexual and gender minority student achievement.  


16 
 
  Robustness testing and ancillary analysis. A range of sensitivity tests were carried out as 
part of the analysis. Tests involved exploring whether alternative measures for the Bullying 
factor were more sensitive, including substituting or appending the current measure with a 
measure of electronic harassment, or with self-reported severity of a bullying incident. Although 
both alternative Bullying items reproduced the same direction as the current item, neither 
reached its level of sensitivity. Equally, the New Zealand Deprivation measure was explored in 
place of the constructed social economic status measure, and again while it confirmed the 
impact of deprivation as a significant factor, it provided limited sensitivity than current more 
comprehensive measure. Parental support was tested by the gender of the parent or caregiver, 
and by numbers of highly supportive parents and caregivers, as well as by the level of stated 
support. While a lower cut-off for parental support made the factor insignificant (i.e., when 
parental support included “some” as well as “a lot” of support provided it was no longer 
sensitive), the other items supported the direction of the final model, albeit with less sensitivity.  
The final items were also tested in conservative multi-logistic regression models that assessed 
odds of achievement, adjusted for sex, ethnicity, and social economic status, against High 
Parental Care, School Belonging, Teacher Expectation, Bullying, and Sexual Minority 
Supportive Structures as individual predictors. These tests showed that School Belonging, 
Teacher Expectation, and Bullying were significant for all categories of participants, while 
Parental Care was significant for heterosexual cisgender students, and Sexual Minority 
Supportive Structures was significant for sexual minority students. In this test, the impact of 
Teacher Expectation had an AOR (Adjusted Odds Ratio) of 11.8 (95% CI = 8.47-16.4; 
p<0.001) for sexual minority student achievement. The increased impact of teacher expectation 
in the final model (Table 2) seems to be mainly generated from the decreased impact of 
Bullying and a slightly reduced impact of School Belonging for sexual minority students when 
compared to the conservative model. In the conservative model, as individual factors, Bullying 
predicted an AOR of 0.42 (95% CI = 0.31-0.59; p<0.001) and School Belonging predicted an 
AOR of 4.12 (95% CI = 3.15-5.78; p<0.001) for sexual minority student achievement, while in 
the final model (Table 2) Bullying was insignificant and School Belonging was associated with 
an AOR of 3.75 (95% CI = 2.58-5.43; p<0.001). The impact of sexual minority supportive 
structures also increased from an AOR of 2.17 (95% CI = 1.64-2.88; p<0.001) in the 
conservative model to 3.42 (95% CI = 2.34 – 5.00; p<0.001) in the final model. Interestingly, 
Bullying was also significant in the conservative model for gender minority students (AOR = 
0.54; 95% CI = 0.47-0.61; p<0.01) but not in the final model, which also saw a drop in the 
adjusted impacts of Teacher Expectation (AOR = 4.31; 95% CI = 2.98-6.21) or School 
Belonging (AOR = 2.73; 95% CI = 2.00–3.72; P<0.001) from the conservative model when 
these factors were in the final model (See Table 2).  


17 
 
Discussion 
Although sexual and gender minority student achievement has received increasing attention in 
the USA, nationally representative research on this topic is still relatively nascent, and largely 
inexistent internationally. As such, few nationally representative, population-based studies have 
explored achievement factors for sexual minority and gender minority students independently of 
each other, nor assessed how teacher expectations may be associated with academic 
achievement. However, research indicates that sexual minority and gender minority students 
usually diverge in their experiences of schooling, with gender minority students often reporting 
increased victimization and less school safety relative to sexual minority students. International 
research also shows that teacher expectations are important for achievement, and may be more 
significant for stigmatized populations, which may mean that sexual and gender minority 
students will be disproportionately affected by such expectations. To address these gaps in the 
literature, the present study examined these aspects, as well as other influential factors identified 
a priori from the literature, in a nationally representative study of New Zealand secondary 
school students.  
Consistent with the study’s hypothesis, gender minority, sexual minority, and heterosexual 
cisgender categories of students, had significantly distinctive achievement profiles. The 
disparities for gender minority student achievement, including the reduced intentions for further 
study by those who self-identified as achieving, indicate urgent action is required for this group. 
A range of divergent intersectional and other factors characterized these groups’ achievement 
profiles. For instance, although social economic status is strongly associated with achievement 
for all categories of students, the impact of social economic deprivation is more significant for 
sexual and gender minority students. This finding adds support to the minority stress model 
(Meyer 2003), where the additional stressors of social economic deprivation may be particularly 
deleterious for sexual and gender minority student academic achievement. Research is required 
to explore reasons for the disproportionate effects social economic deprivation has on sexual 
and gender minority students. In addition to the minority stress hypothesis, another mechanism 
may stem from difficulties finding quality employment to offset the effects of social economic 
deprivation; sexual and gender minority students may experience increased employment 
challenges relative to their heterosexual cisgender peers due to cisheteronormative 
discrimination, in turn mitigating their ability to buffer the experiences associated with low 
social economic status with independent funds.  
Heterosexual cisgender Māori students reported lower odds of academic achievement compared 
to their New Zealand/NZ European peers. For Māori heterosexual cisgender students, poor 
academic achievement has been well documented and reflects ongoing indigenous 


18 
 
discrimination and racism in education and long-standing structural disadvantage (Bishop et al. 
2009). Conversely, the relative disadvantages reported by Māori and Pacific heterosexual 
cisgender students are not exacerbated, or are even slightly reversed for sexual minority Pacific 
youth, relative to their NZ European peers. Instead, NZ European and Asian identified students’ 
academic advantage seems to be “disabled” by a sexual and gender minority status. Although 
Pacific and Other ethnicity sexual minority youth reported 2–3 greater odds of achievement 
compared to their NZ European peers, Pacific and Other ethnicity gender minority students do 
not seem to benefit from the same advantage.  
The patterns and disparities of ethnicity differences in achievement by sexual and gender 
minority status suggest that “additive” models of minority stress are not sufficient for 
conceptualizing the role of ethnicity in achievement. This is supported by Russel and Truong 
(2001) who found that ethnic discrimination and sexual and gender minority-stigma was 
associated with increased school achievement for some groups, suggesting that the interactions 
between ethnicity and sexual and gender minority status are more complex than the additive 
models of minority stress suggest. The negative additive effects for Asian sexual and gender 
minority students in this study provides further evidence for intersectional perspectives (Chiang 
et al. 2017). Of note, Asian students report ethnic stereotypes in New Zealand that do not frame 
them as academically inferior, but rather construct them as a high-achieving group relative to 
other ethnicities (Webber et al. 2013). The interaction of such Model Minority myths 
(Oyserman and Sakamoto 1997), that frame Asian students as always academically able with 
one’s sexual and gender minority status seems to offer little protective benefit for such youth 
and requires further exploration.  
School belonging increases the odds of achievement for all groups of students, and this impact 
is higher among heterosexual cisgender and sexual minority students, than among gender 
minority students. School belonging can significantly moderate the effects of bullying on all 
student categories for achievement, however these protective effects operate differentially for 
sexual minority youth relative to the other categories of students. The same pattern is apparent 
for teacher expectations, which demonstrate particularly positive impacts for sexual minority 
student achievement. While the positive effects on school belonging on sexual and gender 
minority achievement have been noted elsewhere, these data offer a lifeline to schools 
struggling to tackle the complex phenomenon of bullying, by emphasizing the protective route 
bolstering school belonging can offer for fostering achievement. However, the negative health 
outcomes associated with bullying, and the chances (see Strengths and Limitations below) that 
the study may have under-sampled young people who experienced destructive bullying 
(McGuire et al. 2010), means that bullying prevention must remain a part of all efforts to 
support sexual and gender minority student achievement.  


19 
 
In contrast to the hypothesis, yet similar to Poteat et al. (2011), sexual and gender minority 
students’ likelihood of achievement was not affected by having one or more parent that cares a 
lot for them, while the opposite was true for heterosexual cisgender students. The study did not 
have adequate numbers to ascertain the differential effects for this variable for ethnic and sexual 
minority students as was found by Craig and Smith (2014). The finding therefore suggests that 
for sexual minority and gender minority students as a whole, high parental support is not able to 
effectively reduce disparities in sexual and gender minority achievement in the school setting. 
Supportive school structures for sexual minority students resulted in these students achieving 
much higher odds of achievement than sexual minority students in schools without such 
structures. However, in contrast to the hypothesis, sexual minority supportive school structures 
were not associated with increased gender minority student achievement. This finding provides 
evidence that simply mitigating institutional homophobia in particular does not adequately 
address the effects of transphobia and cisnormativity, despite common heteronormative 
elements in the genesis of all of these phenomena (DePalma and Jennett 2010).  
Strengths and Limitations 
Strengths of the current study include the use of nationally representative data, from an 
alternative national context to the USA, to explore the factors associated with sexual minority 
and gender minority student achievement distinctly. The use of a nationally representative 
sample avoids limitations associated with convenience or self-selecting sampling issues, 
increasing the validity of the findings to demonstrate the broad significance of these issues. 
Further, by drawing on data from an alternative context to the USA, these findings strengthen 
international evidence supporting school-level intervention as critical for sexual and gender 
minority youth equity and wellbeing. Finally, this study contributes to scholarship that 
disentangles gender minority youth realities from their more researched sexual minority youth 
peers. In so doing the findings indicate that addressing sexual minority youth equity issues on 
their own is not sufficient to ameliorate gender minority youth inequalities, and additional 
policy actions are required to achieve equality of opportunity for these young people.  
However, there are limitations associated with nationally representative school survey 
methodologies, include challenges around representation of young people who are excluded 
from schools. For instance, by sampling those who have the resources to remain in school, the 
study may over-estimate sexual and gender minority achievement. The potential additional 
support and resiliency afforded to these participants that enables them to remain in school, and 
be sampled in the study, may also be associated with increased ability to achieve academically 
and may over-represent achievement levels for sexual and gender minority students. For 
instance, some students who are particularly affected by bullying, may have already left school 


20 
 
(McGuire et al. 2010) and, as such, their absence in the sample may reflect why bullying was 
reduced as a predictive factor. 
Another limitation of large-scale national surveys in relation to youth health is realized in 
attempts to balance specificity in questions whilst keeping survey items short enough to enable 
a broad scope of activities to be explored in a large survey. For instance, the question “Do 
people at your school expect you to do well?” may, on its own, seem ambiguous in terms of 
who it refers to (i.e., teachers, students, a combination of them, or others). However, in the 
survey, this item (Sch12) was asked after two questions that were centered on adults at school 
(i.e., Sch10 asked “How much do you feel that people at school care about you (like teachers, 
coaches or other adults)?” and Sch11, “How often do the teachers at your school treat students 
fairly?”). The previous two items focusing on adults, especially teachers, strongly suggests that 
participants may have answered this question with them in mind, but some ambiguity may also 
be present here. Either way, the current findings, in combination with the existing literature on 
this topic, suggest, at a minimum, a focus on cultivating positive teacher expectations will be 
very beneficial. If the “people at school” were seen by participants to be referring to, or 
including, peers, then a further focus on cultivating positive peer expectations of students doing 
well may also be of value as a policy intervention.  
Finally, small sample sizes may potentially limit the power of some of these findings, so that 
some granular features for the sexual minority and gender minority student groups did not reach 
the highest levels of significance. For instance, caution is required around the small numbers of 
some ethnically identified sexual and gender minority young people and their experiences. 
However, despite low numbers in some instances, the many significant results overall highlight 
the scope of this issue and indicate many key features for intervention. 
Future Research 
The current study supports recommendations to assess the experiences of sexual minority and 
gender minority students as distinct populations, and suggests further granular examination of 
issues for students who are non-binary versus transgender, and bisexual (or “both sex attracted” 
in the current study) versus gay and lesbian (or “same sex attracted”). The impact of the 
expectations of others at school suggests future research on what might limit teacher 
expectations, and how teachers can best be supported to effectively demonstrate such 
expectations of sexual and gender minority and indigenous/ethnic minority students. Equally, 
evaluation of techniques to foster belonging at school for sexual and gender minority students is 
also advocated by this study. The study findings indicate that sexual minority supportive 
schooling structures support academic achievement for sexual minority students; however, 
further work is required to explore if, and what, supportive schooling structures might support 


21 
 
gender minority student achievement as well as their future educational intentions. In addition, 
this study highlighted the complex interactions between sexual and gender minority status and 
ethnicity; further investigation is required to explore these mechanisms and pathways. Finally, 
this study joins others in calling for nuanced and intersectional analyses on the roles that 
ethnicity and social economic status play in sexual and gender minority student achievement, 
including the potential for these to interact and foster or mitigate resiliency.   
Conclusion 
 
Important work in the USA has demonstrated key factors associated with sexual minority 
student achievement, yet international, and representative findings that explore gender minority 
student achievement, are limited. The present study addressed these gaps by examining how key 
factors from the achievement literature were associated with self-reported achievement in a 
nationally representative New Zealand sample of gender minority and sexual minority 
secondary school students. Actions to increase levels of subjective school belonging and 
reported teacher expectations are vital for all students, particularly for sexual minority students. 
However, the study also demonstrated different profiles associated with achievement for all 
three categories of students, indicate that a one-size-fits-all policy will be less effective for all 
sexual and gender minority students. For schools further committed to supporting sexual and 
gender minority achievement, actions that focus on ensuring supportive structures are in place 
for all sexual and gender minority students (not just gay and lesbian-identified students), are 
likely to increase the odds of sexual and gender minority student academic achievement. 
Finally, the complex interactions between the needs of sexual and gender minority youth, ethnic 
minority and indigenous youth, and their families who experience poverty and deprivation 
require intersectionality approaches acknowledging the overlapping and interdependent systems 
of discrimination or disadvantage. 
 


22 
 
References 
Aragon, S. R., Poteat, V. P., Espelage, D. L., & Koenig, B. W. (2014). The influence of peer 
victimization on educational outcomes for LGBTQ and non-LGBTQ high school students. 
Journal of LGBT Youth, 11(1), 1–19. doi:10.1080/19361653.2014.840761. 
Birkett, M., Russell, S. T., & Corliss, H. L. (2014). Sexual-orientation disparities in school: The 
mediational role of indicators of victimization in achievement and truancy because of 
feeling unsafe. American Journal of Public Health, 104(6), 1124–1128. 
doi:10.2105/AJPH.2013.301785. 
Bishop, R., Berryman, M., Cavanagh, T., & Teddy, L. (2009). Te Kotahitanga: Addressing 
educational disparities facing Māori students in New Zealand. Teaching and Teacher 
Education, 25(5), 734–742. doi:10.1016/j.tate.2009.01.009. 
Buhs, E. S., Ladd, G. W., & Herald, S. L. (2006). Peer exclusion and victimization: processes 
that mediate the relation between peer group rejection and children’s classroom 
engagement and achievement? Journal of Educational Psychology, 98(1), 1–13. 
doi:10.1037/0022-0663.98.1.1 
Chiang, S. Y., Fleming, T., Lucassen, M., Fenaughty, J., Clark, T., & Denny, S. (2017). Mental 
health status of double minority adolescents: Findings from national cross-sectional health 
surveys. Journal of Immigrant and Minority Health, 19(3), 499–510. doi:10.1007/s10903-
016-0530-z. 
Clark, T. C., Lucassen, M. F. G., Bullen, P., Denny, S. J., Fleming, T. M., Robinson, E. M., & 
Rossen, F. V. (2014). The health and well-being of transgender high school students: 
Results from the New Zealand Adolescent Health Survey (Youth’12). Journal of 
Adolescent Health, 55(1), 93–99. doi:10.1016/J.JADOHEALTH.2013.11.008. 
Clark, T., Fleming, T., Bullen, P., Crengle, S., Denny, S., Dyson, B., et al. (2013). Health and 
well-being of secondary school students in New Zealand: Trends between 2001, 2007 and 
2012. Journal of Paediatrics and Child Health, 49(11), 925–934. doi:10.1111/jpc.12427. 
Craig, S. L., & Smith, M. S. (2014). The impact of perceived discrimination and social support 
on the school performance of multiethnic sexual minority youth. Youth and Society, 46(1), 
30–50. doi:10.1177/0044118X11424915. 
Cutrona, C. E., Cole, V., Colangelo, N., Assouline, S. G., & Russell, D. W. (1994). Perceived 
parental social support and academic achievement: An attachment theory perspective 
[published erratum appears in J Pers Soc Psychol 1994 Apr;66(4):687]. Journal of 


23 
 
Personality and Social Psychology, 66(2), 369–378. doi:10.1037/h0090357. 
Denny, S., Lewycka, S., Utter, J., Fleming, T., Peiris-John, R., Sheridan, J., et al. (2016). The 
association between socioeconomic deprivation and secondary school students’ health: 
Findings from a latent class analysis of a national adolescent health survey. International 
Journal for Equity in Health, 15(1), 109. doi:10.1186/s12939-016-0398-5 
DePalma, R., & Jennett, M. (2010). Homophobia, transphobia and culture: Deconstructing 
heteronormativity in English primary schools. Intercultural Education, 21(1), 15–26. 
doi:10.1080/14675980903491858 
Fredricks, J. A., Blumenfeld, P. C., & Paris, A. H. (2004). School engagement: Potential of the 
concept, state of the evidence. Review of Educational Research, 74(1), 59–109. 
doi:10.3102/00346543074001059. 
Friedman, M. S. M. S., Silvestre, A. J., Gold, M. A., Markovic, N., Savin-Williams, R. C., 
Huggins, J., & Sell, R. L. (2004). Adolescents define sexual orientation and suggest ways 
to measure it. Journal of Adolescence, 27(3), 303–317. 
doi:10.1016/j.adolescence.2004.03.006. 
Friedman, M. S., Marshal, M. P., Guadamuz, T. E., Wei, C., Wong, C. F., Saewyc, E. M., & 
Stall, R. (2011). A meta-analysis of disparities in childhood sexual abuse, parental 
physical abuse, and peer victimization among sexual minority and sexual nonminority 
individuals. American Journal of Public Health, 101(8), 1481–1494. 
doi:10.2105/AJPH.2009.190009. 
Hinnant, J. B., O’Brien, M., & Ghazarian, S. R. (2009). The longitudinal relations of teacher 
expectations to achievement in the early school years. Journal of Educational Psychology, 
101(3), 662–670. doi:10.1037/a0014306. 
Jussim, L., & Harber, K. D. (2005). Teacher expectations and self-fulfilling prophecies: 
Knowns and unknowns, resolved and unresolved controversies. Personality and Social 
Psychology Review, 9(2), 131–155. doi:10.1207/s15327957pspr0902_3. 
Juvonen, J., Nishina, A., & Graham, S. (2000). Peer harassment, psychological adjustment, and 
school functioning in early adolescence. Journal of Educational Psychology, 92(2), 349–
359. Retirved from http://ovidsp.tx.ovid.com.ezproxy.auckland.ac.nz/sp-
3.32.0a/ovidweb.cgi?&S=JGJLFPGKBBDDNPHMNCDKGHOBGMIHAA00&Link+Set
=S.sh.22.23.27.31%7C11%7Csl_10.  
King, G., McDougall, J., DeWit, D., Hong, S., Miller, L., Offord, D., et al. (2005). Pathways to 


24 
 
children’s academic performance and prosocial behaviour: Roles of physical health status, 
environmental, family, and child factors. International Journal of Disability, Development 
and Education, 52(4), 313–344. doi:10.1080/10349120500348680. 
Kosciw, J. G., Greytak, E. A., Zongrone, A. D., Clark, C. M., & Truong, N. L. (2018). The 2017 
National School Climate Survey: The experiences of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, 
and queer youth in our nation’s schools. New York. Retrieved from 
https://www.glsen.org/article/2017-national-school-climate-survey 
Lang, K. (2002). Measuring ethnicity in the New Zealand Census. Wellington, New Zealand: 
Statistics New Zealand. 
Lucassen, M. F. G., Clark, T. C., Moselen, E., Robinson, E. M., & The Adolescent Health 
Research Group. (2014). Youth’12 The health and wellbeing of secondary school students 
in new zealand: results for young people attracted to the same sex or both sexes. 
Auckland. Retrieved from www.youthresearch.auckland.ac.nz.  
Lucassen, Mathijs F.G., Clark, T. C., Denny, S. J., Fleming, T. M., Rossen, F. V., Sheridan, J., 
et al. (2015). What has changed from 2001 to 2012 for sexual minority youth in New 
Zealand? Journal of Paediatrics and Child Health. doi:10.1111/jpc.12727. 
Lucassen, M. F. G., Merry, S. N., Robinson, E. M., Denny, S., Clark, T., Ameratunga, S., et al. 
(2011). Sexual attraction, depression, self-harm, suicidality and help-seeking behaviour in 
New Zealand secondary school students. Australian and New Zealand Journal of 
Psychiatry, 45(5), 376–383. doi:10.3109/00048674.2011.559635. 
McGuire, J. K., Anderson, C. R., Toomey, R. B., & Russell, S. T. (2010). School climate for 
transgender youth: A mixed method investigation of student experiences and school 
responses. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 39(10), 1175–1188. doi:10.1007/s10964-
010-9540-7. 
Merton, R. K. (1948). The self-fulfilling prophecy. The Antioch Review, 8(2), 193–210. 
doi:10.2307/4609267. 
Meyer, I. H. (2003). Prejudice, social stress, and mental health in lesbian, gay, and bisexual 
populations: conceptual issues and research evidence. Psychological Bulletin, 129(5), 
674–697. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.129.5.674. 
Ministry of Education. (n.d.). New Zealand education system overview. Retrieved from 
https://www.education.govt.nz/assets/Uploads/NZ-Education-System-Overview-
publication-web-format.pdf.  


25 
 
Murdock, T. B., & Bolch, M. B. (2005). Risk and protective factors for poor school adjustment 
in lesbian, gay, and bisexual (LGB) high school youth: Variable and person-centered 
analyses. Psychology in the Schools, 42(2), 159–172. doi:10.1002/pits.20054. 
New Zealand Qualifications Authority. (2017). Annual Report on NCEA and New Zealand 
Scholarship Data and Statistics (2016). Retrieved from 
http://www.nzqa.govt.nz/assets/About-us/Publications/stats-reports/ncea-annualreport-
2016.pdf 
Nusche, D., Laveault, D., Macbeath, J., & Santiago, P. (2012). OECD Reviews of Evaluation 
and Assessment in Education: New Zealand 2011. doi:10.1787/9789264116917-en. 
Osterman, K. F. (2000). Students’ need for belonging in the school community. Review of 
Educational Research, 70(3), 323–367. doi:10.3102/00346543070003323. 
Oyserman, D., & Sakamoto, I. (1997). Being Asian American: Identity, cultural constructs, and 
stereotype perception. Journal of Applied Behavioral Science, 33(4), 435–453. 
doi:10.1177/0021886397334002. 
Pearson, J., Muller, C., & Wilkinson, L. (2007). Adolescent same-sex attraction and academic 
outcomes: The role of school attachment and engagement. Social Problems, 54(4), 523–
542. doi:10.1525/sp.2007.54.4.523. 
Pizmony-Levy, O., & Kosciw, J. G. (2016). School climate and the experience of LGBT 
students: A comparison of the United States and Israel. Journal of LGBT Youth, 13(1–2), 
46–66. doi:10.1080/19361653.2015.1108258. 
Pomerantz, E. M., Moorman, E. A., & Litwack, S. D. (2007). The how, whom, and why of 
parents’ involvement in children’s academic lives: More is not always better. Review of 
Educational Research, 77(3), 373–410. doi:10.3102/003465430305567. 
Poteat, V. P., Mereish, E. H., DiGiovanni, C. D., & Koenig, B. W. (2011). The effects of 
general and homophobic victimization on adolescents’ psychosocial and educational 
concerns: The importance of intersecting identities and parent support. Journal of 
Counseling Psychology, 58(4), 597–609. doi:10.1037/a0025095. 
Reijntjes, A., Kamphuis, J. H., Prinzie, P., & Telch, M. J. (2010). Peer victimization and 
internalizing problems in children: A meta-analysis of longitudinal studies. Child Abuse 
and Neglect, 34(4), 244–252. doi:10.1016/j.chiabu.2009.07.009. 
Rostosky, S. S., Owens, G. P., Zimmerman, R. S., & Riggle, E. D. (2003a). Associations among 


26 
 
sexual attraction status, school belonging, and alcohol and marijuana use in rural high 
school students. Journal of Adolescence, 26(6), 741–751. 
doi:10.1016/j.adolescence.2003.09.002. 
Rostosky, S. S., Owens, G. P., Zimmerman, R. S., & Riggle, E. D. (2003b). Associations among 
sexual attraction status, school belonging, and alcohol and marijuana use in rural high 
school students. Journal of Adolescence, 26(6), 741–751. 
doi:10.1016/j.adolescence.2003.09.002. 
Russell, S., & Fish, J. (2016). Mental health in lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) 
youth. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 12(1), 465–487. doi:10.1146/annurev-
clinpsy-021815-093153. 
Russell, S. T., & Truong, N. L. (2001). Adolescent sexual orientation, race and ethnicity, and 
school environments: A national study of sexual minority youth of color. In K. K. 
Kumashiro (Ed.), Troubling intersections of race and sexuality: Queer students of color 
and anti-oppressive education (pp. 113–130). Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield. 
Russell, S. T., Seif, H., & Truong, N. L. (2001). School outcomes of sexual minority youth in 
the United States: Evidence from a national study. Journal of Adolescence, 24(1), 111–
127. doi:10.1006/jado.2000.0365. 
Seelman, K. L., Forge, N., Walls, N. E., & Bridges, N. (2015). School engagement among 
LGBTQ high school students: The roles of safe adults and gay–straight alliance 
characteristics. Children and Youth Services Review, 57, 19–29. 
doi:10.1016/j.childyouth.2015.07.021. 
Seelman, K. L., Walls, N. E., Hazel, C., & Wisneski, H. (2012). Student school engagement 
among sexual minority students: Understanding the contributors to predicting academic 
outcomes. Journal of Social Service Research, 38(1), 3–17. 
doi:10.1080/01488376.2011.583829. 
Statistics New Zealand. (2005). Statistical standard for ethnicity.. Retrieved from 
http://archive.stats.govt.nz/methods/classifications-and-standards/classification-related-
stats-standards/ethnicity.aspx.  
UNESCO. (2017). 2017/8 Global Education Monitoring Report Accountability in Education: 
Meeting Our Committments (Second.). Paris, France: Author. Retrieved from 
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0025/002593/259338e.pdf 
Watson, R. J., Grossman, A. H., & Russell, S. T. (2019). Sources of social support and mental 


27 
 
health among LGB youth. Youth & Society, 51(1), 30–48. 
doi:10.1177/0044118X16660110. 
Watson, R. J., & Russell, S. T. (2016). Disengaged or bookworm: Academics, mental health, 
and success for sexual minority youth. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 26(1), 159–
165. doi:10.1111/jora.12178. 
Webber, M., Mckinley, E., & Hattie, J. (2013). The importance of race and ethnicity: An 
exploration of New Zealand Pākehā, Māori, Samoan and Chinese adolescent identity. New 
Zealand Journal of Psychology, 42(2). 17–28.