UNJUST: HOW THE BROKEN CRIMINAL JUSTICE 
SYSTEM FAILS TRANSGENDER PEOPLE
May 2016
Partners
Authors
National Center for
EQUALITY
TRANSGENDER


2
This report was authored by:
Center for American Progress
The Center for American Progress (CAP) is a think tank 
dedicated to improving the lives of Americans through 
ideas and action. CAP combines bold policy ideas with 
a modern communications platform to help shape the 
national debate. CAP is designed to provide long-term 
leadership and support to the progressive movement. 
CAP’s policy experts cover a wide range of issue areas, 
and often work across disciplines to tackle complex, 
interrelated issues such as national security, energy, 
and climate change.
Movement Advancement Project
The Movement Advancement Project (MAP) is an 
independent think tank that provides rigorous 
research, insight, and analysis that help speed 
equality for LGBT people. MAP works collaboratively 
with LGBT organizations, advocates and funders, 
providing information, analysis and resources that 
help coordinate and strengthen efforts for maximum 
impact. MAP’s policy research informs the public and 
policymakers about the legal and policy needs of LGBT 
people and their families.
Contact Information
Center for American Progress
1333 H Street, NW, 10th Floor
Washington, DC 20005
202-682-1611
www.americanprogress.com
Movement Advancement Project (MAP)
2215 Market Street
Denver, CO 80205
303-578-4600
www.lgbtmap.org
This report was developed in partnership with: 
Advancement Project
Advancement Project is a next generation, multi-racial civil rights 
organization. Rooted in the great human rights struggles for 
equality and justice, we exist to fulfill America’s promise of a caring, 
inclusive and just democracy. We use innovative tools and strategies 
to strengthen social movements and achieve high impact policy 
change. Learn more at www.advancementproject.org.
Forward Together
Forward Together is a multi-racial, multi-issue organization that is 
changing how we think, feel, act, and make policy about families. 
Whether chosen or biological, we work to ensure that all families 
have the power and resources they need to thrive. We work at the 
intersections of race, gender, and sexuality—and find ways to shift 
our culture and policy in the areas of reproductive justice, economic 
justice, and ending mass incarceration. For more information, visit
www.forwardtogether.org.
JustLeadershipUSA
JustLeadershipUSA is dedicated to cutting the U.S. correctional 
population in half by 2030, while reducing crime. JLUSA 
empowers people most affected by incarceration to drive policy 
reform. Learn more at www.justleadershipusa.org.
National Center for Transgender Equality 
The National Center for Transgender Equality (NCTE) is the nation’s 
leading social justice advocacy organization winning life saving 
change for transgender people. NCTE was founded in 2003 by 
transgender activists who recognized the urgent need for policy 
change to advance transgender equality. For more information, visit 
www.transequality.org.
National LGBTQ Task Force 
The National LGBTQ Task Force advances full freedom, justice 
and equality for all LGBTQ people. We are building a future 
where everyone can be free to be their entire selves in every 
aspect of their lives. Today, despite all the progress we’ve made 
to end discrimination, millions of LGBTQ people face barriers in 
every aspect of their lives: in housing, employment, healthcare, 
retirement, and basic human rights; these barriers must go. 
They also face persecution, harassment and violence for simply 
being themselves; this must change. That’s why the Task Force is 
training and mobilizing millions of activists across our nation to 
deliver a world where you can be you. For more information, visit 
www.thetaskforce.org.
Transgender Law Center 
Transgender Law Center (TLC) changes law, policy and attitudes 
so that all people can live safely, authentically, and free from 
discrimination regardless of their gender identity or expression. 
Founded in 2002, TLC employs an integrated multidisciplinary 
approach–including 
impact 
litigation, 
policy 
advocacy, 
public education, and movement building–to protect and 
advance the rights of transgender and gender nonconforming 
people from coast to coast. For more information, visit
www.transgenderlawcenter.org.


3
TABLE OF CONTENTS
GRAPHICAL EXECUTIVE SUMMARY................................................................................................1
INTRODUCTION.................................................................................................................................3
PERVASIVE DISCRIMINATION PUSHES TRANSGENDER PEOPLE INTO
THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM...............................................................................................................3
Lack of Support at Home, at School, and in Communities................................................................................ 3
Discrimination in Many Areas of Life........................................................................................................................ 5
Targeted by Bad Laws.................................................................................................................................................... 8
Negative and Dangerous Police Interactions........................................................................................................ 10
EXPERIENCES OF TRANSGENDER PEOPLE IN THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM. ........................19
Discrimination in Legal Proceedings........................................................................................................................ 19
Unfair and Inhumane Treatment in Jails and Prisons.......................................................................................... 20
LACK OF SUPPORT UPON RELEASE FOR TRANSGENDER PEOPLE................................................30
Restrictive Probation and Parole Policies ............................................................................................................... 30
Inadequate Re-Entry Programs.................................................................................................................................. 30
Difficulty Obtaining Name Changes and Accurate Identity Documents...................................................... 30
IMPACT OF HAVING A CRIMINAL RECORD ON TRANSGENDER PEOPLE......................................32
Employment and Housing .......................................................................................................................................... 32
Health Care....................................................................................................................................................................... 32
CONCLUSION.....................................................................................................................................34
RECOMMENDATIONS.......................................................................................................................35
ENDNOTES.........................................................................................................................................37


1
TRANSGENDER PEOPLE ARE OVERREPRESENTED
TRANSGENDER WOMEN
ALL TRANSGENDER AND GENDER
NON-CONFORMING PEOPLE
TRANSGENDER MEN
ALL U.S. ADULTS
21%
16%
10%
5%
TRANSGENDER PEOPLE ARE PUSHED INTO THE SYSTEM
Policing Strategies
• Profiling
• Collaboration Between Police and Immigration Enforcement
• Misgendering and Inaccurate Identity Documents
• Discrimination and Mistreatment
• Violence When Seeking Assistance
Bad Laws
• HIV Criminalization Laws
• Drug Laws
• Criminalization of Sex Work
PERCENT OF ADULTS REPORTING TIME SPENT IN PRISON OR JAIL
Sources: Jaime M. Grant et al., “Injustice at Every Turn: A Report of the National Transgender Discrimination Survey,” Washington: National Center for Transgender Equality and National Gay and Lesbian Task Force, 2011; Allen J. Beck and Thomas P. 
Bonczar, “Lifetime Likelihood of Going to State or Federal Prison” (Bureau of Justice Statistics, March 6, 1997). 
TRANSGENDER PEOPLE ARE MORE VULNERABLE
Family Rejection & 
Homelessness
Unsafe Schools & Unfair 
Disciplinary Policies
Pervasive Discrimination in All Areas of Life
Employment
Housing
Health Care
Identity Documents
WHY ARE TRANSGENDER PEOPLE OVERREPRESENTED? 
HOW THE JUSTICE SYSTEM
FAILS TRANSGENDER PEOPLE
PAGE 1


2
HOW ARE TRANSGENDER PEOPLE TREATED IN THE SYSTEM?
HOW ARE TRANSGENDER PEOPLE TREATED UPON RELEASE?
WHAT IS THE IMPACT ON TRANSGENDER PEOPLE? 
• Disrimination by Court
  and Legal Staff
• Discrimination by 
  Juries
DISCRIMINATION IN COURTS
• Unsafe Placement
• Harassment and Assault by Facility Staff
• Harassment and Assault by Other Inmates
• Lack of Access to Health Care
• Disrepect in Daily Life
HARASSMENT & ABUSE IN PRISONS, JAILS, AND 
IMMIGRATION DETENTION FACILITIES
DISCRIMINATION + CRIMINAL RECORD
= SUBSTANTIAL CHALLENGES TO
REBUILDING LIVES
Unemployment
Denied Housing
Lacking Needed
Health Care
Difficulty obtaining name changes and 
accurate identity documents create 
serious obstacles to success
Lack of support in reentry programs 
and restrictive requirements during 
probation and parole
HOW THE JUSTICE SYSTEM
FAILS TRANSGENDER PEOPLE
PAGE 2


3
INTRODUCTION
This report offers a snapshot of how the U.S. criminal 
justice system not only fails transgender people, but also 
targets them. As shown in the graphics on the previous two 
pages, transgender and gender non-conforming peoplea 
face high levels of discrimination in many areas of life that 
put them at risk for economic insecurity, homelessness, and 
reliance on survival economies. Combined with policing 
strategies that profile and target transgender people, 
particularly transgender women of color, the end result is 
high rates of criminalization of transgender people. Once 
within the criminal justice system, transgender people 
are often discriminated against, verbally and sexually 
assaulted, refused adequate medical care, and treated with 
disregard for their identity and dignity. And when trying 
to rebuild their lives with a criminal record, transgender 
people face added challenges. 
Throughout this report, we highlight the unique 
impact of the criminal justice and immigration systems 
on documented and undocumented transgender 
immigrants. This report is not, however, meant to provide 
a detailed analysis of these added challenges. For a more 
thorough exploration, please see the resources listed on 
the bottom of page 15.
This report is a companion to a broader report 
released in February 2016 entitled Unjust: How the 
Broken Criminal Justice System Fails LGBT People. That 
report provides more detailed analyses and statistics, 
examples of innovative programs and personal 
stories, and detailed recommendations for change. 
This companion report is designed to be a primer 
highlighting the key issues that arise for transgender 
people within the criminal justice system. 
PERVASIVE DISCRIMINATION 
PUSHES TRANSGENDER PEOPLE 
INTO THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM
From youth to adulthood, transgender people face 
high levels of discrimination in many areas of life that put 
them at risk for economic insecurity, homelessness, and 
reliance on survival economies. Transgender people are 
also disproportionately affected by discriminatory laws, 
and are often victims of hate violence and police profiling. 
For transgender people, and especially transgender 
people of color and transgender immigrants, the 
combined effect of these factors is increased potential 
interactions with law enforcement and the criminal 
justice system. The infographic on the following page 
demonstrates the ways in which transgender people are 
pushed into the system.
Lack of Support at Home, at School, and 
in Communities
Family Rejection and Homelessness
Transgender and gender non-conforming youth 
may experience family rejection and isolation, which can 
result in homelessness and a lack of support network. In a 
national survey of transgender adults, 57% experienced 
family rejection.1
OF TRANSGENDER ADULTS 
HAVE EXPERIENCED FAMILY 
REJECTION
57%
Transgender people of color, particularly multiracial, 
Native American, and Latino respondents, were more 
likely to report this experience. According to the National 
Transgender Discrimination Survey, an astounding one 
in five transgender people report having experienced 
homelessness at some time in their lives because of 
discrimination and family rejection.2 Individuals who 
reported experiencing family rejection were also at 
increased risk for incarceration and substance use 
compared to those who were supported by their families. 
Unsafe Schools and Unfair Disciplinary Policies
School is a difficult place for many LGBT students, 
particularly transgender and gender non-conforming 
students, and some students are pushed out of school 
as a result of bullying, violence, and disciplinary policies. 
The 2013 National School Climate Survey found that 
three-quarters (75%) of transgender middle and high 
a	 Transgender. The term transgender is independent of sexual orientation and describes 
individuals whose sex assigned at birth is different from who they know they are on the inside. 
At some point in their lives, many transgender people decide they must live their lives as the 
gender they have always known themselves to be, and transition to living as that gender.
	 Gender non-conforming. This report uses the term gender non-conforming to describe a 
person who has, or is perceived to have, gender-related characteristics and/or behaviors that 
do not conform to traditional or societal expectations. This term is also independent of sexual 
orientation. For example, gender non-conforming women may or may not also identify as 
lesbian, gay, or bisexual.
INTRODUCTION


4
Family Rejection & 
Homelessness
Unsafe Schools & Unfair 
Disciplinary Policies
TRANSGENDER YOUTH LACK SUPPORT AT
HOME, AT SCHOOL, AND IN COMMUNITIES
Employment 
Discrimination
Housing 
Discrimination
Health Care 
Discrimination
Challenges Obtaining 
ID Documents
TRANSGENDER ADULTS FACE PERVASIVE 
DISCRIMINATION IN MANY AREAS OF LIFE
NEGATIVE AND DANGEROUS POLICE INTERACTIONS
INCREASED RISK FOR ECONOMIC INSECURITY, HOMELESSNESS, AND RELIANCE
ON SEX WORK RESULTING IN POLICE INTERACTIONS AND INCARCERATION
IMPACT:
• Police Profiling
• Collaboration Between Police and Immigration Enforcement
• Misgendering and Inaccurate IDs
• Discrimination and Mistreatment by Police
BAD LAWS TARGET TRANSGENDER PEOPLE
HIV Criminalization 
Laws
Drug Laws
Bathroom Laws
Criminalization
of Sex Work
PERVASIVE DISCRIMINATION
PUSHES TRANSGENDER PEOPLE INTO THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM 


5
school students felt unsafe at school because of how 
they expressed their gender.3 Of adults responding to 
the National Transgender Discrimination Survey, 78% 
who expressed a transgender identity or gender non-
conformity during primary and secondary school had been 
harassed.4 Additionally, school facilities like restrooms and 
locker rooms present unique challenges for transgender 
and gender non-conforming students and can increase 
vulnerability to harassment and violence. Some students’ 
experiences are so negative and dangerous that they skip 
school or drop out entirely. In the National Transgender 
Discrimination Survey, 15% of transgender and gender 
non-conforming adults reported leaving school as a result 
of the mistreatment they experienced.
Transgender and gender non-conforming youth, 
particularly transgender youth of color, are among the 
groups of students who are more likely to be suspended, 
expelled, or otherwise removed from school settings—
often for relatively minor offenses—and pushed into 
the juvenile justice and broader correctional systems.5 
For example, the 2013 National School Climate Survey 
revealed that transgender students were more likely 
to have experienced school disciplinary actions—
including detention, suspension, or expulsion—than 
non-transgender LGB students.6 In its work in New York 
State, the New York Civil Liberties Union received many 
complaints of transgender youth being disciplined for 
wearing clothes that were consistent with their gender 
identity or for using the “wrong” restroom.7 Legislation 
like that passed in April 2016 in North Carolina places 
restrictions on how transgender students can use the 
restroom, increasing the chances that transgender 
students will be disciplined in schools (for more about 
laws targeting transgender people, particularly around 
restroom access, see pages 8-9). In May 2016, the U.S. 
Departments of Education and Justice sent a joint letter 
to schools notifying them that prohibiting a transgender 
student from using a restroom in accordance with their 
gender identity, along with other discrimination based 
on gender identity or expression, constitutes a violation 
of Title IX’s prohibition on discrimination based on sex.
What’s more, when young people don’t complete 
their educations, they face limited employment 
opportunities and are more likely to rely on survival or 
underground economies. In the National Transgender 
Discrimination Survey, respondents who reported being 
physically assaulted at school were twice as likely to 
have extremely low incomes of $10,000 or less a year, to 
have done sex work or other work in the underground 
economy, and they were 50% more likely to have been 
incarcerated at some point in their lives.8 
Discrimination in Many Areas of Life
Transgender people experience extremely high rates 
of discrimination in employment, housing, and health 
care. This is compounded by an inability to update the 
gender marker on their identity documents, effectively 
“outing” transgender people whether they are applying 
for a job or an apartment. Barriers to employment and 
housing can result in increased economic insecurity 
and homelessness. The combination of poverty, 
unemployment, and homelessness contributes to higher 
rates of incarceration and justice system interactions 
among 
transgender 
people, 
particularly 
when 
transgender people are forced to rely on underground 
economies to survive, such as trading sex or selling drugs. 
Employment Discrimination
Transgender 
and 
gender 
non-conforming 
people report shockingly high rates of employment 
discrimination; 78% of respondents to the National 
Transgender 
Discrimination 
Survey 
said 
they’d 
experienced discrimination in the workplace.9 In a 
study conducted by the District of Columbia Office 
of Human Rights, employers favored less qualified 
candidates over qualified transgender candidates in 
nearly half (48%) of cases.10
More Qualified Transgender Candidates Rejected
in Nearly Half of Cases
Employment 
discrimination 
and 
harassment 
has negative results for transgender people, namely 
unemployment and poverty. Transgender individuals 
reported twice the average national unemployment 
rate at the time the National Transgender Discrimination 
Survey was conducted; 14% compared to 7% of the 
general population.11 
14%
7%
General 
Unemployment
Transgender
Unemployment
PERVASIVE DISCRIMINATION PUSHES TRANSGENDER PEOPLE INTO THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM


6
The same survey also found that African American 
transgender people had substantially higher rates of 
unemployment than white transgender people (28% 
compared to 12%). Transgender and gender non-
conforming respondents were nearly four times more 
likely to have a household income under $10,000 per 
year than the population as a whole (15% vs. 4%). This is 
true despite the finding that 87% of those surveyed 
completed at least some college and 47% have obtained 
a college or graduate degree—rates that are much 
higher than those for the general population. 
The 
lack 
of 
employment 
opportunities 
for 
transgender people can lead some transgender 
people to engage in underground economies, like 
trading sex for money or shelter or selling drugs. For 
undocumented transgender immigrants in particular, 
lack of employment opportunities can lead to increased 
involvement in underground economies. These factors 
put transgender people, particularly transgender people 
of color, at heightened risk for engagement with the 
criminal justice system. And, as discussed on pages 32-33, 
once an individual has a criminal record, the cycle of 
unemployment and homelessness becomes even more 
challenging to break. 
Housing Discrimination
Nearly one in five (19%) transgender people in the 
National Transgender Discrimination Survey reported 
they had been refused a home or apartment because 
of their gender identity/expression, and 11% had been 
evicted for the same reason.12 Eviction rates were even 
higher for African American transgender respondents 
(37%). When transgender people experience housing 
discrimination or cannot afford adequate housing, 
they may become homeless. The National Transgender 
Discrimination Survey found that nearly one in five 
people (19%) had been homeless at some point.13
One in five transgender people (19%) have been homeless
Transgender people facing homelessness also face 
discrimination from agencies that should be helping 
them. A 2010 survey of transgender people found that 
29% of individuals who had experienced homelessness 
had been turned away from a shelter because of their 
transgender status; 55% had been harassed by shelter 
staff or residents.14 Transgender people are frequently 
unable to stay in a shelter that matches their gender 
identity as opposed to their birth sex, making them less 
likely to seek shelter altogether.15
OF PEOPLE WERE HARASSED BY 
SHELTER STAFF OR RESIDENTS
55%
OF PEOPLE WERE TURNED AWAY 
FROM A SHELTER
29%
BECAUSE OF THEIR TRANSGENDER STATUS
When transgender people are on the streets or 
struggling to make ends meet, they are often put in 
situations where they may encounter police and enter 
the criminal justice system. 
Of transgender people in men’s prisons in California, 
nearly half (47%) reported being homeless at some 
point in their lives, and 20% reported being homeless 
just before their most recent incarceration.16 By 
comparison, only 9% of the general prison population 
reported being homeless prior to being incarcerated.17 
In the National Transgender Discrimination Survey, 
individuals who had experienced homelessness were 
2.5 times more likely to have been incarcerated than 
who had not experienced homelessness.18
47%
20%
Homeless Before Most 
Recent Incarceration
Homeless at Some 
Point in Life
Transgender people in CA prisons:
Healthcare Discrimination and Health Disparities
For transgender people, even those with health 
insurance, needed health care isn’t always covered. In 
a majority of states, insurance companies continue to 
exclude coverage for transition-related medical care, 
even when such care is deemed medically-necessary 
and the same care is covered for non-transgender 
people.19 These exclusions deny transgender people 
coverage for a range of vital services (including hormone 
PERVASIVE DISCRIMINATION PUSHES TRANSGENDER PEOPLE INTO THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM


7
therapy, mental health services, and reconstructive 
surgeries). In May 2016, the U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services released regulations stating that 
health insurance providers that discriminate based on 
sex, including gender identity or expression, including 
excluding services based on transgender status, are in 
violation of federal law. This rule applies to all health 
providers and insurers that participate in the state and 
federal insurance exchanges and those who receive 
federal funding. Transgender immigrants, particularly 
those lacking legal authorization to be in the United 
States, may be unable to access health insurance 
programs, including expanded health insurance 
options for low- and middle-income individuals.
To afford this medically necessary care, some 
transgender people purchase medication or medical 
services without a prescription or from unlicensed 
medical providers, putting their health at risk and 
increasing their chance of being arrested.20 Some 
transgender people inject hormones as part of their 
transition-related medical care, so they may have 
syringes in their belongings.b Transgender people may 
also be unfairly targeted by police for suspicion of drug 
use if they are found in possession of syringes. Others 
turn to survival economies to afford the out-of-pocket 
costs of transition-related care. 
In addition to medical care related to transition, 
research finds that transgender people may have other 
unmet health needs, particularly in the area of mental 
health. More than one quarter (28%) of transgender 
people in the National Transgender Discrimination 
Survey postponed medical care when they were sick 
or injured, because they feared discrimination.21 Nearly 
one in five (19%) transgender people had been refused 
medical care because of their identity, and 28% had been 
harassed in a medical setting, including 24% in doctor’s 
offices and hospitals and 11% in mental health clinics. 
Some transgender people struggle with mental 
health concerns, which may go untreated because of 
discrimination or lack of access to health insurance. 
The National Transgender Discrimination Survey found 
that 41% of transgender and gender non-conforming 
respondents reported attempting suicide at some 
point during their lives.22 Additional analyses reveal 
that individuals who had experienced family rejection, 
discrimination and violence, and those who had 
experienced homelessness were more likely to report 
suicide attempts.23
Healthcare 
discrimination 
combined 
with 
unemployment can combine to mean that few 
transgender people can access competent mental 
health care. 
Challenge Obtaining Accurate Identity Documents
Transgender people face an ongoing struggle to 
obtain identity documents that match their lived gender. 
Many states have requirements that make updating 
documents difficult or impossible.24 Some states also 
limit access to identity documents for undocumented 
immigrants, putting undocumented immigrants at 
particular risk. Having official, government-issued identity 
documents is crucial to many aspects of everyday life, 
including driving a car, paying with a credit card, applying 
for a job or school, voting, or boarding a plane. 
According 
to 
the 
National 
Transgender 
Discrimination 
Survey, 
only 
one-fifth 
(21%) 
of 
transgender people were able to update all of their 
identification documents and records to match the 
gender they live as every day, and one-third did not 
update any of their documents.25
One in five transgender people (21%) were able to update 
all of their identification documents and records to match 
the gender they live as every day...
... and one-third did not update any of their documents
Without access to accurate identity documents, 
transgender people face added barriers to finding 
employment, 
face 
challenges 
accessing 
social 
services, and are at increased risk of harassment by law 
enforcement (see pages 10-12 for more about abuse by 
law enforcement). When transgender people are stopped 
or detained, they are often subject to harassment and 
abuse if the legal name and gender marker on the 
document they present doesn’t match their gender 
expression or the name they use in daily life. Additionally, 
PERVASIVE DISCRIMINATION PUSHES TRANSGENDER PEOPLE INTO THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM
b	 A troubling number of transgender people who lack adequate medical care and/or those who 
cannot find competent medical care use street hormones and may be at increased risk for 
blood-borne illnesses, such as HIV, if they share needles.


8
law enforcement may accuse a transgender person of 
committing fraud for giving a name that differs from the 
one on their identification; they may even be arrested on 
false impersonation charges. 
Targeted by Bad Laws
HIV Criminalization Laws 
Transgender people are among the groups most 
affected by the HIV epidemic. According to a recent study 
by the Transgender Law Center, transgender women of 
color are most likely to be affected, with one in two black 
transgender women and one in five transgender Latinas 
living with HIV.26 
1 in 2 black transgender women and 1 in 5 
transgender Latinas live with HIV
People living with HIV, including transgender 
people, face a patchwork of outdated and reactionary 
laws that rely on misinformation rather than accurate 
science about the transmission of HIV.27 These laws, 
frequently called “HIV criminalization laws,” penalize 
behavior by people living with HIV, even if those 
behaviors carry no risk of transmission or unintentionally 
expose others to the virus. HIV criminalization laws also 
further criminalize commercial sexual behavior between 
consenting adults, regardless of whether they use 
condoms and/or other forms of protection. For example, 
the Williams Institute found nearly all individuals (94%) 
who came into contact with the criminal justice system in 
California under any HIV-related criminalization statute 
had contact related to “solicitation while HIV positive”.28 
In a survey of people living with HIV, 57% of 
transgender respondents said they feared false 
accusations of nondisclosure, which could trigger 
criminal prosecution.29 Virtually all of the transgender 
respondents said it would be very difficult to receive a 
fair chance in court if accused of nondisclosure. 
Drug Laws 
Current drug policy in the United States results in 
the incarceration of tens of thousands of individuals 
each year—many of whom were convicted of nonviolent 
crimes such as possession of marijuana or another illegal 
substance. The intensity of the so-called “war on drugs” in 
the United States has disproportionately impacted urban 
communities, people of color, and those living in poverty.
Some transgender people may engage in selling 
drugs because of their disconnection from more 
traditional employment opportunities as a result 
of discrimination. Other transgender people may 
themselves use illegal drugs as a way to cope with the 
high rates of discrimination, violence, and harassment 
they experience in daily life. For example, transgender 
respondents to the National Transgender Discrimination 
Survey who reported losing a job due to bias were 
70% more likely to drink or misuse drugs to cope 
with mistreatment.30 Transgender respondents who 
experienced family rejection, who had been verbally 
harassed, physically or sexually assaulted, or expelled 
from school where also more likely to report using drugs 
or alcohol as a coping strategy. Given higher rates of 
drug use for LGBT people,31 homelessness and police 
stereotyping, it is likely that LGBT people, including 
transgender people, face significantly higher risks of 
drug-related arrest. For example, in the Black and Pink 
survey of currently incarcerated LGBTQ people, 55% had 
sold drugs prior to being incarcerated.32
Bathroom Laws 
As 
noted 
above, 
transgender 
people 
face 
discrimination and harassment in many areas of life—
when looking for housing or employment, when 
accessing medical care, or when walking down the street. 
For some transgender people, the simple act of 
using a public restroom can result in harassment and 
even violence. In a study of transgender and gender non-
conforming people living in the District of Columbia, 
for example, 70% reported being denied access to 
the restroom or being verbally harassed or physically 
assaulted.33 More than two-thirds of respondents (68%) 
had been told they were in the wrong facility, were told 
to leave, were questioned about their gender, stared 
at or given strange looks, ridiculed or made fun of, or 
otherwise verbally harassed. 
While transgender people have long been at risk 
for harassment—even having the police called on them 
for using a restroom in accordance with their gender 
identity—over the past year, cities and states have 
debated, and in some cases passed, laws that criminalize 
PERVASIVE DISCRIMINATION PUSHES TRANSGENDER PEOPLE INTO THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM


9
transgender people for using the restroom that matches 
the gender they live every day. In some instances, 
legislation requires individuals to use a restroom that 
matches their “biological sex” or the sex listed on their 
birth certificate. For example, in North Carolina all multi-
occupancy restrooms in schools and public agencies 
may only be used by individuals in accordance with their 
“biological sex,” defined by the state as the sex listed on 
one’s birth certificate.34 But many transgender people 
live in states that make it extraordinarily difficult, if 
not impossible, to update identity documents such as 
birth certificates. North Carolina requires proof of sex 
reassignment surgery to change the gender marker on 
a birth certificate, which means undergoing medical 
procedures not all transgender people want or can 
afford.35 And for transgender people who are unable to 
update their birth certificates, these new bathroom laws 
make it impossible for them to safely use the restroom. 
For example, a transgender man who was assigned female 
at birth but has lived his adult life as a man (and who 
looks like a man, including full facial hair) would certainly 
risk violence and police involvement if he entered the 
women’s room—but if he enters the men’s room, he’s 
breaking the law. In the 2015-2016 legislative session, at 
least 20 states proposed this type of “no-win” legislation 
restricting restroom access for transgender people.36
Despite claims made by some legislators in support 
of these laws, there is no evidence that transgender 
people using the restroom in accordance with their 
gender identity decreases safety for anyone.37 In 
2014, advocates contacted law enforcement officials, 
government employees, and victims’ rights advocates in 
12 states that prohibit discrimination in places of public 
accommodation.38 Not one state reported that the law had 
led to an increase in public safety incidents in restrooms. 
In fact, these ordinances and laws restricting 
restroom access actually contribute to a concerted effort 
to criminalize transgender people. Indiana lawmakers 
considered legislation that would have made it a 
misdemeanor crime for anyone above the age of 10 to use 
a restroom that did not match their sex assigned at birth. 
The Criminalization of Sex Work
Faced with discrimination at school and work, high 
rates of homelessness, and limited access to meager 
safety net supports, some transgender people engage in 
sex work to earn income or trade for housing. For example: 
•• According to the National Transgender Discrimination 
Survey, 11% of transgender respondents had engaged 
in sex work in order to survive.39 Black respondents 
had the highest rate of sex trade participation overall 
(44%), followed by those who identified as Latino/a 
(33%). Those who identified as “White only” had the 
lowest rate of participation at 6%.
Participation in sex trade by transgender people, by race
44%
33%
6%
Latino/a
White
Black

Nearly half (48%) of transgender people who 
engaged in sex work also reported experiencing 
homelessness, further compounding their likelihood 
of interaction with police. 
•• In a survey of transgender people in state prisons 
for men in California (the survey presumably 
reached mostly transgender women who were 
placed in men’s prisons), over 40% reported having 
participated in sex work.40
Because 
transgender 
people, 
particularly 
transgender women of color, and undocumented 
transgender immigrants may be disproportionately 
represented among individuals engaged in sex 
work, they are frequent targets of laws criminalizing 
prostitution and related offenses. Police generally have 
wide discretion under these ordinances, and they often 
arrest individuals for vague violations such as “loitering 
with intent to solicit.”41
A newly released report entitled Meaningful Work: 
Transgender Experiences in the Sex Trade details these 
laws further.42 The report finds that police may classify 
an individual as a “known prostitute” or issue “stay 
away orders” which associate a physical location with 
a presumption of criminal activity, regardless of the 
legitimate, non-criminal reasons a person might have for 
being in an area. Profiling in this manner, particularly of 
transgender women of color, is commonly referred to as 
“walking while trans.” 
PERVASIVE DISCRIMINATION PUSHES TRANSGENDER PEOPLE INTO THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM


10
In a number of cities and counties, police take these 
laws to an even greater extreme, considering possession 
or presence of condoms as evidence of prostitution.43 
Not only does this practice infringe on basic rights, but 
it also discourages individuals from carrying condoms, 
undermining efforts to reduce transmission of HIV and 
other sexually transmitted infections. 
Particularly for transgender women, who are at 
increased risk for HIV,44 this leaves them in a difficult 
situation—risking arrest for carrying condoms or 
endangering their health by not using protection. 
Among LGBTQ youth in New York City engaged in survival 
sex surveyed by the Urban Institute and Streetwise and 
Safe, 15% reported that condoms found during a stop, 
question, or frisk were used by police to justify lengthy 
questioning or arrests for prostitution-related offenses.
Negative and Dangerous Police 
Interactions
When law enforcement agencies, including city 
and state police, enforce laws and ordinances, they 
frequently do so in ways that disproportionately impact 
low-income people and people of color, including 
transgender people. For transgender people specifically, 
especially transgender women of color, interactions 
with police are not only negative but they are frequently 
dangerous. Transgender people experience profiling 
by police, frequently under the assumption they are 
engaged in sex work; they are treated with disrespect 
and are misgenderedc by police, and the lack of an 
accurate identity document can put an individual at 
increased risk for this; and they are subject to invasive 
searches and too often physical and sexual violence at 
the hands of law enforcement. Transgender immigrants 
are at constant risk of being pushed into immigration 
enforcement custody as law enforcement may profile 
or target them because of their real or perceived 
immigration status, their gender identity or expression, 
their race or ethnicity, or all three. Additionally, when 
transgender people seek assistance from police, they all 
too often are themselves arrested. 
Police Profiling
Law enforcement officers frequently make judgment 
calls about when to question or interact with someone. In 
these situations, underlying biases and explicit prejudice 
can influence officers’ decisions. “Profiling” refers to the 
practice by law enforcement of relying on an individual’s 
characteristics to make conclusions about whether or 
not that individual is participating in criminal activity.45 
When law enforcement officials profile, they are not 
focusing on evidence of wrongdoing, but are instead 
relying on stereotypes and bias. 
An Amnesty International report found that 
transgender people in particular, as well as LGBT 
individuals generally, are subject to increased policing 
because they are perceived to transgress gender 
norms.46 For example, police frequently assume that 
transgender women, particularly transgender women 
of color, are sex workers based on their perceived 
transgender status and their race, as well the fact that 
they are standing, walking, or driving in a particular 
area. As noted above, some LGBT people do engage in 
sex work or selling drugs, but the assumption by police 
is too frequently that any LGBT person, particularly a 
transgender woman of color, must be doing so. In New 
Orleans, for example, as part of the U.S. Department 
of Justice investigation and resulting consent decree, 
transgender women reported that officers frequently 
targeted and arrested them.47 
Surveys also show the disproportionate impact 
of stop-and-frisk policies on transgender people, 
particularly people of color and transgender women. 
Transgender women in New York City reported high 
levels of interactions with the police, which often 
included unnecessary and aggressive searches.48 
Collaboration Between Police and Immigration 
Enforcement 
LGBT immigrants, particularly those who are also 
people of color, are at heightened risk of profiling by 
police because of their presumed undocumented 
immigration status or their religious or ethnic 
background. Even an arrest for a minor offense can result 
in detention and ultimately deportation for immigrants, 
in some cases regardless of immigration status. Under 
programs such as the Priority Enforcement Program, 
law enforcement checks fingerprints of those arrested 
against immigration databases, which can result in 
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) taking 
custody of individuals, regardless of whether they 
committed a crime. Other programs, such as the Criminal 
PERVASIVE DISCRIMINATION PUSHES TRANSGENDER PEOPLE INTO THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM
c	 The term “misgender” refers to when a transgender person is not recognized as the gender with 
which they identify but rather is referred to as and treated in accordance with their sex assigned 
at birth. For example, a transgender woman is misgendered when she is referred to as “he” or 
put into an all-male setting. 


11
Alien Program and the 287(g) program, intertwine law 
enforcement and immigration enforcement by allowing 
law enforcement to act as immigration officials and to 
increase immigration enforcement activities within 
prisons and jails. 
Under the Obama administration, deportation 
has reached a record high. In 2013, the United States 
deported 240,000 people without criminal records and 
198,000 people with criminal records.49 
Misgendering and Inaccurate Identity Documents
Being asked to present identity documents in 
interactions with police is a very vulnerable moment for 
transgender people. If one’s identity document does not 
match an individual’s gender expression or the officer’s 
perception of what the person’s gender is, this may result 
in increased scrutiny by law enforcement. Additionally, 
if an individual’s name differs from the name on their 
identity documents, a simple traffic stop or stop on a 
street corner may escalate quickly. For transgender 
immigrants, who may lack legal identity documents, 
these interactions can be particularly dangerous—both 
increasing the risk of harassment and interactions with 
immigration systems. Particularly troubling, officers may 
then conduct searches to try to ascertain “who someone 
really is,” violating a transgender person’s physical 
safety and subjecting them to humiliating treatment, 
and increasing the risk of physical and sexual assault. 
As noted above, there are numerous requirements and 
high costs associated with name change and gender 
marker changes in many states–and the impossibility 
in others–and, as a result, many transgender people 
have incongruent documents that can put them at 
increased risk of harassment, violence, and even arrest 
and possible deportation.
Discrimination and Mistreatment by Police
Transgender people, including many transgender 
people of color, have long suffered from discrimination, 
harassment, and violence at the hands of police. 
PERVASIVE DISCRIMINATION PUSHES TRANSGENDER PEOPLE INTO THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM
Story: Walking While Trans
#1: Bianca’s Story
In 2011, 18-year-old Bianca Feliciano was walking with a friend in Cicero, a western suburb 
of Chicago. They were stopped by police under suspicion of prostitution. The police ordered 
them into a police car and proceeded to search Bianca’s purse. The police officers refused 
to accept her ID, which had her legal name and gender marker. They then verbally harassed 
Bianca, saying, “You are not female, you have a dick between your legs.” She was threatened 
with physical violence by the police, and they told her she could be accused of fraud. In 2012, 
she settled a lawsuit with the police, which included a stipulation that the police department 
would develop guidelines for respectful interactions with transgender people.
Adapted from “Transgender Woman Sues Cicero Police, Alleging Harassment,” The Tran’s Women’s Healing Justice Project; Clifford Ward, “Transgender woman settles 
suit with Cicero, attorneys say,” The Chicago Tribune, August 7, 2012. 
#2: Antonia’s Story
Antonia is a transgender Latina woman from Jackson Heights in Queens, NY. She has been 
stopped, frisked, profiled, and arrested multiple times for allegedly being engaged in prostitution. 
One day, Antonia was walking in her neighborhood with two other transgender women. While 
outside of one of their homes, two police officers pulled up in a police car, stopped them, and 
told them to go home. The officers then drove around the block and saw Antonia and her friends 
again. This time they did not ask; they just stopped and frisked them. Police told them they 
were looking for condoms; they said they stopped Antonia and her friends for prostitution. No 
condoms were found, but Antonia was arrested and taken to the detention center, where she 
was strip searched to the point that she was nearly naked as officers reportedly laughed at her. 
As a result, Antonia feels falsely accused, violated, and humiliated.
Adapted from Make the Road New York, “Transgressive Policing: Police Abuse of LGBTQ Communities of Color in Jackson Heights,” October 2012. 


12
Recent surveys have quantified these experiences, 
and they highlight some of the ways in which law 
enforcement not only targets transgender people, but 
also abuse their power and treat transgender people 
in deplorable ways.
In the National Transgender Discrimination Survey, 
22% of respondents who had interacted with police 
experienced harassment.50 The 2015 LGBT Health and 
Human Services Needs Assessment conducted in New York 
State found one in five transgender respondents (21%) 
had been unfairly arrested, harassed, or physically harmed 
with higher rates for transgender people of color (31%).51
Rate of Mistreatment by Police
31%
21%
Transgender 
People
Transgender
People of Color
Harassment and discrimination by law enforcement 
is higher among transgender people of color. The 
National Transgender Discrimination Survey revealed 
that transgender people of color, particularly black and 
multiracial transgender and gender non-conforming 
people reported even higher rates (38% and 36%, 
respectively), while 8% of Latino/a transgender and gender 
non-conforming people who interacted with police 
reported sexual assault compared to 2% of all respondents. 
Among transgender Latinas in Los Angeles County, for 
example, two-thirds report that they have been verbally 
harassed by law enforcement, 21% report being physically 
assaulted by law enforcement, and an astounding 24% 
report being sexually assaulted by law enforcement.52 
When Seeking Assistance From Police. The lack 
of a competent response from law enforcement when 
transgender people seek assistance can unfairly push 
some transgender people into the criminal justice system 
or immigration enforcement system. When transgender 
people seek assistance from the police, particularly 
in instances of intimate partner violence or a hate 
crime, they are often met with a lack of understanding. 
Sometimes they are even arrested alongside, or instead 
of, the perpetrator. 
According to a 2014 study by the National Coalition 
of Anti-Violence Projects (NCAVP), transgender women 
and transgender people in general, are among the 
most at risk for severe violence.53 Further, transgender 
women and transgender people of color were each 
1.6 times more likely to experience physical violence 
than other LGBT people and people living with HIV. 
Transgender women and transgender people of color are
more likely to experience physical violence
1.6x
Even with the high levels of violence they 
experience, NCAVP’s report found that transgender 
women were less likely to report hate violence incidents 
to the police than were other survivors—probably 
because of poor treatment by police.54 The National 
Transgender Discrimination Survey, for example, found 
that 46% of respondents reported being uncomfortable 
seeking assistance from police, likely resulting from 
high rates of experienced harassment or disrespect by 
police described above.55 
When transgender people do seek out assistance 
from law enforcement, they often do not have their 
complaint taken seriously or are not responded to 
quickly. Police may blame the transgender survivor 
for crimes against them, particularly in cases involving 
transgender people whom police officers may see as 
engaging in “gender fraud.”56 In addition, there have 
been documented cases where a transgender person 
involved in a hate incident was charged with a crime for 
defending themselves against a perpetrator, while the 
perpetrator was not charged.57 
PERVASIVE DISCRIMINATION PUSHES TRANSGENDER PEOPLE INTO THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM


13
PERVASIVE DISCRIMINATION PUSHES TRANSGENDER PEOPLE INTO THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM
Story: Transgender Man Imprisoned for Fighting Off Rapist
Ky Peterson, a black transgender man, is serving a 20-year sentence for involuntary 
manslaughter in the Pulaski State Prison in Georgia. His crime? He defended himself when 
he was being raped by a stranger. 
On October 2011, Ky was walking home from a gas station. He was frequently harassed 
by strangers and had been raped before, so he kept a gun in his bag for protection. 
After ignoring the advances of a man drinking outside the gas station, Ky passed some 
abandoned buildings. There the man, Samuel Chavez, hit Ky over the head and raped him 
while screaming homophobic slurs. Ky’s brothers heard his screams and helped pull Chavez off of Ky. As Chavez 
came charging toward him again, Ky shot the man. 
Immediately, Ky wondered what to do. Would the police see him as a rape survivor who defended himself with 
the help of his brothers? Or would police see the young black men as thugs? 
A rape kit came back positive and confirmed what Ky had told the police—he had been raped and had defended 
himself. Nevertheless, he was arrested for possession of a firearm and for shooting his rapist. Ky spent 366 days in 
the county jail awaiting formal charges. He wasn’t given an opportunity to meet with a public defender. 
Once he was formally charged, Ky met with a public defender who advised him to plead guilty to involuntary 
manslaughter. Ky’s public defender had more than 200 active cases at the time and wasn’t able to devote much 
time to the case. Ky’s attorney told The Advocate he thought Ky had two strikes against him. “Number 1, you’re 
African-American,” the attorney recounted saying to Ky. “And these little old white ladies in South Georgia 
think that if [they] see an African-American outside their own neighborhoods, [they] need to be careful.” The 
second strike, the attorney said, was that Ky looked “stereotypically gay.” “The fact you’re gay will be an issue 
that I have to address early on,” the attorney recalled telling Ky. “That’s two strikes that are against us from the 
get-go. And that factored extensively into my and my investigator’s discussions about the case.” Ky never told 
his public defender that he was transgender. 
Ky was placed in a women’s prison and is frequently harassed. “My identity [as a trans man] has not been 
respected at all. The officers still address me as ‘ma’am,’ which I don’t like at all. But I have to go by it, because 
that’s their rules that I have to go by,” Ky told a reporter for The Advocate. “Here the staff’s like ‘girl’ this and ‘girl’ 
that, and I have to catch myself sometimes like, ‘You must be talking to someone behind me.’ It’s just not what 
I’m used to, even at home. Once I make it known to them [that I’m a trans man], it’s always something extra like, 
‘No, you’re just gay.’” Ky struggles with depression, and has yet to receive follow-up care or counseling related 
to the rape. There are also substantial delays in receiving routine medical care, including asthma medication, 
which took seven months for Ky to receive. In January 2016, Ky was finally approved to begin testosterone.
Adapted from Sunnivie Brydum and Mitch Kellaway, “This Black Trans Man Is in Prison for Killing His Rapist,” The Advocate, April 8, 2015. 


14
PERVASIVE DISCRIMINATION PUSHES TRANSGENDER PEOPLE INTO THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM
Story: Chicago Woman Charged with Attempted Murder For Defending Herself During Hate Crime
On March 28, 2012, Eisha Love and Tiffany Gooden parked near a gas station in the Austin 
neighborhood of Chicago, Illinois. Eisha wanted to pick up a birthday present for her mom. 
Two men approached the women, including one who was verbally assaulting Eisha. As 
black transgender women in Austin, this wasn’t surprising to her and Tiffany. Eisha says she 
was frequently harassed, but she learned to keep her head down and ignore her harassers. 
The men continued bothering Eisha and Tiffany, and then one of the men punched Eisha 
in the face. When she heard one of the men calling friends for some support, Eisha realized 
they were in real danger, so Eisha and Tiffany ran for their car and drove away. 
After the men gave chase both on foot and by car, Eisha lost control of her car, swerving and hitting one of the 
men. The man limped away and was later treated for a broken leg. Certain that the men were going to kill them, 
Eisha and Tiffany left their car and ran, finding a hiding spot from which she called her mother. 
Later, Eisha and her mother returned with police to the location where the car had been left and explained what 
happened. Some of the men who had been involved were there, too. As Eisha arrived, several of the men pointed 
to Eisha and said, “There’s the faggot that did it,” and “We’re going to get you.” 
Eisha was told to go to the police station. She thought the police would investigate her attack, but instead she 
was booked and ultimately indicted on charges of attempted first-degree murder and aggravated battery. Eisha 
spent three years and nine months in jail without a trial before being released in December 2015 after accepting 
a plea of guilty for aggravated battery. While in a maximum security men’s jail, Eisha was verbally harassed and 
attacked by a correctional officer.
Several months after the incident, Tiffany Gooden was found dead in an abandoned building. She’d been 
stabbed. Her mother told a Windy City Times reporter that a friend of Tiffany’s told her that someone was looking 
for Tiffany. “They were saying they was going to kill her. They were saying they were going to ‘get his’ ass because 
‘he’ was riding in the car.” Another transgender woman, Paige Clay, was murdered just a few blocks from where 
Tiffany’s body was found a few weeks earlier. 
Adapted from Gretchen Rachel Blickensderfer, “Trans* Woman Claims Self-Defense in Case,” Windy City Times, September 17, 2014; Gretchen Rachel Blickensderfer, “A Tale of Two Murders: Connected 
or Not?,” Windy City Times, September 24, 2014; Gretchen Rachel Hammond, “Transgender Woman Released from Jail after Nearly 4 Years without Trial,” Windy City Times, December 17, 2015.
Photo permission from Windy City Times
Story: Transgender Man in Georgia Assaulted by Police
In East Point, Georgia, on October 23, 2014, Juan Evans was pulled over by police for speeding. An 
African American transgender man, he provided extensive information in response to the officers’ 
questions. Since he didn’t have his wallet with him, he offered his birth name, birthdate, social 
security number, and address. He disclosed to police that he was transgender after one of the 
officers accused him of lying. 
The officer responded by demanding to search Juan and examine his genitals to determine whether 
he was a man or a woman. When Juan refused, he was arrested and taken to the police station where 
he was harassed by staff and outed, including being threatened with additional genital searches. 
Adapted from Mitch Kellaway, “WATCH: Georgia Trans Man Called ‘It’ by Police Pushes for End to Harassment,” The Advocate, November 2, 2014.


15
PERVASIVE DISCRIMINATION PUSHES TRANSGENDER PEOPLE INTO THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM
Transgender People Caught at the Intersections of the Immigration and Criminal Justice Systems
There are an estimated 267,000 LGBT-identified undocumented individuals in the United States.58 And there are 
an additional 637,000 LGBT-identified documented immigrants, including those with green cards.59 According 
to the National Transgender Discrimination Survey, of all transgender and gender non-conforming respondents, 
4% in total were non-citizens, including 2% who reported they were undocumented.60
Transgender immigrants are frequently caught at the intersections of the immigration and criminal justice 
systems with troubling outcomes both in terms of their ability to stay in the United States and for how they are 
treated by the system. 
Background on immigration system. While it is not part of the criminal justice system, the immigration system in 
the United States functions as a justice system in many ways, relying on immigration enforcement officers and even 
law enforcement officers, immigration courts and attorneys, and immigration detention facilities. Programs such as 
the Priority Enforcement Program rely on local law enforcement to transfer certain immigrants over to immigration 
enforcement officials. Some of the more than 250 ICE detention facilities are even comprised of space rented from 
city or county jails and prisons.61
Individuals can enter federal immigration custody if they are apprehended at the border or at a port of entry, 
through immigration raids, being stopped by law enforcement, or after being convicted of certain crimes. For 
example, undocumented immigrants who are arrested by police or detained by immigration officials may be held 
in an immigration detention while awaiting deportation proceedings, asylum applications or other judgments. 
Documented immigrants, including those with a green card, can be detained and have deportation proceedings 
commenced for convictions of certain categories of crimes. ICE has broad authority to detain individuals without 
legal status to be in the United States, including those who are awaiting a determination of whether they should 
be deported and those awaiting deportation.62
Transgender immigrants may be at increased risk of interaction with law enforcement. As noted above, 
heightened policing and profiling by police of immigrants, people of color, and LGBT people mean that LGBT 
people of color, particularly transgender women of color, may be more likely to be targets of law enforcement. 
Several immigration enforcement programs encourage collaboration between law enforcement and immigration 
enforcement. These programs can result in the detention and deportation of transgender immigrants, many of 
whom are returned to countries where they can face discrimination, persecution, and even death. 
Transgender immigrants are frequently detained. It is likely that LGBT people are overrepresented in immigration 
detention facilities because of the number of LGBT people, particularly transgender women, who come to the 
United States to seek asylum based on persecution in their home countries based on sexual orientation, gender 
identity, and/or HIV status. 
Many immigrants, particularly those who are detained or surrender at a border seeking asylum, are placed 
in immigration detention facilities. Some immigrants are subject to statutory mandatory detention, such as 
individuals with certain criminal convictions. However, ICE policies state that individuals who are found to have 
“credible fear” of persecution or torture if deported to their home country and who pose no flight risk or are no 
danger to the community should be eligible for release to await future immigration hearings.63
NOTE: This section is designed to be a broad overview of the intersection of the criminal justice and immigration systems and how transgender people are treated within immigration detention facilities. 
For a deeper discussion and more information, see these resources from the Movement Advancement Project and the Center for American Progress (2016); Human Rights Watch (2016); and the Center 
for American Progress (2013). 


16
PERVASIVE DISCRIMINATION PUSHES TRANSGENDER PEOPLE INTO THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM
Transgender People Caught at the Intersections of the Immigration and Criminal Justice Systems
Despite this, research shows that LGBT undocumented immigrants, including asylum seekers, are more 
likely to be detained, compared to the general population of asylum seekers, putting them at increased risk 
for harassment, sexual assault, and lack of adequate medical care. A 2015 report by the Center for American 
Progress found that 68% of LGBT asylum seekers were detained, despite the fact that 70% of all cases were to be 
considered for release.64 In a 2016 report by Human Rights Watch, nearly half of the transgender women held in 
immigration detention indicated they were detained because of low-level criminal convictions, such as sex work, 
false identification, or minor drug possession.65 According to another investigation by the Center for American 
Progress, ICE documents showed that between October 2013 and October 2014, 104 immigrants told ICE they 
were afraid of being put in detention because of their sexual orientation and/or gender identity.66 Of these, 81 
were placed in detention anyway. Even when bond is available, since the ability of an individual to pay is not 
taken into account bond amounts are often set far too high for detainees to afford, resulting in transgender 
people remaining in detention for months, even years, simply because they are too poor to post bail. 
Transgender people lack adequate counsel while in detention and challenges upon release. While criminal 
defendants, particularly those facing a potential prison or jail sentence, are generally entitled to legal 
representation even if they cannot afford it, individuals in immigration proceedings are not guaranteed counsel. 
Lacking counsel has serious consequences, particularly in complicated situations, like asylum cases or other 
instances where deportation could put an individual at grave risk, such as a transgender people from a country 
where she may be treated harshly. Research finds that a key factor in whether a person going through removal 
proceedings was ultimately deported was access to counsel.67
During immigration court hearings, judges must make decisions about whether individuals should be able to remain 
in the United States or be deported. In asylum cases, in particular, there are numerous examples of judges showing 
a basic lack of understanding of the challenges facing transgender people in other countries. Immigration attorneys 
frequently hear judges refer to transgender asylum seekers using the wrong pronoun or using an applicant’s legal 
name even after they have been told that an individual uses a name in accordance with their gender identity. 
When a transgender person enters the United States seeking asylum from persecution, they have to complete 
an application within a year. Asylum seekers are not eligible for many public assistance programs and cannot 
work legally for at least 180 days after filing their application. As a result, they often struggle to make ends meet. 
Some rely on informal support networks, while others may work in survival economies, increasing their chances 
of arrest and prosecution. There are very few services available to asylum seekers in general upon release, and 
particularly for transgender individuals, there are even fewer culturally competent organizations providing direct 
relief. And when an individual has been convicted of drug offenses, crimes of moral turpitude, and other crimes, 
they can become ineligible for asylum. 
Transgender immigrants are frequently mistreated in immigration detention facilities. Much like the inhumane 
and unsafe conditions described later in U.S. prisons and jails for transgender people, transgender people face 
extraordinary difficulties in immigration detention facilities. 
Unsafe placement. In immigration detention facilities, LGBT detainees, particularly transgender detainees, are 
frequently placed in isolation or in segregated units. In some cases, this placement happens immediately when 
an individual identifies as LGBT or is identified by staff as LGBT; it also happens in response to a safety concern.68 
Complaints about the treatment of LGBT detainees prompted ICE to create a specialized facility to house LGBT 
immigrants at the Santa Ana City Jail in California.69 Staff in this facility have received specialized training, but the 
number of beds is limited and individuals are transferred there only when space permits and it has been determined 
that the unit is the only safe option for a particular detainee.70 Even at this facility, there continue to be complaints 
by transgender detainees about mistreatment, including strip searches, failure to provide medical attention, and 
lack of access to necessary medical care related to gender dysphoria.71 For LGBT detainees housed at the other 
hundreds of ICE facilities around the country, including many contract facilities in county or city jails or state prisons, 
being placed in isolation or in units that do not correspond with one’s gender identity is a frequent occurrence. 
(continued)


17
PERVASIVE DISCRIMINATION PUSHES TRANSGENDER PEOPLE INTO THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM
Transgender People Caught at the Intersections of the Immigration and Criminal Justice Systems
Despite PREA regulations, which are binding on the federal government, transgender detainees in immigration 
detention facilities are frequently housed in units according to the sex on their birth certificate rather than their 
gender identity, putting their physical safety at risk.72 According to the Government Accountability Office, 20% of 
substantiated assaults in immigration facilities involved transgender detainees.73 When transgender detainees 
are placed in units that do not reflect their lived gender, it can present challenges in seeking asylum. For example, 
if a transgender woman detainee is unable to wear clothing in accordance with her gender identity, it can make 
her asylum case less persuasive to judges, many of whom conduct hearings via videoconference. 
In June 2015, ICE released guidance on the treatment of transgender detainees.74 Specifically, the guidance 
requires officials to explicitly ask detainees if they identify as transgender. If the answer is yes, officials are advised 
to consider placing transgender detainees in facilities that have capacity to provide medical care and appropriate 
placement for transgender people. Recent evidence continues to show, however, that transgender detainees are 
continuing to be put at risk for inappropriate placement, sexual violence and harassment, and lack of medical care.
High rates of physical and sexual assault. Transgender women, in particular, face safety concerns within 
immigration detention facilities. In a U.S. Government Accountability Office study of substantiated sexual abuse 
and assault allegations in Immigration and Customs Enforcement detention facilities between October 2009 and 
March 2013, 20% of cases involved transgender detainees.75 This is despite the fact that transgender detainees 
comprise a small percentage of individuals detained overall (less than 10%).76
Transgender people, in particular, are extremely vulnerable within immigration detention facilities. Many are seeking 
asylum from their home countries where they are persecuted for who they are, and yet they are placed in detention 
facilities with individuals from those same countries and who may carry the same hatred toward them. According to 
a study by the Center for American Progress, more than half of the complaints by LGBT detainees to the Department 
of Homeland Security’s Office of Inspector General over a five-year period included reports of sexual or physical 
abuse.77 A 2013 analysis found that transgender people comprise one out of every 500 individuals in immigration 
detention, but one out of every five confirmed sexual assault incidents involved a transgender person.78
Lack of necessary medical care. In immigration detention facilities, medical care for all detainees, including LGBT 
people, has been consistently considered substandard, even for basic care. In July 2015, several organizations 
filed a complaint with the Department of Homeland Security about the lack of adequate medical care provided to 
individuals detained in facilities in Texas and Pennsylvania.79 Included in the complaint were examples of individuals 
waiting up to 14 hours for medical care, never receiving follow-up care, and not receiving prescribed medications.
Individuals with HIV have reported difficulties continuing their medical regime while held in immigration 
detention facilities. For example, Bamby Salcedo, a transgender Latina immigrant from Mexico, was placed in 
the San Pedro Detention Center in California for 45 days. She’d been taking an HIV antiretroviral drug, which she 
needed to take twice a day. Even after notifying authorities upon arrival of her medication needs, she did not 
receive the drug for two weeks.80
In some instances, transgender detainees in immigration detention facilities are required to prove they had been 
receiving medical care related to gender dysphoria, such as hormone therapy, before entering ICE custody. But, 
particularly for individuals seeking asylum from home countries where they face persecution for being transgender, 
this is frequently an impossible standard. Additionally, because of the geographic and physical isolation of immigrants 
in detention facilities, it can be very difficult to obtain medical records, if they even exist.81 For individuals who 
cannot demonstrate that they were receiving hormone therapy prior to being taken into ICE custody, ICE requires 
an assessment to determine whether treatment is medically necessary. Reports from detainees suggest that even 
after medical assessment, requests for medical care related to gender dysphoria have been denied. 
Advocates argue that LGBT people, particularly transgender women, cannot be detained safely by ICE and 
should therefore be released to await hearings or deportation proceedings. This would not be unusual; many 
undocumented immigrants, including those seeking asylum, are released while awaiting immigration hearings.
(continued)


18
DISCRIMINATION IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
UNFAIR AND INHUMANE TREATMENT IN JAILS & PRISONS
RESULT: INCREASED RATES OF INCARCERATION AND LONGER SENTENCES
Stigma and stereotypes hinder transgender
people’s ability to get a fair trial
Court staff, judges, and attorneys
lack basic transgender competency
Result: Transgender people are frequently placed in facilities that do not 
reflect their gender identity, putting them at risk for harassment and violence 
UNSAFE PLACEMENTS
Result: Transgender people are refused medically necessary health care
LACK OF COMPETENT HEALTH CARE
Result: Transgender people report high rates of harassment and physical 
and sexual assault by staff and other inmates
HARASSMENT & VIOLENCE
Result: Transgender people are unable to express their gender in daily 
life, including clothing, names, and grooming
DISCRIMINATION IN DAILY LIFE
TRANSGENDER PEOPLE EXPERIENCE
DISCRIMINATION, DISRESPECT, AND VIOLENCE
IN THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM


19
EXPERIENCES OF TRANSGENDER 
PEOPLE IN THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE 
SYSTEM
The U.S. criminal justice system is actually a 
complicated patchwork of systems–federal, state, and 
local law enforcement agencies, federal and state 
courts, and federal prisons, state prisons, and local city 
and county jails as well as juvenile courts and facilities 
and immigration courts and detention facilities. At all 
points of contact with the system, transgender people 
may experience discrimination, disrespect, and all too 
often violence and inhumane treatment, as shown in the 
infographic on the previous page.
Discrimination in Legal Proceedings
Transgender people are frequently mistreated by 
the justice system. Court and legal staff, including their 
own attorneys, may be unfamiliar with the issues facing 
transgender people, at best, and at worst may treat 
transgender people with disdain and hostility. 
For example, judges and court staff may refuse to 
use a transgender person’s correct pronoun or name, 
setting a dehumanizing tone for what should be a fair 
process. Of respondents to the National Transgender 
Discrimination Survey, 12% of transgender and 
gender non-conforming people indicated they’d been 
harassed or disrespected by a judge or court official, 
with transgender women reporting consistently 
higher rates of mistreatment by judges, courts, and 
legal service clinics than transgender men.86 In a 
survey by Lambda Legal, of transgender and gender 
non-conforming respondents who had been in 
court anytime during the past five years, 33% heard 
a judge, attorney, or other court employee make 
negative remarks about a person’s sexual orientation, 
gender identity, or gender expression.87 Transgender 
and gender non-conforming people of color in the 
survey reported even higher rates; 53% had heard 
discriminatory comments in the courts. 
In the immigration system, immigration judges 
must make decisions about whether individuals are to 
be deported or permitted to stay in the United States. 
Immigration attorneys frequently hear judges refer to 
transgender asylum seekers using the wrong pronoun 
or using an applicant’s legal name even when they 
have been told that an individual uses an name in 
accordance with their gender identity.
Prosecutors 
and 
judges 
may 
also 
use 
misinformation and stereotypes during trials to 
persuade judges and juries of the guilt of transgender 
people, playing on many people’s unfamiliarity 
with the transgender community. For example, an 
Oklahoma judge cited his belief that transgender 
people were “fraudulent” for seeking to change their 
names, and he quoted Bible passages in his opinions.88 
An appellate court later overturned the judge’s rulings 
prohibiting transgender people from changing their 
names.89 In Lambda Legal’s survey, one quarter 
(26%) of transgender and gender non-conforming 
respondents who had been in court in the past five 
years indicated their gender identity had been raised 
Data about Transgender People in Jails, 
Prisons, and Juvenile Facilities
•• 	Sixteen percent of transgender and gender 
non-conforming respondents to the National 
Transgender Discrimination Survey indicated 
they had spent time in jail or prison, with higher 
rates for transgender women (21%) and lower 
rates for transgender men (10%).82
•• 	The National Inmate Survey also found that 
in 2011-2012 there were approximately 5,000 
transgender adults currently serving time in adult 
prisons and jails in the United States.83
•• 	In a survey of youth in six juvenile justice 
jurisdictions across the United States, 15% 
identified as LGBT or gender non-conforming, and 
the proportion held fairly steady by race.84 The 
rates of detention varied greatly by sex, however; 
11% of males identified as LGBT or gender non-
conforming compared to 27% of females.
•• Statistics about transgender people in immigration 
detention facilities are difficult to obtain. However, 
an investigation by the Center for American Progress 
found that between October 2013 and October 
2014, 104 immigrants told ICE they were afraid 
of being put in detention because of their sexual 
orientation and gender identity.85 Of these, 81 were 
placed in detention anyway.
EXPERIENCES OF TRANSGENDER PEOPLE IN THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM


20
as an issue in court when it was not appropriate, and 
21% had been “outed” against their will in court.90
In short, transgender and gender non-conforming 
people may not receive adequate, fair representation and 
that increases the likelihood that they will spend time in a 
detention facility and eventually be convicted of a crime.
Unfair and Inhumane Treatment in Jails 
and Prisons
The 
harassment, 
abuse, 
and 
discrimination 
that many transgender people experience in their 
communities–which puts them at increased risk 
for involvement with the criminal justice system–is 
heightened in confinement settings, like prisons, jails, 
and immigration detention facilities. Many correctional 
professionals receive no or only minimal training in 
how to work with transgender people, despite clear 
guidance from the federal government through the 
Prison Rape Elimination Act (see sidebar) identifying 
transgender people as particularly vulnerable in 
confinement settings. There are several key issues that 
arise for transgender people in prisons and jails: unsafe 
placement, harassment and assault by facility staff and 
other incarcerated peopleinma, lack of health care, and 
general disrespect for transgender people in daily life. 
For transgender and gender non-conforming people 
placed in immigration detention facilities, many of 
these issues are similar. For more about these facilities 
specifically, see pages 15-17 and the resources listed at 
the bottom of page 15.
Unsafe Placement
Transgender people are almost exclusively placed 
in facilities based on their external anatomy or the sex 
recorded on their birth certificates. In other words, 
transgender women are almost always placed in men’s 
facilities and transgender men are frequently housed 
in women’s facilities. According to a study of California 
Department of Corrections facilities, over three-quarters 
(77%) of transgender people in men’s prisons identified 
as women and lived their lives as women outside of 
prison.91 Despite PREA regulations, which are binding on 
the federal government and its confinement facilities, 
EXPERIENCES OF TRANSGENDER PEOPLE IN THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM
Story: Discrimination in the Justice System—Harmful Comments from Her Own Attorney
Destiny, a 16-year-old African American transgender girl, became involved with the juvenile court 
system at age 12. Over the course of the next four years, she repeatedly re-entered the system for 
shoplifting women’s clothing and jewelry and fighting back against abuse at school. Even though 
Destiny had not committed any violent or sexual offenses, the court ordered that she be housed in the state’s 
highest-security juvenile facility for boys because no other placement would accept a transgender girl. 
During the year she was incarcerated, Destiny was regularly sexually assaulted and physically 
threatened by other youth, harassed by staff, and punished for her gender expression. Destiny’s 
court-appointed attorney never advocated for programs to meet her needs and never challenged 
the abusive conditions of her confinement. Despite his refusal to advocate on her behalf, the court 
denied Destiny’s requests for a new attorney. 
The National Center for Lesbian Rights (NCLR) subsequently agreed to represent Destiny. When NCLR submitted 
a report with local co-counsel about the sexual assaults perpetrated against Destiny, her court-appointed 
attorney remarkably suggested to the judge that Destiny was exaggerating. He told the judge, “I think this young 
man has a lot of things—and I use the word man—to think about so I would just ask the court to be cautious in 
any decision that it makes.” 
Not only had the court-appointed attorney demonstrated a complete disrespect for Destiny’s gender identity 
and failed to act when he became aware of Destiny’s abuse, he argued in favor of continued commitment in the 
facility where she was clearly unsafe. As a result, the court continued Destiny’s commitment at the facility until 
she completed the program.
Excerpted from Katayoon Majd, Jody Marksamer, and Carolyn Reyes, “Hidden Injustice: Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender Youth in Juvenile Courts,” Legal Services for Children, National 
Juvenile Defender Center, and National Center for Lesbian Rights, October 16, 2009.


21
transgender 
detainees 
in 
immigration 
detention 
facilities are frequently housed units according to their 
external anatomy, not their gender identity, putting their 
physical safety at increased risk, as discussed below.
Placing transgender women in a men’s prison not only 
ignores how these women understand themselves and live 
their lives, it also greatly increases the risk of harassment 
and violence by other incarcerated people and staff. 
Unsafe placements also make it more difficult–
if not impossible–for transgender people to receive 
appropriate services, including access to gender-
specific clothing, personal care products, and medical 
care such as hormone therapy. When placed in facilities 
that are incongruent with their gender identity, every 
interaction with correctional officers too often results in 
a transgender person’s gender identity being ignored.92
Some prisons and jails frequently place incarcerated 
transgender people in isolation or segregation using the 
rationale of “safety.”93 However, segregating or isolating 
incarcerated people for long periods of time not only 
has serious mental health consequences, it also limits 
their ability to access programs and services available 
to the general prison population. Segregation also 
further stigmatizes transgender people—highlighting 
their status and increasing hostility.94 Additionally, when 
prisoners are placed in protective custody or isolated, 
they can be at increased risk for harassment and abuse 
by correctional officers because of reduced visibility 
and oversight. Placement in solitary confinement 
has documented negative outcomes for incarcerated 
people, including physical and mental health risks, such 
as higher risk of suicide attempt. For this reason, the 
U.S. Department of Justice released a report in late 2015 
calling for limited use of restrictive housing.95	
In Black and Pink’s 2015 survey of 1,100 LGBTQ 
prisoners currently incarcerated, nearly all respondents 
(85%) had been placed in solitary confinement during 
their time in prison or jail. The survey also found that 
transgender women are put into solitary confinement 
against their will at the highest rates.96
Harassment and Assault by Facility Staff 
Incarcerated transgender people report high levels of 
unnecessary searches, including strip searches, which are 
demeaning and can increase the risk of harassment and 
violence by other incarcerated people and correctional 
staff.97 Additionally, because transgender people are 
frequently placed in facilities that do not reflect their 
gender identity, they may be subject to cross-gender 
searches and monitoring, making them particularly 
vulnerable to sexual assault. A Bureau of Justice Statistics 
survey conducted in 2011-2012 found that 16.7% of 
transgender people in prisons and jails reported being 
sexually assaulted by facility staff in the previous 12 
months compared to 2.4% of all incarcerated adults.98 This 
mirrors findings from a survey of transgender women in 
men’s prisons in California in which 14% reported being 
sexual assaulted by a correctional staff member.99
EXPERIENCES OF TRANSGENDER PEOPLE IN THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM
New Transgender Unit on New York City’s Rikers Island
In November 2014, Rikers Island, which houses nearly 11,400 individuals held by the New York City Department 
of Corrections, opened a 30-bed facility specifically for transgender women. As deputy commissioner for the 
city’s Department of Corrections, Erik Berliner, explained, “We are finding ways to keep people safe, giving 
them a place where they don’t have to worry about being themselves. This is a place that can be sensitive to 
them. It is the right time for it. We are reassessing everything about safety and security.”100
Several LGBT advocacy and legal organizations, including the ACLU and the Sylvia Rivera Law Project, provided 
input and advice in the design of the facility. Placement in the facility is voluntary. Staff have been trained on 
transgender issues, and the facility is designed to provide supportive and social services to the transgender 
women housed there. 
Adapted from from Andy Humm, “Exclusive: Rikers Ready With Housing Unit for Some Trans Inmates,” Gay City News, November 18, 2014. 


22
EXPERIENCES OF TRANSGENDER PEOPLE IN THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM
The Prison Rape Elimination Act (PREA) and Protections for Transgender and Gender Non-
Conforming People
The 2003 Prison Rape Elimination Act is an important federal law that seeks to reduce sexual assault in confinement 
facilities across the United States. PREA is groundbreaking in establishing comprehensive standards for federal, state, 
and local detention facilities. At its core, this law seeks to enforce basic regulations that reduce and eliminate sexual 
assault within all facilities where individuals are held—both by other incarcerated people and by staff. 
GOALS
HOW
TO PROTECT INDIVIDUALS FROM PRISON SEXUAL ASSAULT AND TO UNDERSTAND 
THE INCIDENCE AND EFFECTS OF SEXUAL ASSAULT IN PRISONS 
NATIONAL STANDARDS
PREA CREATED A NATIONAL COMMISSION THAT DEVELOPED NATIONAL STANDARDS FOR THE 
DETECTION, PREVENTION, REDUCTION, AND PUNISHMENT OF SEXUAL ASSAULT IN PRISONS. 
PREA CREATES NATIONAL STANDARDS FOR:
STAFFING
  • Training and Education
  • PREA Coordinators
  • Supervision and Monitoring
  • Minimum Staffing Levels
STAFF-INMATE 
INTERACTIONS
  • Searches and Privacy
  • Reporting and Investigations
  • Discipline
REDUCING RISK
  • Risk Assessments and 
    Screenings
  • Added protections for youth
  • Educating inmates about 
     protections and complaint 
    processes
DATA COLLECTION
  • Audits
  • Annual review and analysis of 
     incidence and effects by 
    Bureau of Justice Statistics
LEGAL
Federal facilities are 
bound by PREA, and 
other 
jurisdictions 
may 
be 
legally 
bound
STICK
Facilities that don’t 
comply risk losing 
Department of Justice 
funding
CARROT
States 
and 
local 
governments 
can 
apply for additional 
funding for imple-
mentation
ACCREDITATION
Accrediting organi-
zations must include 
standards or risk 
losing funding
TRAINING
PREA Resource Center 
and others provide 
technical assistance 
and trainings
DATA
Analyses examine 
differences in reports 
of sexual assault by 
facility and jurisidiction
PREA includes standards for the placement of LGBT and intersex people, how they should be treated by staff and 
other incarcerated people, and standards for ensuring their safety. Specifically for transgender people, PREA sets the 
following standards: 
•• PLACEMENT. Placement decisions in all settings should be individualized and should take into consideration 
an individual’s safety as well as the overall safety and day-to-day operations of the facility. All adult prisons and 
jails must conduct an intake screening within 72 hours of arrival to assess risk for sexual victimization and abuse, 
including whether an individual is, or is perceived to be, LGBT or gender non- conforming. This is based on the fact 
that LGBT people in prisons and jails are at increased risk for sexual assault. Additionally: 
•• LGBT and intersex people may not be placed in “facilities, units, or wings solely on the basis of such identification or status”; 


23
EXPERIENCES OF TRANSGENDER PEOPLE IN THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM
The Prison Rape Elimination Act (PREA) and Protections for Transgender and Gender Non-
Conforming People
•• Individualized decisions must be made in the placement of transgender and intersex people in men’s 
and women’s facilities, taking into consideration an individual’s health and safety and overall facility 
management and safety; 
•• Transgender people must have opportunities to shower separately; 
•• Placement decisions must be assessed at least twice a year for transgender and intersex people; 
•• Staff may not search or examine a transgender or intersex person with the sole purpose of determining genital status.  
In March 2016, the National PREA Resource Center released guidance clearly stating that any written policy or 
actual practice that assigns transgender people to gender-specific facilities solely because of their external anatomy 
is in violation of PREA.101 Rather, placement decisions are to be “truly individualized, case-by-case assessments.” 
Unfortunately, few prison or jail systems have complied with this standard to date. 
PREA is significant for LGBT people, and transgender people in particular, given the high rates of violence against 
transgender people in confinement facilities. The law explicitly identifies LGBT people as a vulnerable population and 
provides specific guidance and regulations as to how LGBT people should be treated and protected. The law applies 
to both facilities housing adults and those housing young people, though it applies a little differently across different 
levels of government. 
•• Federal facilities. The law is mandatory for all federal facilities, including prisons, immigration detention facilities, 
and other confinement facilities with a contract with the federal government, such as state prisons or county jails, to 
house federal prisoners or detainees. 
•• State facilities. PREA’s standards are binding on state prisons, but the federal government has a limited ability 
to enforce these requirements. States that do not certify that they have adopted the standards and are in compliance 
across all their facilities—or at least working to be in compliance—risk losing federal funding, but would not face 
other consequences from the federal government.102
•• Local facilities. Although PREA states that all confinement facilities are required to follow PREA standards, 
compliance of local jails is difficult to ensure, especially since state agencies do not generally regulate local jails.103 
Local county and city jails that do not contract with federal or state governments will not face financial 
penalties for noncompliance. However, local jails that house state detainees or that do contract with the 
federal government (including Immigration and Customs Enforcement) must comply with PREA standards or 
face financial penalties, including the loss of such contracts. 
•• Immigration detention facilities. Because immigration detention facilities are operated by the federal government, 
they are bound by PREA standards.104 U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, a division of the Department 
of Homeland Security, also sets forth its own detention standards through the Office of Detention Policy and 
Planning.105 Many immigrants in detention are not held in facilities owned by ICE but operated under contract 
with ICE, such as private facilities or local jails. These facilities are technically bound by PREA standards, but the 
Department of Homeland Security has taken a more relaxed approach to requiring them to meet standards. Some 
are only required to meet PREA or department standards when contracts are renegotiated or there are “substantial 
contract modifications.” 
•• Accrediting agencies. Agencies that accredit correctional facilities risk losing their federal grant funding if they do 
not incorporate PREA standards into their accreditation. In other words, if an agency accredits an institution that 
does not adhere to PREA standards, it risks losing federal funding. 
(continued)


24
Harassment and Assault by Other Incarcerated 
People 
Transgender people in prisons are also at increased 
risk for violence and sexual assault by other incarcerated 
people. For example: 
•• The 2011-2012 National Inmate Survey found that 
24.1% of transgender people in prisons and jails 
reported being sexually assaulted by another inmate, 
compared to 2.0% for all people.109 
•• Of those transgender women in the National 
Transgender Discrimination Survey who reported 
being incarcerated at some point during their 
lives, nearly half (47%) reported being harassed or 
assaulted in prison or jail; black, Latina, and mixed-race 
transgender women were more likely to be victimized 
than white transgender women.110 
•• In a survey of transgender women placed in men’s 
prisons in California, more than half (59%) had been 
sexually assaulted compared to 4.4% of all male 
respondents—meaning that transgender people were 
13 times more likely to be assaulted than incarcerated 
men.111 Officers and guards were less likely to be 
aware of the incidents involving transgender people 
(29% compared to 61% of incidents involving all 
incarcerated people in the same facilities).112 In a 
follow-up study two years later, researchers found that 
the same percentage of transgender people reported 
sexual victimization (59%).
•• According to the Government Accountability Office, 
20% of substantiated assaults in immigration 
detention facilities involved transgender detainees. 113
16.7%
24.1%
Sexually Assaulted
by Another Inmate
Sexually Assaulted
by Facility Staff
2.4%
2.0%
Incarcerated Transgender People
All Incarcerated People
EXPERIENCES OF TRANSGENDER PEOPLE IN THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM
The Prison Rape Elimination Act (PREA) and Protections for Transgender and Gender Non-
Conforming People
As of May 15, 2015, the deadline by which states had to submit certifications or assurances of compliance with PREA, 
11 states were fully in compliance; 34 states and the District of Columbia submitted assurances they were working 
toward compliance.106 Four states—Alaska, Arkansas, Idaho, and Utah—declined to submit such certifications or 
assurances and were subject to the 5% decrease in federal grant funding as a result.107
Despite the majority of states certifying they are either fully PREA compliant or working toward PREA compliance, 
there is little evidence to suggest that conditions for transgender people in these facilities have changed and meet 
the requirements set forth by PREA.108 For example, the majority of facilities continue to house transgender people 
in facilities based on their external anatomy. In some cases, the reality on the ground for transgender people in these 
facilities may differ from the official policy in that state and in other instances, the state has certified it is compliant but 
has done little to update policies or practices within their facilities. Advocates, including the Transgender Law Center, 
continue to receive complaints from transgender people in prison who have experienced sexual and physical assault, 
including those who have been raped multiple times. Yet, to date, no facility has failed a PREA audit.
Although there are no financial penalties for noncompliance with PREA at the local level, many county and city jails 
have worked to incorporate PREA standards into their facilities, including in states that have not certified compliance 
with PREA standards for their state facilities.
(continued)


25
Lack of Access to Health Care
Health care in prisons, jails, and immigration 
detention facilities varies greatly, but transgender 
people in these settings face difficulty accessing 
competent, appropriate transition-related health care. 
For example, even when hormone therapy or surgery is 
deemed medically necessary, some officials may delay 
or deny this care. As noted on page 17, for transgender 
immigrants held in immigration detention facilities, 
it can be extremely difficult to prove that one was 
receiving medical care related to gender dysphoria and 
evaluations by facility medical staff are frequently used 
to deny such care. Given the incomplete or inadequate 
medical care that confinement facilities often offer to 
transgender prisoners, some have turned to courts 
to seek the care they need. An article published in the 
Journal of Correctional Health Care examined letters 
written by transgender people in state and federal 
facilities to the TIP Journal (Trans in Prison).114 Of 129 
letters examined, 55% addressed transgender health 
issues and 42% reported abuse (23% involving physical 
abuse or harassment and 19% involving sexual abuse by 
other incarcerated people, corrections officers, or both). 
Disrespect in Daily Life
In addition to denying transgender people access to 
medically-necessary health care, failing to ensure their 
physical safety, and placing them in facilities that do not 
reflect their gender identity, many facilities do not allow 
transgender people the ability to express their gender.115
For example, some states prohibit incarcerated 
people from changing their names or having access to 
cosmetics and gender-appropriate clothing, such as bras 
for transgender women housed in men’s facilities, even 
if such items are available to incarcerated women.116 If 
EXPERIENCES OF TRANSGENDER PEOPLE IN THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM
Story: Passion Star’s Fight For Safety in a Texas Prison
Passion Star, a black transgender woman, has been in Texas Department of Criminal 
Justice prisons since 2003, when she pleaded guilty to a felony and was sentenced to 20 
years in prison. Since that time, Passion has been in at least six male facilities, where she 
has endured sexual assault with little response from correctional staff. 
For example, a gang member threatened to hurt her if she didn’t perform sexual acts 
or pay him with commissary items. Passion complained to prison staff, telling them 
she feared for her safety. They did nothing, but instead disciplined her for refusing to 
leave her cell out of fear. In another incident, Passion was harassed by her cellmate. 
Guards did nothing, and a few days later, she was raped. She was moved to solitary 
confinement for two weeks after reporting the incident. In another facility, after telling 
staff about her fear for her safety, a guard told her, “You can’t rape someone who’s gay.” Multiple sexual assaults 
have followed, and she once was violently attacked with a razor blade, requiring 36 sutures to her face.
Passion wrote to prison officials in November 2013: “I am gay and have been taken advantage of in the past. 
… TDCJ does not control the gang-influenced general population enough to ensure … homosexual offenders’ 
safety from being assaulted, threatened or extorted.” In July 2014, she wrote again to officials: “I have been told 
that I will be killed if I remain in population.” A prison official responded to her fears by telling a committee, “It’s 
a man’s prison. You can’t expect to walk around acting like that and not have problems.” 
After meeting with an attorney for Lambda Legal about her experiences in the prison in July 2014, Passion was 
placed in solitary confinement and remained there for more than 80 days. She was unable to attend church or 
work, or to speak with her family. 
In November 2014, Passion was transferred to a different prison and again placed in the general population. 
In March 2015, after legal advocacy by Lambda Legal, Passion was finally placed in safekeeping, a status that 
increases attention paid to her safety but is not solitary confinement. 
Adapted from “Complaint: Star v. Livingston,” Lambda Legal, October 23, 2014.
Self portrait printed with permission from Lambda Legal


26
prisoners have prohibited items, they can be punished if 
they are discovered. As part of a survey of transgender, 
gender non-conforming, and intersex prisoners by Sylvia 
Rivera Law Project, a transgender woman reported she’d 
received a 30-day sentence of solitary confinement for 
possessing a bra.122
Adding to the challenges for transgender people, 
prisons and other confinement facilities often have 
grooming standards by which incarcerated people 
must abide. Incarcerated transgender people placed 
in facilities in accordance with the sex on their birth 
certificate rather than their lived gender can face 
constant struggles. For example, in many prisons there 
are limitations on hair length for individuals in men’s 
prisons, which may force a transgender woman to cut 
her hair. Also, they are not permitted access to grooming 
products listed in the catalog available in the women’s 
prison. Some prisons and jails have begun to develop 
more expansive commissary listings. For example in 
March 2016, the Pennsylvania Department of Corrections 
released updated general commissary directories, which 
allow individuals in both male and female facilities to 
purchase items such as undergarments and make up.123
EXPERIENCES OF TRANSGENDER PEOPLE IN THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM
Access to Transgender-Related Health Care Across the Country 
Individuals in state prisons and local jails have varied access to transgender-related care. For example: 
California is home to the only two prisons in the country that have a physician dedicated to providing 
competent care for transgender people, including hormone therapy.117 They are: the California 
Medical Facility, a California Department of Corrections facility located in Vacaville that provides 
medical and psychiatric health care for male prisoners in California prisons ; and the California Men’s 
Colony in San Luis Obispo. 
In August 2015, the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation and the Transgender Law 
Center reached a settlement in the case of Shiloh Quine, a transgender woman held in a male prison (see page 27 
for more about Shiloh’s case). As part of the settlement, the state agreed to revise its policies regarding transgender 
people’s access to medically necessary health care, including hormones and surgery. Incarcerated individuals’ 
requests for transition-related surgery are now reviewed by a committee, and requests can be reviewed annually.118
Until recently, Wisconsin had a ban on providing hormone therapy to incarcerated individuals who 
were biologically male at birth but identify as female. In 2010, however, a federal judge found this 
state law was unconstitutional because it violated the equal protection clause and constituted cruel 
and unusual punishment by not taking into consideration an individual’s medical needs or the 
judgment of their physicians.119 This decision was upheld by the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals.120 
In 2013, the Illinois Department of Corrections issued an administrative directive regarding the 
evaluation and treatment of people with Gender Identity Disorder (GID).121 It states that individuals 
who self-identity as transgender or who may have GID should undergo a detailed medical and 
mental health examination within 24 hours of arriving at a facility. Based on these examinations, the 
Gender Identity Disorder Committee makes decisions about placement, hormone therapy, clothing, 
showers, and searches. However, any surgery for the purpose of gender confirmation is prohibited 
unless “in extraordinary circumstances”; and hormone therapy is to be offered only with prior 
approval from the medical director.


27
EXPERIENCES OF TRANSGENDER PEOPLE IN THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM
Incarcerated Transgender People Fight in the Courts for Medical Care 
Individuals in prison who are diagnosed with gender dysphoria frequently seek medical 
care to affirm their gender. In some cases, that care includes hormones; for others, it may 
include surgeries, frequently called “sex reassignment surgeries” or “gender-affirming 
surgeries.” For transgender people in prison, such medical care can be incredibly difficult 
to obtain. Several recent legal cases highlight the challenges for transgender people. 
In California, the Transgender Law Center represented Michelle Norsworthy, a transgender 
woman serving in Mule Creek State Prison in California. In 2000, Michelle was diagnosed with gender identity 
disorder, now referred to as gender dysphoria. Shortly after being diagnosed, she began hormone treatment, 
which has continued to the present. The prison allows Michelle to shower out of sight from other prisoners, let her 
hair grow long, purchase and wear brassieres, and use her name Michelle, rather than her legal name. 
In 2012, her psychologist concluded that Michelle was still suffering from debilitating symptoms related 
to her gender dysphoria, including anxiety, sleeplessness, cold sweats, panic attacks, and mood swings. The 
psychologist affirmed the necessity of a “sex change medical operation before normal mental health can be 
achieved for this female patient.” Despite these recommendations, the Department of Corrections has refused to 
authorize treatment for Michelle. 
On April 2, 2015, a federal judge ruled that the prison’s denial of medical care violated Michelle’s right to adequate 
medical care under the Eighth Amendment’s prohibition of cruel and unusual punishment. In its groundbreaking 
decision, court ordered the state to provide her with medical care, including surgery. However, just a day before 
a federal court was scheduled to consider the state’s appeal, Michelle was released on parole. She served 28 years 
and was released to a halfway house. 
Just prior to Michelle’s release from prison, the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation settled 
a case with another transgender woman held in a men’s prison, Shiloh Quine. The Transgender Law Center also 
represented Shiloh. As part of the settlement, Shiloh will be moved to a women’s prison and will receive medically 
necessary transition-related care, including surgery. The state also agreed to improve conditions for transgender 
people across its system, including allowing them to purchase clothing and commissary items consistent with 
their gender identity and to have access to medical treatment for gender dysphoria. 
Upon hearing the news of the settlement, Shiloh told the Transgender Law Center, “After so many years of almost 
giving up on myself, I will finally be liberated from the prison within a prison I felt trapped in, and feel whole, 
both as a woman and as a human being. I’m just overwhelmed, especially knowing that this will help so many 
other people. I know I can never truly make amends for what I’ve done in the past, but I am committed to making 
myself a better person, and to helping others so they don’t have to struggle the way I have.“ In October 2015, the 
California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation became the first state in the country to adopt a policy 
for transgender people in prison to access gender affirming surgery.
Prior to these cases in California, in 2014, the First Circuit Court of Appeals reached a 3-2 decision reversing a prior 
ruling that Michelle Kosilek, an incarcerated transgender woman in Massachusetts, should receive medically 
necessary gender reassignment surgery.
Adapted from Norsworthy v. Beard et al (N.D. Cal. 2005); “State of CA and Transgender Law Center Reach Historic Settlement over Trans Prisoner Health Care,” Transgender Law Center, August 7, 
2015; Kosilek v. Spencer (1st Circuit 2014); “Kosilek v. Spencer,” Gay & Lesbian Advocates & Defenders, May 4, 2015.


28
EXPERIENCES OF TRANSGENDER PEOPLE IN THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM
Access to Transgender-Related Health Care Across the Country 
Individuals in state prisons and local jails have varied access to transgender-related care. For example: 
California is home to the only two prisons in the country that have a physician dedicated to providing 
competent care for transgender people, including hormone therapy.117 They are: the California 
Medical Facility, a California Department of Corrections facility located in Vacaville that provides 
medical and psychiatric health care for male prisoners in California prisons ; and the California Men’s 
Colony in San Luis Obispo. 
In August 2015, the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation and the Transgender Law 
Center reached a settlement in the case of Shiloh Quine, a transgender woman held in a male prison (see page 27 
for more about Shiloh’s case). As part of the settlement, the state agreed to revise its policies regarding transgender 
people’s access to medically necessary health care, including hormones and surgery. Incarcerated individuals’ 
requests for transition-related surgery are now reviewed by a committee, and requests can be reviewed annually.118
Until recently, Wisconsin had a ban on providing hormone therapy to incarcerated individuals who 
were biologically male at birth but identify as female. In 2010, however, a federal judge found this 
state law was unconstitutional because it violated the equal protection clause and constituted cruel 
and unusual punishment by not taking into consideration an individual’s medical needs or the 
judgment of their physicians.119 This decision was upheld by the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals.120 
In 2013, the Illinois Department of Corrections issued an administrative directive regarding the 
evaluation and treatment of people with Gender Identity Disorder (GID).121 It states that individuals 
who self-identity as transgender or who may have GID should undergo a detailed medical and 
mental health examination within 24 hours of arriving at a facility. Based on these examinations, the 
Gender Identity Disorder Committee makes decisions about placement, hormone therapy, clothing, 
showers, and searches. However, any surgery for the purpose of gender confirmation is prohibited 
unless “in extraordinary circumstances”; and hormone therapy is to be offered only with prior 
approval from the medical director.
Story: Ashley Diamond’s Fight for Safety and Adequate Medical Care 
Ashley Diamond, a black transgender woman from Georgia, was sentenced to 12 years for 
violating probation for a previous conviction related to a nonviolent offense.
Ashley notified the staff that she was transgender and was receiving hormone therapy 
upon admission. But despite PREA standards and the Georgia Department of Corrections’ 
own guidelines, she was not evaluated for gender dysphoria, referred for adequate 
medical care, or given an appropriate placement. Instead, Ashley was placed in a series of 
facilities designated for violent and dangerous male felons. 
Less than a month after her incarceration began, Ashley was sexually assaulted by six 
inmates and knocked unconscious. She was subsequently moved to prisons considered equally if not more 
dangerous. At one facility, she was told to guard her “booty” and be prepared to fight. She suffered repeated 
physical and sexual assaults while in prison—eight sexual assaults in all. Each time she reported the incidents to 
the staff, but correctional staff did not take steps to ensure her safety. After one sexual assault in early 2014, even 
after she reported the incident, Ashley continued to be housed with her assailant. 
In addition to denying Ashley safekeeping, Georgia corrections officials refused to provide Ashley with transition-
related care, despite the fact that she started receiving hormone therapy at age 17 and medical staff recommended 
that she receive hormone therapy. Correction officials acknowledged Ashley’s gender dysphoria and that hormone 
therapy was necessary treatment, but staff refused to provide her with proper medical care. She was also forced 
to shave her head. One prison official told Ashley that she had “forfeited the right to receive hormone therapy 
when she became a prisoner.” As a result, Ashley’s body underwent extreme hormonal and biological changes, and 
Ashley experienced mental stress. She attempted suicide and self-castration several times. Ashley explained while 
incarcerated, “I continue to feel trapped in the wrong body and look more ‘male’ than I have in my entire life.”
Ashley has been harassed and punished for her female gender identity, including being thrown into solitary 
confinement for “pretending to be a woman.” She was frequently told to look and act like a man, and she had her 
female clothing and undergarments confiscated. One prison official called her a “he-she-thing” in front of other staff 
and inmates. Another told her, “I am not going to refer to you as Inmate Diamond, you ain’t no miss, you’re an it.” 
Even after she filed legal complaints against the State of Georgia with the assistance of the Southern Poverty Law 
Center, Ashley was sexually assaulted by a cellmate. After reporting the incident, she was threatened and was 
afraid to leave her dormitory, including for meals. 
Under widespread media scrutiny and attention following the lawsuit’s filing, Ashley was released from prison in 
August. In September 2015, a court denied the state’s motion to dismiss, finding that Ashley’s case seeking safety 
and healthcare can move forward. And in February 2016, Ashley and her attorneys reached a settlement with the 
Georgia Department of Corrections.
Adapted from case materials available at Diamond v. Owens, et al., available at Southern Poverty Law Center, https://www.splcenter.org/seeking-justice/case-docket/ashley-diamond-v-brian-owens-et-al.
Courtesy: Southern Poverty Law Center/Robin Henson


29
LACK OF SUPPORT UPON RELEASE LEAVES
TRANSGENDER PEOPLE UNPREPARED
IMPACT OF A CRIMINAL RECORD COMBINED WITH
DISCRIMINATION MAKE RE-ENTRY DIFFICULT
High Rates of
Unemployment
Increased Risk of 
Homelessness
Lack of Competent
Medical Care
Penalize or even reincarcerate transgender 
people for their gender expression
RESTRICTIVE PROBATION
AND PAROLE POLICIES
Don’t provide assistance to address unique 
challenges for transgender people
INADEQUATE RE-ENTRY 
PROGRAMS
Make it more difficult to access 
benefits and find employment
DIFFICULTY OBTAINING NAME CHANGES
& ACCURATE ID DOCUMENTS
BOTTOM LINE:
TRANSGENDER PEOPLE ARE LEFT WITHOUT THE RESOURCES AND SUPPORT 
NEEDED TO SUCCESSFULLY REBUILD THEIR LIVES. THEY CAN BE TRAPPED 
IN A CYCLE OF POVERTY, HOMELESSNESS, AND INCARCERATION
TRANSGENDER PEOPLE FACE
EXTRAORDINARY OBSTACLES TO SUCCESSFUL RE-ENTRY


30
LACK OF SUPPORT UPON RELEASE 
FOR TRANSGENDER PEOPLE
Rebuilding one’s life after being incarcerated 
is very difficult. For transgender people, there are 
additional challenges related to a lack of support, 
lack of legal protection from discrimination, strict 
probation and parole requirements, and difficulty 
obtaining accurate identity documents that make 
rebuilding one’s life more challenging, as shown on 
the infographic on the previous page.
Restrictive Probation and Parole Policies 
When incarcerated transgender individuals may be 
considered for parole, discrimination by parole board 
members may result in longer time served. Immigrants, 
even those in the United States legally, may be 
deported upon conviction of certain crimes and can 
be deemed permanently inadmissible to the United 
States, meaning there are additional penalties if they 
are found to reenter the country.
Once released from prison and placed on parole or 
probation, individuals often are required to adhere to 
strict requirements and regularly meet with a parole 
or probation officer. Lack of support for transgender 
people and the rigorous requirements placed on people 
on probation or parole can contribute in high levels 
of recidivism among parolees and recently released 
individuals. For example, there have been cases in which 
a transgender person’s dressing in accordance with their 
gender identity has resulted in a violation of parole 
terms.124 Recently, a transgender woman was released 
from prison and forced to stay in a men’s shelter and 
faced parole conditions that explicitly prohibited her 
from dressing as a woman in public.125 
Some parole conditions include restrictions on travel 
by individuals. For example, in California, individuals on 
parole generally must receive permission to travel more 
than 50 miles from home, leave their “home” county for 
more than two days, or leave the state.126 These limitations 
can be particularly onerous for transgender people 
and people living with HIV, particularly those living in 
rural areas. These individuals may not be able to access 
competent, respectful medical care without traveling. 
And if a parole officer is not supportive of an individual’s 
gender transition—which is not an unlikely turn of events, 
given the lack of competency training for law enforcement 
generally—the officer may not approve a request to travel 
or may consider an individual in violation of parole if he or 
she travels for medical care.
Inadequate Re-Entry Programs
Federal, state, and local governments frequently 
contract with private agencies to provide re-entry 
services to recently released individuals, including job 
training, re-entry counseling, and residential re-entry 
centers. Some people who are nearing release are placed 
in residential re-entry programs, such as halfway houses, 
where they live for a period of time before being released 
into the community. As a condition of placement in 
a residential re-entry program, individuals in these 
facilities have many aspects of their lives controlled by 
the facility but are able to go out into the community to 
find work, to complete job training, or to visit family. 
Transgender people placed in residential settings 
like these report violence and harassment by fellow 
residents and by staff. In addition, transgender people 
have been housed in residential re-entry programs 
that do not match their gender identity, and have had 
their clothing taken away for violating house policies. 
Denying transgender people the ability to live their lives 
authentically makes it all the more challenging for them 
to focus on addressing the difficulties of having a criminal 
record, such as finding employment, completing their 
education, and receiving substance abuse counseling. 
Prisons frequently provide assistance to individuals 
who will be released to help them obtain identity 
documents, such as a driver’s license. For transgender 
people in prison, it may be nearly impossible to obtain an 
accurate identity document, which can make accessing 
services and finding employment and housing more 
difficult upon release. 
Difficulty Obtaining Name Changes and 
Accurate Identity Documents
Frequently transgender people seek a legal name 
change. It is an important step in living their lives and 
bringing their legal identities in line with how they 
live every day. As discussed on pages 7-8, there are 
substantial barriers for transgender people to changing 
their gender markers, names, and identity documents, 
which leave them vulnerable to harassment, violence, 
and discrimination. 
For transgender people with criminal records, a 
criminal record creates hurdles to rebuilding one’s life. 
LACK OF SUPPORT UPON RELEASE FOR TRANSGENDER PEOPLE


31
LACK OF SUPPORT UPON RELEASE FOR TRANSGENDER PEOPLE
Story: Life as a Transgender Woman in a Halfway House
I am a transgender woman. I first realized that I felt more like a girl than a boy when I was four 
years old, but it wasn’t until 1999 that I started hormone therapy. For the past 15 years, I have lived 
openly in the world as a woman. 
In August of 2010, I was sentenced to two years in federal prison. I began three years of supervised 
release in April of 2012, but was sent back because I tested positive for drug use. That was a real 
wake up call for me, and I started attending Narcotics Anonymous (NA) meetings. With hard work 
and prayer, I have been drug free since April 15, 2013.
In October 2013, I was paroled to The H Group, a halfway house in Marion, Illinois, to complete 
my sentence and begin a drug rehabilitation program. At the halfway house, I was able to enroll 
in college, and attend counseling and substance abuse treatment. I was excited about the 
opportunity to focus on my rehabilitation and to set myself up to succeed once I was released. I was sorry about the actions 
that had landed me in jail and truly believed that I was capable of more, but the way I was treated at The H Group made it 
nearly impossible for me to think about the future.
Almost as soon as I started living at The H Group, I was told by the staff members that I was a man, which is not true, and that if 
I didn’t stop acting like a woman, I would be sent back to jail. The staff members addressed me with male pronouns and titles, 
I was forced to sleep in a room with four men, even though I didn’t feel safe, and the staff at The H Group periodically raided 
my belongings and confiscated anything they viewed as remotely feminine. They took my makeup, clothing, pedicure kit, 
magazines, and curlers. They even took my pink shower cap. I tried to “take the high road,” “turn the other cheek,” and “let go 
and let God,” but I was hurt, and I knew this treatment was wrong. Instead of focusing on improving myself to build a new life, I 
was just focused on surviving each day.
Being the first transgender resident at this facility, I realized that I had the opportunity and responsibility to speak out, not 
only to protect myself, but to make sure that other transgender individuals aren’t discriminated [against] in the same way. 
After some investigation, I reached out to Lambda Legal, a national LGBT advocacy group. They agreed to advocate for me, 
but I had to do my part. 
On April 21, I filed a formal grievance with The H Group about the way I was being treated. I wasn’t convinced that the 
grievance would cause The H Group to change, but I had learned that if I didn’t exhaust The H Group’s internal grievance 
procedure, I could be barred from filing a lawsuit in federal court. There was a tight deadline to file a grievance, but I was able 
to file the grievance within 20 days of the last raid of my room. In the grievance, I demanded four things: 1) that my personal 
possessions be returned; 2) that I be allowed to live and present as the woman I am; 3) that staff address and refer to me with 
feminine pronouns and titles; and 4) that I be removed from the male dormitory. On May 1, Lambda Legal sent a demand 
letter to the CEO of The H Group with copies forwarded to my probation officer, my U.S. Senator, the regional director of the 
Bureau of Prisons, and the U.S. Attorney General.
On May 5, I was summoned by the facility director. She extended a formal apology on behalf of the facility. She informed 
me that all of my personal belongings would be returned, staff would refer to me using appropriate pronouns and treat 
me with respect, I would start eating meals with the other female residents, and I would be reassigned to a single room. 
Talk about a grand slam! 
I felt proud and grateful. I felt that I had spoken up not only for myself but for transgender women everywhere. When The 
H Group was refusing to respect me, I felt as though they were forcing me to take a step backward. After my personal items 
were returned and The H Group staff started treating me as a woman, I found for the first time that I was able to concentrate 
on the real reason I was at The H Group – treating my substance abuse and preparing myself for my release.
I have since found a job and nice apartment in the area. I have a growing support network in the community, and I love the progress 
that I’m making with my therapist. I feel like my trust in God allowed me to trust the process and myself.
I hope that my story can help to further transgender rights in correctional institutions. What happened to me should 
never happen to anyone just because of who they are. I’m thankful I stood up for myself and thankful that Lambda Legal 
was able to help me.
	
- Donisha McShan
Reprinted, with permission, from Donisha McShan, “In My Own Words: Donisha McShan,” Lambda Legal. 
Printed with permission from Lambda Legal


32
For individuals on probation or parole, for example, a 
judge may require written consent from a probation 
or parole officer before an individual may change their 
name. Adding to the challenges, name changes are 
granted by individual judges. Given a judge’s own biases 
and lack of understanding, they may be unwilling or 
more hostile toward a transgender individual seeking a 
name change particularly if the individual has a criminal 
record. Additionally, 57% of LGBT population lives in 
states with additional restrictions and/or requirements 
for name changes specifically for individuals with a 
criminal record.127 These laws were created to prevent 
name changes meant to evade law enforcement, but 
also create additional barriers for transgender people 
rebuilding their lives.
IMPACT OF HAVING A CRIMINAL 
RECORD ON TRANSGENDER PEOPLE
Individuals exiting prisons and jails with a criminal 
record, and those who didn’t serve time, but who 
have a criminal record, face substantial challenges 
in rebuilding their lives. Finding employment and 
housing, accessing benefits and health care, and 
reestablishing family connections are all important 
parts of successful reentry and avoiding the cycle of 
incarceration. For transgender people, the challenges 
to successfully rebuilding their lives are substantial–
not only do they have a criminal record, but they also 
face high levels of discrimination because of their 
gender identity. For immigrants, both undocumented 
and documented, they may be deported as a result of 
having a criminal conviction. 
Employment and Housing 
Employment and housing discrimination is already 
particularly problematic for transgender people, and 
it can become almost insurmountable for transgender 
people with a criminal record. Not only does the 
difficulty of finding employment create financial 
challenges for individuals and their families, but a lack 
of stable employment is the single greatest predictor of 
recidivism among individuals with criminal records.128 
Thus, the inability to obtain a job due to a criminal record 
contributes to the cycle of incarceration. 
Formerly incarcerated individuals also struggle to find 
private housing even if they can afford it. It is estimated 
that 80% of landlords use background checks to assess 
prospective tenants, and this unfairly disadvantages 
individuals with criminal records who pose no safety risk 
to other tenants.129 This discrimination is compounded 
by the high levels of housing discrimination reported by 
transgender people in general.130 No federal law explicitly 
prohibits discrimination in housing based on gender 
identity, and only 20 states and the District of Columbia 
have laws outlawing housing discrimination. In federally 
funded housing programs, however, discrimination 
based on sexual orientation, gender identity, and family 
status is prohibited. In early 2016, the U.S. Department 
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) released 
updated guidance indicating that it is illegal to deny 
housing opporutntiies based on a criminal record if 
doing so results in a discriminatory effect under the law, 
such as a disparate impact on individuals based race or 
national origin.131 
Formerly incarcerated people may also face harsh 
consequences after their release if they are labeled as a 
“sex offender.” Laws labeling people as sex offenders are 
overly broad and are often applied in a discriminatory 
fashion to target LGBT people. For example, in Louisiana 
some transgender women of color report being arrested, 
charged, and convicted of soliciting “crimes against 
nature.” This is a separate and more serious charge than 
general solicitation, and multiple convictions for “crimes 
against nature” require registration as a sex offender. 
According to a report from the Department of Justice, 
people convicted of crimes against nature comprise 40% 
of the Orleans Parrish sex registry.132 Of those convicted, 
80% were African American.133 Labeling individuals 
convicted of certain crimes as “sex offenders” places 
serious limitations on individuals convicted of these 
offenses even after they serve their sentence. These often 
include limitations on where someone can or cannot 
live, whether they have to receive ongoing supervision, 
and whether they must register or be tracked using 
electronic monitoring, all of which restricts access to 
employment and housing.134
Health Care
Many formerly incarcerated individuals qualify for 
government assistance in obtaining health care, such as 
through Medicaid. However, they may not be aware that 
they qualify—especially because they were ineligible 
LACK OF SUPPORT UPON RELEASE FOR TRANSGENDER PEOPLE


33
while in detention. Adding to the challenge, most 
states terminate an individual’s enrollment in Medicaid 
following a period of incarceration (typically if the period 
is longer than 30 days), requiring them to reapply upon 
release.135 This application process can take several 
weeks (or months), causing a gap in coverage and care. 
Continuity of coverage and care is particularly 
important for transgender individuals who are taking 
hormones and receiving other transgender-related 
health care. Medicaid exclusions for transgender-related 
care in many states mean that individuals may have 
received care while in prison (although as discussed 
earlier, the availability of this care should not be 
overstated), but are unable to access appropriate health 
care upon release.
Research 
finds 
that 
formerly 
incarcerated 
transgender people face health issues as a result 
of incarceration, further underscoring the need for 
access to health care. A study of transgender veterans 
who had involvement with the criminal justice system 
found significant physical and mental health disparities 
compared to formerly incarcerated veterans who were 
not transgender. The study suggests there are persistent 
effects of incarceration on later health outcomes in the 
transgender population.136
LACK OF SUPPORT UPON RELEASE FOR TRANSGENDER PEOPLE


34
CONCLUSION
The U.S. criminal justice system is severely flawed. 
Millions of Americans spend time in prisons and jails for 
non-violent offenses and these facilities do very little to 
improve their chances for success on the outside. 
For transgender people in the United States, 
the criminal justice system not only fails them but 
targets them. Pervasive discrimination in virtually 
all areas of life pushes transgender youth and 
adults into situations where they are more likely to 
interact with law enforcement. Bad laws, such as 
HIV criminalization laws, drug laws, and harsh laws 
criminalizing sex work, combined with profiling and 
brutality by law enforcement increase the likelihood 
that transgender people, particularly transgender 
women of color, enter the system. 
Within the criminal justice system, transgender 
people experience discrimination by court staff, judges, 
and juries and violence, inadequate health care, and daily 
indignities simply because they are transgender. Despite 
being recognized as a particularly vulnerable population 
within jails and prisons and federal legislation designed 
to reduce sexual assault, transgender people in these 
facilities—and those who have left—continue to report 
high rates of sexual and physical assault, deplorable lack 
of healthcare access, and more. 
When transgender people exit the system, they face 
further challenges in rebuilding their lives. Restrictive 
parole and probation policies may limit their ability to 
dress in accordance with their gender, to access health 
care, or even to visit friends. Laws limiting access to 
accurate identity documents for transgender people, 
particularly those with a criminal record, mean that 
simply cashing a check or purchasing groceries can put 
transgender people at risk for further discrimination 
and harassment. Finally, the discrimination experienced 
by transgender people combined with the substantial 
collateral damage resulting from having a criminal 
record can make rebuilding one’s life extremely difficult. 
From finding a job to housing to accessing government 
benefits, transgender people with criminal records find 
many doors closed to them entirely. The end result is a 
cycle of law enforcement involvement and incarceration 
that can be difficult to break. 
More In-Depth Content is Available
This overview about transgender people and the 
criminal justice system is designed to a primer. For more 
detailed policy analyses, statistics, stories from youth, 
spotlights on innovative programs and initiatives 
around the country, please visit www.lgbtmap.org/
criminal-justice.
For example, the following can be found in the 
broader report, Unjust: How the Broken Criminal Justice 
System Fails LGBT People:
•• Detailed recommendations focused on three key 
areas: reducing the number of LGBT people who 
interact with the criminal justice system; improving 
the conditions of confinement for LGBT people; and 
improving systems to ensure that LGBT people with 
criminal records can rebuild their lives and avoid the 
cycle of incarceration.
•• Innovative programs from around the country 
working to address the needs of transgender people 
who are at risk for involvement in the criminal 
justice system, such as job training programs for 
transgender people; LGBT-focused shelters and 
service providers for individuals experiencing 
homelessness; programs connecting incarcerated 
LGBT people with community; and more.
•• Key reports, practice guides, and resources.
CONCLUSION


35
RECOMMENDATIONS
Much work is needed to ensure safety, security, and 
justice for transgender people. The recommendations 
below are purposefully high-level and broad, but they are 
key to reducing the drivers of criminal justice involvement 
for transgender people; to ensuring fair treatment within 
the justice system and safety, dignity, and healthcare 
within the confinement facilities; and improving the 
supports for transgender people with criminal records to 
improve opportunities and reduce recidivism.
Work 
to 
eliminate 
discrimination 
against 
transgender people across many areas of life, including 
in families and schools, when seeking employment, 
housing, healthcare, and public accommodations, and 
improving access to accurate identity documents. 
•• 	Federal 
and 
state 
lawmakers 
should 
pass 
nondiscrimination laws prohibiting discrimination 
in employment, education, housing, healthcare, and 
public accommodations. 
•• 	Federal and state laws and school district policies should 
ensure nondiscrimination in education and prohibit 
bullying in schools. These laws should, however, also work 
to reduce the school-to-prison pipeline. 
•• 	Federal 
and 
state 
regulators 
and 
insurance 
companies should remove insurance exclusions for 
transition-related care for transgender people. 
•• 	State 
lawmakers 
should 
pass 
laws 
allowing 
transgender people to obtain accurate identity 
documents; states and localities should issue guidance 
easing the processes for updating documents. 
Reform and modernize HIV criminalization laws, 
laws criminalizing consensual sex, and drug laws. 
•• 	States should repeal all laws that criminalize the 
transmission of HIV and other diseases. 
•• 	State and local law enforcement should not 
criminalize consensual sex between adults ensuring 
access to condoms without fear that their possession 
or presence will be used as evidence to justify stops, 
arrest or prosecution for any prostitution-related 
offense or lewd conduct-related offense. 
•• 	Law enforcement should deprioritize enforcement 
of laws criminalizing prostitution. Efforts should be 
made to provide supportive services requested by 
people in the sex trades, including drug treatment 
and housing, rather than focusing on arrests. 
•• 	Congress and the states should pass sentencing 
reforms to allow for judicial and prosecutorial 
discretion to take into account the circumstances 
surrounding a crime. Another priority: exploring and 
implementing alternatives to criminal charges, such 
as substance abuse assistance, alternative justice 
methods, and restorative justice programs. 
Reduce Profiling and Discrimination by Law 
Enforcement
•• 	Congress should pass a law to end profiling by law 
enforcement on the basis of actual or perceived 
race, color, ethnicity, immigration status, language, 
disability (including HIV status), sexual orientation, 
and gender identity, among other characteristics, 
such as the End Racial Profiling Act. Local and state 
legislatures should pass their own LGBT-inclusive 
anti-profiling laws. 
•• 	All law enforcement agencies that receive federal 
funding should implement guidance from the 
U.S. Department of Justice regarding profiling, 
which states that federal law enforcement officers 
cannot use “race, ethnicity, gender, national origin, 
religion, sexual orientation or gender identity to any 
degrees, except that officers can rely on the listed 
characteristics in a specific suspect description.”137 
This guidance should be applied to all federal 
government agencies. Cities and counties should 
adopt similar guidance. 
•• Government at all levels should build strong 
boundaries between immigration enforcement and 
law enforcement to prioritize community safety and 
to encourage immigrants, regardless of legal status, to 
report violence and other concerns to police without 
fear of deportation.
Reduce the number of people held in confinement 
facilities—including adults in prisons and jails, youth 
in juvenile justice facilities, and undocumented 
immigrants in detention centers.
•• 	Federal and state legislators should revisit mandatory 
sentencing 
guidelines, 
mandatory 
minimums, 
and increased penalties, especially for non-violent 
offenses, including non-violent drug crimes. 
•• 	Federal and local jurisdictions and judges should 
reduce reliance on bail and increase the ability 
of individuals to be released pre-trial and those 
awaiting immigration proceedings. 
RECOMMENDATIONS


36
•• 	Federal, state, and local agencies should use risk 
assessment instruments to determine whether 
individuals should be released while awaiting trial 
and to determine the least burdensome bail amount, 
including nonmonetary pre-trial release options. 
•• 	Federal, state, and local legislators should increase 
funding for the expansion of community-based 
alternatives 
to 
incarceration, 
including 
drug 
treatment programs and mental health programs. 
Improve conditions of confinement for transgender 
people.	
•• 	Implement PREA requirements for individualized 
placement of LGBT people, including transgender 
people, based on an individual’s concerns about 
safety. 
•• For all instances when mandatory detention does 
not apply, immigration enforcement officials 
should release detainees, particularly transgender 
detainees given the lack of safety within facilities 
for this vulnerable population. Facilities should 
ensure the physical safety and medical needs of 
trangender detainees.
•• Develop and implement nondiscrimination policies 
with education and ongoing training for staff. 
Training should specifically address working with 
transgender people, including procedures for 
searches and prohibitions on harassment, violence, 
abuse, and discrimination. 
•• 	Improve health care in prisons. Medical personnel 
in confinement facilities should provide consistent, 
research-based medical care according to approved 
standards of care, including prompt access to HIV 
medication and transition-related health care for 
transgender people. 
•• 	Provide access to appropriate clothing and grooming 
products for transgender people. Agencies should 
give all inmates the ability to choose available 
clothing and grooming items so they can express 
their gender identity through clothing, hairstyle, 
and other means of gender expression. 
Include 
nondiscrimination 
provisions 
in 
all 
government-funded re-entry programs. 
•• 	Federal, state, and local governments should require 
all organizations receiving government funding for 
re-entry programs to include nondiscrimination 
provisions that enumerate race, sex, sexual 
orientation, and gender identity, among other 
characteristics. 
•• 	Legislators should pass nondiscrimination legislation 
that explicitly prohibits discrimination based on 
gender identity and sexual orientation at the federal, 
state, and local levels in employment, housing, and 
public accommodations to ensure equal access to all 
programs and services. 
Ensure that prison and jail re-entry programs 
provide a holistic assessment of an individual’s needs. 
•• 	Parole and probation officers and staff in prisons 
and re-entry facilities should assess needs including 
access to safe, affordable needs; competent, 
affordable health care; educational resources; 
employment; and more with a focus on the needs of 
transgender people. 
•• 	As part of re-entry planning, agencies should assist 
transgender people in obtaining accurate identity 
documents necessary to access public benefits, find 
housing and employment, and more. 
RECOMMENDATIONS


37
ENDNOTES
1	 Jaime M. Grant et al., “Injustice at Every Turn: A Report of the National Transgender Discrimination Survey” (Washington: National Center for Transgender Equality and National Gay and Lesbian Task 
Force, 2011), http://www.thetaskforce.org/static_html/downloads/reports/reports/ntds_full.pdf.
2	 Ibid.
3	 Joseph G. Kosciw et al., “The 2013 National School Climate Survey: The Experiences of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender Youth in Our Nation’s Schools” (New York: GLSEN, 2014), https://www.
glsen.org/sites/default/files/2013%20National%20School%20Climate%20Survey%20Full%20Report_0.pdf.
4	 Grant et al., “Injustice at Every Turn: A Report of the National Transgender Discrimination Survey.”
5	 NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, “School to Prison Pipeline,” accessed July 6, 2015, http://www.naacpldf.org/case/school-prison-pipeline; Amnesty International, “United States of 
America: Stonewalled: Police Abuse and Misconduct against Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and People in the U.S.,” September 2005, https://www.amnesty.org/en/documents/AMR51/122/2005/en.
6	 Kosciw et al., “The 2013 National School Climate Survey.”
7	 Lauren Frederico and Ujala Sehgal, “Dignity for All? Discrimination Against Transgender and Gender Nonconforming Students in New York State” (New York: New York Civil Liberties Union, June 2015), 
http://www.nyclu.org/files/releases/Dignity_for_All_Report.pdf. 
8	 Grant et al., “Injustice at Every Turn: A Report of the National Transgender Discrimination Survey.”
9	 Ibid.
10	 Rachel Kurzius, “Report: Transgender Job Applicants In D.C. Face Staggering Discrimination Rates,” DCist, November 3, 2015, http://dcist.com/2015/11/new_report_finds_48_percent_discrim.php.
11	 Grant et al., “Injustice at Every Turn: A Report of the National Transgender Discrimination Survey.”
12	 Ibid.	
13	 Ibid.
14	 Ibid.
15	 Nicholas Ray, “Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender Youth: An Epidemic of Homelessness,” New York: National Gay and Lesbian Task Force Policy Institute and the National Coalition for the Homeless, 
2006, http://www.thetaskforce.org/static_html/downloads/HomelessYouth.pdf.
16	 Lori Sexton, Valerie Jenness, and Jennifer Macy Sumner, “Where the Margins Meet: A Demographic Assessment of Transgender Inmates in Men’s Prisons,” Justice Quarterly 27, no. 6 (2010): 835–66.
17	 Stephen Metraux, Caterina G. Roman, and Richard S. Cho, “Incarceration and Homelessness” (National Symposium on Homelessness Research, Washington, DC, March 1, 2007), https://www.huduser.
gov/publications/pdf/p9.pdf.
18	 Grant et al., “Injustice at Every Turn: A Report of the National Transgender Discrimination Survey.”
19	 Movement Advancement Project, “Healthcare Laws and Policies,” Movement Advancement Project, accessed February 8, 2016, http://www.lgbtmap.org/equality-maps/healthcare_laws_and_policies.
20	 Laura Rena Murray, “Some Transgender Women Pay a High Price to Look More Feminine,” The New York Times, August 19, 2011, http://www.nytimes.com/2011/08/21/nyregion/some-transgender-women-pay-a-
high-price-to-look-more-feminine.html; amfAR, “Issue Brief: Trans Populations and HIV: Time to End the Neglect,” April 2014, http://www.amfar.org/issue-brief-trans-populations-and-hiv-time-to-end-the-neglect. 
21	 Grant et al., “Injustice at Every Turn: A Report of the National Transgender Discrimination Survey.”
22	 Ibid.
23	 Ann P. Haas, Philip L. Rodgers, and Jody L. Herman, “Suicide Attempts among Transgender and Gender Non-Conforming Adults” (American Foundation for Suicide Prevention and The Williams Institute, 
January 2014), http://williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/wp-content/uploads/AFSP-Williams-Suicide-Report-Final.pdf; Augustus Klein and Sarit A. Golub, “Family Rejection as a Predictor of Suicide 
Attempts and Substance Misuse Among Transgender and Gender Nonconforming Adults,” LGBT Health, April 5, 2016, doi:10.1089/lgbt.2015.0111.
24	 Movement Advancement Project, “Identity Document Laws and Policies,” Movement Advancement Project, accessed February 8, 2016, http://www.lgbtmap.org/equality-maps/identity_document_laws.
25	 Grant et al., “Injustice at Every Turn: A Report of the National Transgender Discrimination Survey.”
26	 “Positively Trans: A National Needs Assessment of Transgender and Gender Non-Conforming People Living with HIV” (Transgender Law Center, December 1, 2015).
27	 Movement Advancement Project, “HIV Criminalization Laws,” accessed July 22, 2015, http://www.lgbtmap.org/equality-maps/hiv_criminalization_laws.
28	 Amira Hasenbush, Ayako Miyashita, and Bianca D.M. Wilson, “HIV Criminalization in California: Penal Implications for People Living with HIV/AIDS” (The Williams Institute, December 2015), http://
williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/wp-content/uploads/HIV-Criminalization-California-December-2015.pdf.
29	 “HIV Criminalization Discourages HIV Testing, Disclosure and Treatment for Transgender and Third Sex Individuals [Press Release],” Sero Project and Transgender Law Center, July 2, 2013.
30	 Grant et al., “Injustice at Every Turn: A Report of the National Transgender Discrimination Survey.”
31	 Jerome Hunt, “Why the Gay and Transgender Population Experiences Higher Rates of Substance Use” (Center for American Progress, March 9, 2012), https://cdn.americanprogress.org/wp-content/
uploads/issues/2012/03/pdf/lgbt_substance_abuse.pdf.
32	 Jason Lydon et al., “Coming Out of Concrete Closets: A Report on Black & Pink’s National LGBTQ Prisoner Survey” (Black & Pink, 2015), http://www.blackandpink.org/wp-content/upLoads/Coming-
Out-of-Concrete-Closets.-Black-and-Pink.-October-16-2015..pdf.
33	 Jody L. Herman, “Gendered Restrooms and Minority Stress: The Public Regulation of Gender and Its Impact on Transgender People’s Lives,” Journal of Public Management & Social Policy 19, no. 1 (2013): 65–80.
34	 Bishop et al., An Act to Provide for Single-Sex Multiple Occupancy Bathroom and Changing Facilities in Schools and Public Agencies and to Create Statewide Consistency in Regulation of Employment and 
Public Accommodations, 2016, http://www.ncleg.net/Sessions/2015E2/Bills/House/PDF/H2v0.pdf.
35	 Movement Advancement Project, “Identity Document Laws and Policies.”
36	 “Take Action Against Anti-Trans Legislation Now!” National Center for Transgender Equality, January 22, 2016, http://www.transequality.org/action-center.
37	 Marcie Bianco, “Statistics Show Exactly How Many Times Trans People Have Attacked You in Bathrooms,” Mic, April 2, 2015, http://mic.com/articles/114066/statistics-show-exactly-how-many-times-
trans-people-have-attacked-you-in-bathrooms.
38	 Carlos Maza and Luke Brinker, “15 Experts Debunk Right-Wing Transgender Bathroom Myth,” Media Matters for America, March 20, 2014, http://mediamatters.org/research/2014/03/20/15-experts-
debunk-right-wing-transgender-bathro/198533.
39	 Erin Fitzgerald et al., “Meaningful Work: Transgender Experiences in the Sex Trade” (Best Practices Policy Project, Red Umbrella Project, and National Center for Transgender Equality, December 2015), 
http://www.transequality.org/sites/default/files/Meaningful%20Work-Full%20Report_FINAL_3.pdf.
40	 Sexton, Jenness, and Sumner, “Where the Margins Meet: A Demographic Assessment of Transgender Inmates in Men’s Prisons.”
41	 Amnesty International, “United States of America: Stonewalled: Police Abuse and Misconduct against Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and People in the U.S.” 
42	 Fitzgerald et al., “Meaningful Work.”	
43	 Megan McLemore, Sex Workers at Risk: Condoms as Evidence of Prostitution in Four US Cities (New York, NY: Human Rights Watch, 2012), http://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/
us0712ForUpload_1.pdf.
44	 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Today’s HIV/AIDS Epidemic,” July 2015, http://www.cdc.gov/nchhstp/newsroom/docs/hivfactsheets/todaysepidemic-508.pdf. 
45	 Alejandro del Carmen, “Profiling, Racial: Historical and Contemporary Perspectives,” in Encyclopedia of Race and Crime (SAGE Publications, 2011), 666–68, http://studysites.sagepub.com/healeyregc6e/
study/chapter/encycarticles/ch10/CARMEN~1.PDF.
46	 Amnesty International, “United States of America: Stonewalled: Police Abuse and Misconduct against Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and People in the U.S.”
ENDNOTES


38
ENDNOTES
47	 “Investigation of the New Orleans Police Department” (U.S. Department of Justice, Civil Rights Division, March 16, 2011), http://www.justice.gov/sites/default/files/crt/legacy/2011/03/17/nopd_report.pdf.
48	 Nahal Zamani et al., “Stop and Frisk: The Human Impact” (New York, NY: Center for Constitutional Rights, July 2012), http://stopandfrisk.org/the-human-impact-report.pdf. 
49	 Undocumented Immigrants: Who They Are and What the Public Thinks,” Pew Research Center, January 15, 2015, http://www.pewresearch.org/key-data-points/immigration.
50	 Grant et al., “Injustice at Every Turn: A Report of the National Transgender Discrimination Survey.”
51	 Somjen Frazer and Erin Howe, “Transgender Health and Economic Insecurity: A Report from the 2015 LGBT Health and Human Services Needs Assessment Survey” (New York, NY: Empire State Pride 
Agenda, 2015), http://www.prideagenda.org/sites/default/files/PDFs/TG%20health%20and%20economic%20insecurity%20report%20FINAL.pdf. 
52	 Frank H. Galvan and Mohsen Bazargan, “Interactions of Latina Transgender Women with Law Enforcement” (Bienestar, 2012), http://williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/wp-content/uploads/Galvan-
Bazargan-Interactions-April-2012.pdf. 
53	 Osman Ahmed and Chai Jindasurat, “2014 Report on Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Queer, and HIV-Affected Hate Violence” (New York: National Coalition of Anti-Violence Programs, 2015), 
http://www.avp.org/resources/avp-resources/405-2014-report-on-lesbian-gay-bisexual-transgender-queer-and-hiv-affected-hate-violence; Rebecca L. Stotzer, “Comparison of Hate Crime Rates 
Across Protected and Unprotected Groups – An Update,” The Williams Institute, May 2012, http://williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/research/violence-crime/comparison-hate-crime-rates-update.
54	 Ahmed and Jindasurat, “2014 Report on Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Queer, and HIV-Affected Hate Violence.”
55	 Grant et al., “Injustice at Every Turn: A Report of the National Transgender Discrimination Survey.”
56	 American Friends Service Committee, “Close to Home: Developing Innovative, Community-Based Responses to Anti-LGBT Violence,” October 2005, http://www.prisonpolicy.org/scans/afsc/close-to-home.pdf. 
57	 Chai Jindasurat and Emily Waters, “Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Queer, and HIV-Affected Intimate Partner Violence in 2014” (National Coalition of Anti-Violence Programs, 2015), http://www.
avp.org/storage/documents/2014_IPV_Report_Final_w-Bookmarks_10_28.pdf.
58	 Gary J. Gates, “LGBT Adult Immigrants in the United States” (The Williams Institute, March 2013), http://williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/wp-content/uploads/LGBTImmigrants-Gates-Mar-2013.pdf.
59	 Ibid.
60	 Grant et al., “Injustice at Every Turn: A Report of the National Transgender Discrimination Survey.”
61	 U.S. Department of Homeland Security, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, “Detention Facility Locator,” accessed September 17, 2015, https://www.ice.gov/detention-facilities.
62	 United States Government Accountability Office, “Immigration Detention: Additional Actions Needed to Strengthen Management and Oversight of Facility Costs and Standards,” October 2014, http://
www.gao.gov/assets/670/666467.pdf.
63	 U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, “Parole of Arriving Aliens Found to Have a Credible Fear of Persecution or Torture,” December 8, 2009, http://www.ice.gov/doclib/detention-reform/pdf/
credible-fear.pdf.
64	 Sharita Gruberg and Rachel West, “Humanitarian Diplomacy: The U.S. Asylum System’s Role in Protecting Global LGBT Rights” (Center for American Progress, June 2015), https://cdn.americanprogress.
org/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/LGBTAsylum-final.pdf.
65	 Adam Frankel, “‘Do You See How Much I’m Suffering Here?’: Abuse against Transgender Women in US Immigration Detention” (Human Rights Watch, March 2016), https://www.hrw.org/sites/default/
files/report_pdf/us0316_web.pdf. 
66	 Dara Lind, “The Government Knows LGBTQ Immigrants Are Often Raped in Detention. It Puts Them There Anyway.” Vox, May 14, 2015, http://www.vox.com/2015/5/14/8606199/transgender-
immigrant-detention.
67	 Peter L. Markowitz et al., “Accessing Justice: The Availability and Adequacy of Counsel in Immigration Proceedings,” New York Immigrant Representation Study (Cardozo Law Review, December 2011), 
http://www.cardozolawreview.com/content/denovo/NYIRS_Report.pdf.
68	 Sharita Gruberg, “Dignity Denied: LGBT Immigrants in U.S. Immigration Detention” (Center for American Progress, November 2013), https://www.americanprogress.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/11/
ImmigrationEnforcement.pdf.
69	 Ibid.
70	 Thom Senzee, “Women Are Still Locked in Immigration Detention Cells With Men Just Because They’re Trans,” The Advocate, May 25, 2015, http://www.advocate.com/world/2015/05/25/women-are-
still-locked-immigration-detention-cells-men-just-because-theyre-trans.
71	 Transgender Law Center, “Letter to Deputy Secretary Mayorkas,” December 10, 2015; Frankel, “Do You See How Much I’m Suffering Here?”
72	 Gruberg, “Dignity Denied.”
73	 United States Government Accountability Office, “Immigration Detention: Additional Actions Could Strengthen DHS Efforts to Address Sexual Abuse,” November 2013, http://www.gao.gov/
assets/660/659145.pdf.
74	 Thomas Homan, “Further Guidance Regarding the Care of Transgender Detainees” (U.S. Department of Homeland Security, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Office of Enforcement and 
Removal Operations, June 19, 2015), https://www.ice.gov/sites/default/files/documents/Document/2015/TransgenderCareMemorandum.pdf.
75	 United States Government Accountability Office, “Immigration Detention,” November 2013.
76	 Wendy Cervantes et al., “The Heart of the Matter: Women, Children and the Way Forward on Immigration Policy” (We Belong Together in partnership with First Focus and Instituto para las Mujeres en 
la Migración, January 2015), http://www.webelongtogether.org/sites/default/files/The%20Heart%20of%20the%20Matter.pdf.
77	 Gruberg, “Dignity Denied.”
78	 Cristina Costantini, Jorge Rivas, and Kristofer Rios, “Why Are Transgender Women Locked up with Men in the Immigration System?” Fusion, November 19, 2014, http://interactive.fusion.net/trans.
79	 “Public Version of Complaint to Office of Civil Rights and Civil Liberties, Department of Homeland Security” (American Immigration Lawyers Association, American Immigration Council, Catholic Legal 
Immigration Network, Inc., Immigration Justice Corps, Refugee and Immigrant Center for Education and Legal Services, Women’s Refugee Commission, July 30, 2015), http://www.aila.org/advo-
media/press-releases/2015/deplorable-medical-treatment-at-fam-detention-ctrs/public-version-of-complaint-to-crcl.
80	 Costantini, Rivas, and Rios, “Why Are Transgender Women Locked up with Men in the Immigration System?”
81	 Gruberg, “Dignity Denied.”
82	 Grant et al., “Injustice at Every Turn: A Report of the National Transgender Discrimination Survey.”
83	 Allen J. Beck, “Sexual Victimization in Prisons and Jails Reported by Inmates, 2011–12 – Supplemental Tables” U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, Bureau of Justice Statistics, 
December 2014, http://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/svpjri1112_st.pdf.
84	 Angela Irvine, “‘We’ve Had Three of Them’: Addressing the Invisibility of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Gender Non-Conforming Youths in the Juvenile Justice System,” Columbia Journal of Gender and Law 
19, no. 3 (2010): 675–701; Angela Irvine, “LGBT Kids in the Prison Pipeline,” The Public Intellectual, May 2, 2011, http://thepublicintellectual.org/2011/05/02/lgbt-kids-in-the-school-to-prison-pipeline. 
85	 Lind, “The Government Knows LGBTQ Immigrants Are Often Raped in Detention. It Puts Them There Anyway.”
86	 Grant et al., “Injustice at Every Turn: A Report of the National Transgender Discrimination Survey.” 
87	 Lambda Legal, “Protected and Served? Courts,” accessed April 21, 2016, http://www.lambdalegal.org/protected-and-served/courts.
88	 Zack Ford, “Oklahoma Appeals Court Overturns Judge That Rejected Name Changes For Transgender Women,” ThinkProgress, March 27, 2014, http://thinkprogress.org/lgbt/2014/03/27/3420064/
oklahoma-transgender-name-changes.
89	 Ahmed and Jindasurat, “2014 Report on Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Queer, and HIV-Affected Hate Violence.”


39
ENDNOTES
90	 Lambda Legal, “Protected and Served? Courts.”
91	 Sexton, Jenness, and Sumner, “Where the Margins Meet: A Demographic Assessment of Transgender Inmates in Men’s Prisons.” 
92	 D. Morgan Bassichis, “‘It’s War in Here’: A Report on the Treatment of Transgender and Intersex People in New York State Men’s Prisons” (New York: Sylvia Rivera Law Project, 2007), http://archive.srlp.org/files/warinhere.pdf.
93	 “Representing Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Queer, or Questioning (LGBTQ) Youth in Juvenile Court” (Office of the Juvenile Defender, April 2011), http://www.ncids.org/JuvenileDefender/Guides/LGBTQ_Guide.pdf.
94	 Rudy Estrada and Jody Marksamer, “The Legal Rights of LGBT Youth in State Custody: What Child Welfare and Juvenile Justice Professionals Need to Know,” Child Welfare 85, no. 2 (2006): 171.
95	 “Report and Recommendations Concerning the Use of Restrictive Housing,” U.S. Department of Justice, Office of the Deputy Attorney General, January 27, 2016, http://www.justice.gov/restrictivehousing.
96	 Lydon et al., “Coming Out of Concrete Closets: A Report on Black & Pink’s National LGBTQ Prisoner Survey.”
97	 Bassichis, “‘It’s War in Here’: A Report on the Treatment of Transgender and Intersex People in New York State Men’s Prisons.”
98	 Beck, “Sexual Victimization in Prisons and Jails Reported by Inmates, 2011–12 – Supplemental Tables.”
99	 Valerie Jenness, “Transgender Inmates in California’s Prisons: An Empirical Study of a Vulnerable Population,” April 8, 2009, http://ucicorrections.seweb.uci.edu/files/2013/06/Transgender-Inmates-
in-CAs-Prisons-An-Empirical-Study-of-a-Vulnerable-Population.pdf.
100	 Andy Humm, “Exclusive: Rikers Ready With Housing Unit for Some Trans Inmates,” Gay City News, November 18, 2014, http://gaycitynews.nyc/exclusive-rikers-trans-housing.
101	 National PREA Resource Center, “Does a Policy That Houses Transgender or Intersex Inmates Based Exclusively on External Genital Anatomy Violate Standard 115.42(c) & (e)?,” March 24, 2016, http://
www.prearesourcecenter.org/node/3927.
102	 “Justice Department Releases Final Rule to Prevent, Detect and Respond to Prison Rape,” U.S. Department of Justice, May 17, 2012, http://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/justice-department-releases-final-
rule-prevent-detect-and-respond-prison-rape.
103	 James Markham, “The Prison Rape Elimination Act and Its Impact on County Jails,” Coates’ Canons: NC Local Government Law, June 17, 2013, http://canons.sog.unc.edu/?p=7161.
104	 Justice Department Releases Final Rule to Prevent, Detect and Respond to Prison Rape.
105	 “ICE Detention Standards,” accessed August 4, 2015, https://www.ice.gov/factsheets/facilities-pbnds; “Office of Detention Policy and Planning (ODPP),” accessed August 4, 2015, http://www.ice.gov/leadership/odpp. 
106	 “FY 2015 List of Certification and Assurance Submissions” (U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Assistance, June 29, 2015), https://www.bja.gov/Programs/15PREA-AssurancesCertifications.pdf.
107	 Ibid.
108	 Written policy language from state department of corrections, for example, may be incongruent with PREA standards. For example, the Alabama Department of Corrections has a policy stating that 
placements will be made on the basis of an individual’s external genitalia. See, State of Alabama, Alabama Department of Corrections, “Administrative Regulation, No. 637, Gender Identity Disorder,” 
November 16, 2005, http://www.doc.alabama.gov/docs/AdminRegs/AR637.pdf. 
109	 Beck, “Sexual Victimization in Prisons and Jails Reported by Inmates, 2011–12 – Supplemental Tables.”
110	 Sari L. Reisner, Zinzi Bailey, and Jae Sevelius, “Racial/ethnic Disparities in History of Incarceration, Experiences of Victimization, and Associated Health Indicators among Transgender Women in the 
U.S,” Women & Health 54, no. 8 (2014): 750–67, doi:10.1080/03630242.2014.932891.
111	 Jenness, “Transgender Inmates in California’s Prisons: An Empirical Study of a Vulnerable Population.”
112	 Ibid. 
113	 “Immigration Detention: Additional Actions Could Strengthen DHS Efforts to Address Sexual Abuse,” GAO-14-38 (United States Government Accountability Office, November 2013), http://www.gao. 
gov/assets/660/659145.pdf.
114	 George R. Brown, “Qualitative Analysis of Transgender Inmates’ Correspondence: Implications for Departments of Correction,” Journal of Correctional Health Care: The Official Journal of the National 
Commission on Correctional Health Care 20, no. 4 (October 2014): 334–42, doi:10.1177/1078345814541533. 
115	 Bassichis, “‘It’s War in Here’: A Report on the Treatment of Transgender and Intersex People in New York State Men’s Prisons.”
116	 Norsworthy v. Beard et al (N.D. Cal. 2005); “Still We Rise - Prison Resource Guide,” TGI Justice, accessed January 19, 2016, http://www.tgijp.org/still-we-rise---prison-resource-guide.html.
117	 Sexton, Jenness, and Sumner, “Where the Margins Meet: A Demographic Assessment of Transgender Inmates in Men’s Prisons.”
118	 “Calif. Sets Standards for Trans Inmates,” Washington Blade, October 23, 2015, http://www.washingtonblade.com/2015/10/23/calif-sets-standards-for-trans-inmates.
119	 Fields v. Smith (7th Cir. 2011).
120	 Ibid. 
121	 “Administrative Directive: Evaluations of Offenders with Gender Identity Disorders” (Illinois Department of Corrections, May 1, 2013), http://tjlp.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/IDOC-Policy-on-
Transgender-Prisoners-download.pdf.
122	 Bassichis, “‘It’s War in Here’: A Report on the Treatment of Transgender and Intersex People in New York State Men’s Prisons.”
123	 “MALE GEN POP” (Pennsylvania Correctional Industries, March 21, 2016), http://www.cor.pa.gov/PCI/Documents/Commissary%20Catalogs/Male%20Gen%20Pop.pdf; “FEMALE GEN POP” 
(Pennsylvania Correctional Industries, March 21, 2016), http://www.cor.pa.gov/PCI/Documents/Commissary%20Catalogs/Female%20Gen%20Pop.pdf.
124	 “Policy Recommendations Regarding LGBT People in California Prisons” (Transgender Law Center, n.d.), January 27, 2016.
125	 William M. Conley, Mitchell v. Wall (W.D. Pa. 2015).
126	 “Parolee Conditions,” Division of Adult Parole Operations, California Department of Corrections & Rehabilitation, accessed January 27, 2016, http://www.cdcr.ca.gov/Parole/Parolee_Conditions.
127	 Analysis by the Movement Advancement Project and the National Center for Transgender Equality. 
128	 Persis S. Yu and Sharon Dietrich, “Broken Records: How Errors by Criminal Background Checking Companies Harm Workers and Businesses” (National Consumer Law Center, April 2012), http://www.
nclc.org/images/pdf/pr-reports/broken-records-report.pdf.
129	 Rebecca Vallas and Sharon Dietrich, “One Strike and You’re Out” (Center for American Progress, December 2014), https://www.americanprogress.org/issues/poverty/report/2014/12/02/102308/one-strike-and-youre-out.
130	 Movement Advancement Project, “Paying an Unfair Price,” November 2014, http://www.lgbtmap.org/policy-and-issue-analysis/unfair-price.
131	 Helen R. Kanovsky, “Office of General Counsel Guidance on Application of Fair Housing Act Standards to the Use of Criminal Records by Providers of Housing and Real Estate-Related Transactions” (U.S. 
Department of Housing and Urban Development, April 4, 2016), http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/documents/huddoc?id=HUD_OGCGuidAppFHAStandCR.pdf.
132	 “Investigation of the New Orleans Police Department.”
133	 Ibid.
134	 Joan Tabachnick and Alisa Klein, “A Reasoned Approach: Reshaping Sex Offender Policy to Prevent Child Sexual Abuse” (Association for the Treatment of Sexual Abusers, 2011), http://www.atsa.com/
pdfs/ppReasonedApproach.pdf.
135	 David Cloud, “On Life Support: Public Health in the Age of Mass Incarceration” (New York, NY: Vera Institute of Justice, November 2014), http://vera.org/sites/default/files/resources/downloads/on-
life-support-public-health-mass-incarceration-report.pdf. 
136	 George R. Brown and Kenneth T. Jones, “Health Correlates of Criminal Justice Involvement in 4,793 Transgender Veterans,” LGBT Health 2, no. 4 (December 2015): 297–305.
137	 U.S. Department of Justice, “Guidance for Federal Law Enforcement Agencies Regarding the Use of Race, Ethnicity, Gender, National Origin, Religion, Sexual Orientation, or Gender Identity.” 


40
MAP thanks the following major* funders, without 
whom this report would not have been possible.
Craig Benson 
David Bohnett Foundation 
David Dechman & Michel Mercure 
David Geffen Foundation 
Evelyn and Walter Haas Jr. Fund 
Ford Foundation 
Gill Foundation 
Esmond Harmsworth 
Jim Hormel 
Johnson Family Foundation
Jeff Lewy & Ed Eishen
Amy Mandel & Katina Rodis 
Weston Milliken 
The Palette Fund 
Matthew Patsky 
Mona Pittenger 
H. van Ameringen Foundation 
Wild Geese Foundation
*Individual and institutional funders greater than $5,000


Copyright © 2016, Movement Advancement Project
2215 Market Street • Denver, CO 80205
1-844-MAP-8800
www.lgbtmap.org 
1333 H Street NW, 10th Floor • Washington, DC 20005
202-682-1611
www.americanprogress.org