Abstract
Abstract
Objectives
Housing First (HF) is an evidence-based approach to ending homelessness, particularly for individuals with mental illness. Yet, limited research explores which aspects of HF programmes facilitate change over time, within the context of a programme theory of change (ToC). A particular research gap includes how mechanisms of change within HF programmes differ between men and women. This study examines gender-specific pathways of change in the HF model based on secondary qualitative data from Toronto’s original At Home/Chez Soi (AH/CS) trial, focusing on outcomes of housing stability, socio-economic status, health and overall well-being.
Design
This was a secondary qualitative analysis of the AH/CS trial data. This analysis was guided using a gender-sensitive ToC framework.
Settings
This multisector study was conducted in a large Canadian urban centre in Toronto, Canada.
Participants
A total of 32 participants (23 men and nine women) who identified themselves as male or female, 18 months after their enrolment in the treatment arm of the Toronto site of the AH/CS randomised controlled trial.
Data collection and analysis
Semistructured interviews were conducted as part of the trial’s qualitative study. Thematic analysis was guided by the ToC framework and conducted using NVivo software. We assessed differences between men and women across the following outcome domains: housing stability, financial status, physical and mental health, substance use recovery and inpatient care.
Results
The findings largely confirmed the ToC with participants, particularly women, experiencing greater improvements across all mechanisms of change, especially in housing stability, financial status and health outcomes. Men faced ongoing challenges, including difficulty maintaining stable income, limited engagement with education/training and continued struggles with mental health and substance use. Despite these improvements, both men and women participants reported ongoing challenges in achieving consistent income and accessing education or training opportunities.
Conclusions
This study provides insight into how mechanisms of change within HF programmes differ between men and women. It underscores the need for ongoing programme adaptation and gender-responsive evaluation to meet the diverse needs of individuals, particularly those with mental health illness and histories of chronic homelessness.
Keywords: MENTAL HEALTH, Health Services, Health Services Accessibility
STRENGTHS AND LIMITATIONS OF THIS STUDY.
- This study offers knowledge on At Home/Chez Soi (AH/CS) theory of change through a systematic gender-based thematic analysis.
- The study provides insight into how participants experienced gender-specific mechanisms of change through their engagement with the AH/CS programme.
- Gender options included in this study were limited to binary categories from the original dataset, which do not reflect the full diversity of gender identities.
- The qualitative design of this study limits the generalisability of findings.
Introduction
Homelessness remains a critical social and public health issue globally, affecting millions of men and women worldwide. In countries such as Canada, the USA and across the European Union, thousands of men and women experience homelessness each year, often relying on temporary (emergency) accommodations or sleeping rough.1,3 Homelessness reduces opportunities across various aspects of life, including education, food security, public safety,4 social support networks and income growth,4 5 while also contributing to higher mortality rates.6 7
Experiences and pathways into and out of homelessness differ by gender, health problems (eg, chronic illness, mental health disorders, problematic substance use),4 a lack of access to healthcare services,4 socioeconomic background and personal histories.8 Among these factors, gender, in particular, plays a crucial role in shaping the pathways into and out of homelessness.8 However, few studies have examined differences between men and women who experience homelessness.
A recent study highlights inadequate housing, safety and suitability as key factors that undermine housing stability and contribute to housing loss for both men and women.9 Women face homelessness primarily because of trauma and domestic violence, while men are more likely to experience housing loss due to higher rates of substance use and contact with the criminal justice system.10 Understanding these differences among men and women is essential for designing more effective, targeted interventions that address the unique challenges faced by diverse groups of people. Studies reported that women experiencing homelessness are at higher risk of violence compared with the general population.9 11 While women face unique safety dangers, it is also important to understand the challenges faced by greater numbers of men, such as substance use and involvement with the criminal justice system. Documenting the unique experiences of both men and women is crucial to developing comprehensive and effective interventions. For example, women constitute approximately 20–25% of the homeless population in North America, while men make up 75–80%.2 12 Yet, these numbers are likely an underestimate of women’s homelessness, as many women experience ‘hidden homelessness’ such as staying with friends or in unsafe living conditions to avoid formal services.13 This may be explained by the fact that women’s pathways to homelessness are more often linked to leaving a violent relationship, but also because they have access to social services, particularly when dependent children are living with them or because they use and exhaust informal support before they access homelessness services.14
Gender-based differences also emerge in how men and women seek help or engage with formal support services, reflecting their distinct needs and experiences.14 15 However, reports indicate that many immediate and longer-term housing interventions are ‘gender-blind’, failing to account for the unique need of men and women.16 17 This suggests that without gender-transformative approaches, housing interventions may perpetuate cycles of poverty and housing instability, particularly for women and women-led families.9 The literature also provides a basis for considering the role of gender when studying pathways into and out of homelessness.14 18
Given the rise in homelessness globally, governments in high-income countries have increasingly prioritised access to permanent supportive housing through models such as Housing First (HF).19 HF programmes are a popular service delivery model for offering permanent housing options.20 When implemented with high efficiency, HF provides immediate access to housing without preconditions related to mental health or substance use, making it a low barrier approach.20 21 Permanent, supportive housing benefits all persons regardless of whether they identify as men and women.22
While HF benefits all individuals regardless of gender, it is essential to understand how men and women experience and are served by these programmes differently. The process of regaining housing stability occurs through stages, with additional challenges faced by individuals with complex needs. These challenges, such as the need for autonomy, social connection and the development of competence, are addressed through the various resources provided by HF.23,26 However, despite these mechanisms, most homelessness interventions, including HF programmes, have historically been gender-neutral, overlooking the unique experiences of men and women. Addressing these differences is key to improve long-term outcomes, especially for individuals with mental health concerns and histories of chronic homelessness.
To date, there is limited research on how HF interventions impact men and women differently, particularly regarding health, social and economic outcomes. However, understanding these differences is crucial for developing more effective, gender-responsive approaches that address the distinct needs of each group. Additionally, little has been published concerning gender-based differences of men and women in experiences and motivations for changes in health, social and economic outcomes. Hence, examining these gendered experiences within the context of the theory of change (ToC) offers a promising path to developing more tailored and effective supports for people who experience chronic homelessness.
HF and the ToC
The HF model’s foundational ToC demonstrates that safe permanent housing paired with mental health and social support services will lead to improved housing stability, positive behavioural changes and better outcomes across various domains, including social, economic, criminal justice and health.27,29 The model draws from substantial evidence showing that HF works effectively for people with complex needs who have mental health and substance use disorders.28 30 A recent quantitative study tested the ToC framework using data from the At Home/Chez Soi (AH/CS) trial, Canada’s largest randomised controlled trial of the HF model, conducted across five sites.30 This national study evaluated the effectiveness of HF in improving housing and health outcomes among individuals experiencing chronic homelessness who had severe mental health illness. The trial assessed both primary outcomes (eg, housing stability) and secondary outcomes (eg, community functioning, quality of life, substance use and mental health disorders’ symptoms severity).30 However, while this study demonstrated the overall effectiveness of the HF model, it did not report potential gender-specific pathways of change. Thus, to fill this gap, our exploratory secondary analysis examines how men and women who participated in the Toronto site of the AH/CS trial experienced and described pathways of change relating to housing stability, health and socioeconomic improvements and well-being.31 This secondary analysis draws on indepth interviews conducted 18 months after participants’ enrolment in the original HF programme, with the aim of identifying gender-specific differences in ToC pathways shaping men’s and women’s experiences and outcomes.31
Methods
A qualitative approach was chosen to provide a comprehensive description of participants’ experiences. The study follows the Consolidated Criteria for Reporting Qualitative Research.32 These criteria are summarised in a checklist of items (online supplemental table S1).
Study design, participants and data source
The current qualitative study is a secondary analysis of data collected from the original Toronto site of the AH/CS trial. The methodology for this larger and original AH/CS study has been described in detail elsewhere.31 33 Between October 2009 and July 2011, 575 participants were recruited, with 199 assigned to HF treatment (97 high needs clients assigned to assertive community treatment (ACT) and 102 moderate needs clients received intensive case management supports) and the remaining to the treatment as usual group.31 Inclusion criteria were: (1) age ≥18 years, (2) absolute or precarious homelessness and (3) serious mental disorder (major depressive disorder, manic or hypomanic episode, mood disorder with psychotic features, panic disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder and/or a psychotic disorder), as assessed by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition (DSM-IV) criteria.31
The Toronto AH/CS qualitative study includes semistructured one-on-one interviews with a subset of the original 575.31 The interviews in the original AH/CS trial were conducted by one of the coauthors (MK) and other research assistants who were not involved in this secondary analysis. HF treatment participant data collected at the 18-month follow-up time point were the focus of this secondary analysis. These interviews were part of the original AH/CS trial’s qualitative study in the HF treatment arm of the Toronto site of the AH/CS trial. Data from 32 participants who identified themselves as men (n=23) and women (n=9) were collected between October 2010 and March 2013. The data for this secondary analysis were accessed and analysed between October 2021 and December 2022. In the original AH/CS trial, participants were given the following gender identity options in the demographic questionnaire: male, female, transgender, transsexual, other, declined. We received an Excel file that contained a serial number for each participant and their subsequent gender. No participants in this sample identified as transgender, trans-sexual, other or declined to state. As a result, our analysis was necessarily limited to binary gender comparisons. The gender imbalance in our sample reflects the overall participants included in the original AH/CS Toronto site, where men represented the majority. The semistructured interviews were designed to elicit information about housing stability, socioeconomic changes, health outcomes and the pathways through which HF facilitated these changes.34 To access the interview protocol, study guide and informed consent form, see the study by Nelson et al.33 We have included the questions asked at the 18-month time point according to the Narrative Interview Guide (25 July 2011) in online supplemental table S3.
Data analysis
The analyses were guided by a coding framework which was developed for the secondary analysis based on the ToC (online supplemental table S2),35 reflecting key programme areas such as housing, mental health supports and community integration, that included considerations of potential differences for men and women. This coding framework identified the AH/CS key programme areas, such as housing, mental health treatment/support and promotion of community integration, as well as changes anticipated in response to programme participation within and across those domains. The coding framework was created to reflect differences between men and women. Hence, this study used a deductive approach to data analysis35 which allowed for the application of the ToC to the experiences of men and women. ToC pathway thematic analysis framework36 was used to analyse and interpret the data.
The analysis included four stages: (1) independent coding of 32 transcribed interviews by eight researchers, followed by group meetings for consistency and identification of common or differing codes. Once code consensus was achieved, the authors coded the remaining transcribed interviews; (2) the authors validated the codes, identified first-degree themes (broad categories), second-degree themes (key patterns emerging within each domain) and third-degree themes (more detailed subthemes reflecting individual-level experience). Themes were then organised and analysed using Excel and Nvivo V.12 software; (3) the study team reviewed the themes and validated them against the study objectives37; (4) all transcripts were again reviewed to refine the codes and create gender-based comparisons. NVivo’s case classifications were used to create a men and women comparison. Differences in housing, socioeconomic advancement and health outcomes between men and women were identified and visually represented in figure 1. This figure shows how men and women experienced intermediate outcomes in housing, socioeconomic and health domains according to the ToC framework.
Results
Sociodemographic characteristics
Of the 32 study participants, the majority self-identified as men (n=23) and the remainder as women (n=9). The average age was 42 years (age range 22–54 years) and 19% of participants self-identified as parents (45% of women and only 9% of men identified as parents).
Changes in housing, socioeconomic and health outcomes for men and women
Qualitative data analysis revealed notable differences between men’s and women’s experiences of change within the ToC framework. Gender-based differences emerged across housing, socioeconomic and health outcomes. Women generally reported more positive changes across all outcomes, while this was less pronounced among men. However, fewer men experienced unfavourable housing outcomes compared with women (see figure 1).
Differences between men and women in housing stability
Women in this study generally reported greater positive changes in housing stability compared with men. For many women, stable housing led to improvements in personal safety, emotional security and autonomy, especially for those who had experienced violence or domestic abuse prior to becoming homeless. Several women noted that having their own space provided a sense of empowerment and control, allowing them to rebuild their independence. For example, one participant who was escaping partner violence shared:
I have my own apartment, and this is a big relief. Now I can invite friends over. I have high self-esteem, and no husband to abuse me. (W-454)
Another woman reported:
Ever since I’ve got my own place, I’ve just progressed more and more and I’m starting to get healthy, which I never thought I was. (W-517)
The factors that contributed to women’s positive outcomes included emotional, cognitive and safety dimensions, such as increased feeling of control, safety, home attachment and more positive attitude and motivation. These factors helped women attain and sustain housing stability and break free from ongoing cycles of abuse or domestic violence in the 18 months following the HF intervention.
In contrast, men often faced more challenges in maintaining housing stability. Some reported difficulties due to ongoing substance use or involvement with the criminal justice system, which hindered their ability to sustain housing. External factors such as poor housing conditions or unsafe neighbourhoods were commonly cited by men as barriers to stability. One participant explained:
Yeah, it’s a bad neighbourhood… there’s a lot of drugs… violence too… It’s not a good area, it’s not a safe place. (M-079)
Another shared:
I had a place, I lost it. Now I’m staying in [name of shelter] because I am on house arrest. (M-208)
Despite challenges, some men received significant support from HF case managers, which helped them navigate obstacles. One participant noted:
My worker [HF case manager] is staying in, in my corner, the staff at the house are really good, the case manager is, really goes out of his way to try to make sure that, that I don’t get into any more trouble. (M-170)
While women reported benefiting from secure housing in terms of emotional well-being and safety, some men faced ongoing challenges such as substance use and re-entry into the criminal justice system. Although most men achieved stable housing, these issues, along with stressors like poor living conditions, may have affected their overall experience of housing stability and quality of life. Dissatisfaction with the quality of the home unit and its surroundings, such as ambient noise and locations near or in neighbourhoods with high perceived or actual rates of substance use, posed additional risks to achieving and maintaining stability. These conditions also challenged participants’ ability to maintain sobriety, which may identify as a personal goal related to their recovery. One participant reflected on the poor quality of his living environment:
The apartment is dirty. They didn’t even paint it when I moved in, my walls still got holes in them, my cupboard doors are falling off, and I’ve got holes in my floor. (M-227)
Another echoed similar concerns:
Not much, the apartment is dirty…, and because the building is full of crack and full of booze. (M-247)
These experiences highlight the need for additional support to address the personal and environmental challenges men faced that may have affected their satisfaction with housing.
Differences between men and women in socioeconomic outcomes
Women, more than men, tended to report active engagement in employment, education and training opportunities. Many women described using stable housing as a stepping stone to improve their financial situation by finding paid work or enrolling in training programmes. One participant shared:
I work 4 days a week now, and I’m also taking a basic course to improve my skills. (W-428)
Women were more likely to report that they actively engaged in activities to improve their financial situation once they were stably housed:
I take a basic course, and I think you can go on to take the next, but my goal is to get as fast as possible… to get working… (W-99)
Women also reported improvements in managing their finances which contributed to greater financial stability over time. Accessing community resources, while not enough to cover all expenses, helped create financial stability. One participant explained:
Yeah, ODSP [Ontario Disability Support Program] pays my stuff. Finances just the stability, I’m, of course, working for a few months. General labour. So, I do that, and if I need more money, I am just going to work for a couple of weeks. (W-193)
The socioeconomic pathway of change for women was linked to their ability to build and strengthen positive connections within their residential community (eg, volunteering and using community services and amenities, less involvement in illegal activities). Many participants also indicated improved family and friendship dynamics.
One woman stated:
Yeah, I am going to see my family, my mother really helped me, I felt almost suicidal then she really helped me, if she wasn’t there, I don’t know what would have happened. (W-181)
Men, on the other hand, reported persistent barriers to socioeconomic advancement. Many reported difficulties with unemployment, low social skills and a lack of supportive networks to help them find and maintain jobs. Financial instability was a recurring issue, with some men turning to illegal activities to cope with their economic hardships. One man participant reflected:
I tried to go back to school, but it was too overwhelming. I felt too much anxiety, so I dropped out. (M-257)
While all participants received access to the public programme Ontario Disability Support Program, a small income supplement for very low-income individuals, both men and women continued to experience deep poverty and limited income supports. However, while many women noted improvements in financial management, financial instability continued to pose significant challenges for men. Several men discussed challenges making ends meet around basic needs, such as food and medicine. Some men reported involvement in illegal activities when not engaged in education, training or employment. One participant shared:
It’s hard to…Live off it [ODSP] at the end of the month… I don’t have no money; I’m trying to cut back on a lot of stuff like that. (M-482)
Another added:
I get about $500 a month to myself for groceries and food… it’s not enough. I still struggle. I usually eat at the [agency]… the free lunches. (M-188)
Although some men reported improvements in socioeconomic dimensions, others found that low social skills and insufficient opportunities to build positive social connections hindered their progress. Barriers such as weak community and family networks and stigma related to mental health or substance use further limited their progress toward socioeconomic, housing and health stability. One participant expressed frustration over the lack of family support:
None to speak with [family and friends]. Holidays are difficult, I have a little brother in Montreal that I haven’t seen in 10 years, but he won’t see me until I am clean for a year. He doesn’t want me to come and contaminate his environment, and I understand that, but at the same time, it angers me because when he was down and out, I was always there for him and it kind of bugs me that you know, when I need him the most he’s not there. So, I can understand he’s trying to save his own life at the same time. (M-170)
These findings suggest that men may need more targeted interventions to overcome barriers to employment and achieve financial stability.
Differences between men and women in health outcomes
The health outcomes reported by men and women also differed. Women generally reported positive changes in their physical and mental health following participation in the HF programme. They reported engaging with healthcare services, following treatment plans and experiencing reductions in symptoms of anxiety and depression. One participant shared:
I’m taking my meds, and I feel totally different. I’m staying out of the hospitals now and feeling good about myself. (W-428)
Women’s overall engagement with health services improved after enrolment in HF. The evidence for the health-related pathway of change was observed in participants’ discussions of engagement with healthcare and substance use treatment, adherence to healthcare plans and treatments and improvements in mental health symptomology and substance use. Many reported adhering to treatment plans for both mental health and chronic conditions that had previously been poorly managed. Their ability to access and meaningfully engage with health services contributed to improvements across other areas, including social, economic and housing outcomes. One participant explained:
The balance is key. I’m taking my meds, and I feel totally different. I feel good about myself because I’m working, staying out of the hospitals, and I’m taking my meds because I’d be in the hospital probably every night if I don’t take my meds. (W-428)
In contrast, men reported more difficulties with health-related issues, particularly regarding mental health and substance use. Several men struggled to retain stable housing due to personal or structural factors, such as losing their home unit mainly due to lack of identification documents or incarceration. The latter was experienced more by men with active substance use. A few men recounted incidents where maladaptive behaviours, including violence, limited their ability to achieve stability. One participant described:
I got arrested and was in jail for 3 months so back and forth up and down. I was on drugs, drinking a lot and got into two different fights and then I got arrested. I just got out last Wednesday. (M-208)
Men also expressed lower motivation to engage with healthcare services or follow treatment plans, which contributed to ongoing health challenges. Loneliness and isolation were prevalent in men’s accounts. One participant highlighted this:
Loneliness is a killer. I sit there, drink to get sloshed—that’s not living at all. (M-150)
Although both men and women received the same HF support, men reported inter-related challenges that acted as barriers to progress across housing, socioeconomic and health dimensions. While some men acknowledged improvements in these areas, their achievements were discussed less frequently than in women’s interviews. Men struggle to engage with healthcare services and follow-up treatments for mental health and substance use issues, which were key contributors to their ongoing challenges. These difficulties, along with feelings of isolation, affected their overall health, daily functioning and ability to maintain stability. One participant described:
They say I’m using the system… We don’t just treat alcoholics; this is for sick people. You don’t think I’m sick? […] Kicking me out at 1:00 o’clock, 2:00 o’clock in the morning, which I clearly told them I cannot see at night-time. (M-302)
Men’s challenges in accessing and engaging with healthcare services highlight the need for more robust support systems to address their complex health needs. While this study focuses on participants’ perceptions and experiences, making it difficult to quantify differences between men’s and women’s outcomes, the qualitative data clearly demonstrate key differences between men and women in health, socioeconomic and housing outcomes. Women’s interviews, for instance, frequently referenced long-term goals and aspirations, such as:
I didn’t get to be a mom the first time around, so this time I want to be there, and see everything. I’m also planning to finish high school. (W-517)
Meanwhile, men expressed more uncertainty about their futures:
I have just been procrastinating about it I’ve got to get on the computer and start doing that and see if I have to take the 8-week mining course which would probably be a good idea. (M-099)
All of these key findings presented in the results section are visually illustrated in figure 1.
Discussion
This exploratory study presents the first qualitative, gender-sensitive analysis of the ToC within the Toronto site of the AH/CS trial. It highlights key differences in how men and women experienced changes in housing stability, socioeconomic well-being and health-related outcomes. Overall, women reported more consistent positive outcomes across these domains. Women’s engagement with support services, in addition to reliance on family and community networks, appeared to contribute to improvement in well-being. However, men continued to face persistent challenges in maintaining housing, achieving financial independence, engaging with education/training and addressing complex health issues. Despite the improvements, both men and women participants reported ongoing challenges in achieving consistent income and accessing education or training opportunities.
Our research demonstrates men and women-based differences in outcomes. Women reported positive changes across all three life dimensions: housing, socioeconomic well-being and health. Women’s interviews indicate improvements in a sense of autonomy, relationships with family members, community connections and mental health, often linked to stable housing. These findings align with the literature, where women in HF programmes typically show greater positive life changes, including enhanced safety, improved recovery in mental illness, reduction in drug use and individual changes.38 In contrast, in our study, men faced more significant barriers, including substance use, criminal justice involvement and interpersonal conflict, which are less prevalent in women’s reported experiences. Men reported facing micro, meso and macro level challenges that limited their ability to achieve similar outcomes to women. Some men faced ongoing challenges related to housing and socioeconomic satisfaction, particularly when substance use and criminal justice issues were involved, even though housing stability was generally maintained. Substance use, criminalisation or incarceration, and interpersonal conflicts are discussed by many of the men, and these discussions are less prominent and present in the interviews with women participants. These challenges highlight the need for gender-specific supports to address these distinct barriers.
Our findings suggest that gender (participants who self-identified as men/women) may shape how individuals experience and progress through the ToC pathways, highlighting potential areas for future hypothesis-driven research. The ToC assumes that stable housing, when combined with support services, leads to improvements in health, social and economic outcomes. Our findings suggest these improvements may occur differently among men and women. This is consistent with prior research from the AH/CS trial, which quantitatively showed improved quality of life and community functioning among participants in the HF programme.39 Further, qualitative work by Nelson et al concludes that people experiencing homelessness and having a mental health illness benefit from HF in the following ways: good quality housing results in having positive relationships with the HF programme staff, achieving greater community integration, having increased control over substance use, developing positive relationships and social support and making progress towards substance use related goals.33 40 Our qualitative findings add depth by demonstrating the complexity and multidimensional nature of change, for both men and women. Women appeared to progress more consistently along the housing, health and socioeconomic pathways compared with men. While HF programmes offer significant benefits to all participants, our findings suggest that men may require different types of support to fully achieve and maintain stability. Previous studies also support the notion that gender-specific barriers need tailored interventions.38 41 42 A qualitative study conducted in Ontario found that men in a HF programme described ‘housing stability’ as a multifaceted concept, including elements not traditionally captured by standard definitions, highlighting the need for interventions to include supports to enable men to achieve their own vision of stable home environments.41 Another study of 18 men experiencing homelessness in Montreal reported that emotional self-management was their greatest challenge, compounded by isolation, severe chronic diseases and comorbid mental illness. Their preferred supports were from healthcare providers and peer-support initiatives.42
Our findings revealed various factors contributing to stability for both men and women in the HF programme. These factors included access to stable housing, supportive relationships with case managers, improved engagement with health services and opportunities for financial and social integration. Our analysis identifies gender-specific pathways of change, emphasising the improvements women experienced across all dimensions of the ToC. The study by O’Campo et al18 included a large sample of women experiencing homelessness and severe mental illness from five Canadian cities and focused on understanding factors that help or hinder women in benefiting from the HF programme. It offered insights into how specific challenges, such as low levels of formal education, severe mental health illness and lack of tailored support, can shape their recovery and stability over a 24-month period. That study emphasised that a gender-neutral HF alone is not sufficient, and additional targeted supports are particularly necessary for women with high needs.18
HF posits that housing is the first step toward stability20 and not contingent on behavioural change which provides the right to housing for those who are often denied this right.43 Our findings support this, as housing allowed participants to address more complex social and health needs. Similar to the findings of Isaak et al,38 our results show that housing alone is insufficient to address all underlying issues contributing to housing insecurity. As expressed by participants, better housing outcomes require access to support that improves self-confidence, community connection and engagement in meaningful everyday activities. This is corroborated in a recent study by Nelson et al which reports that positive relationships with HF programme staff, increased community integration and progress toward recovery from substance use and mental illness promote housing stability over time.40 Thus, gendered approaches to HF programmes are crucial. Women participants emphasised how housing played a critical role in helping them escape abusive relationships, maintain safety and regain control over their lives. Several women in our study described their housing as a turning point that provided emotional security and autonomy. These narratives underscore how HF can serve as a pathway out of violence for women, particularly when combined with trauma-informed and safety-focused supports. For men, challenges such as social isolation, poverty, substance use and involvement with the criminal legal system suggest a need for enhanced support in areas like substance use treatment, mental healthcare and community integration. Understanding the distinct experiences of men and women along the various pathways of change is crucial for programme developers to plan strategies that increase success for both genders. The importance of context in evidence-based interventions has been increasingly recognised, particularly when addressing the unique needs of men and women in homeless populations.44 Structural factors such as discrimination, stigmatisation and poverty often impact men and women differently and can present major obstacles to achieving successful programme outcomes. This focus on context is especially important for individuals experiencing homelessness, who often encounter trauma, violence, alienation and emotional dislocation not only from service providers but also from the general public.11 15 45
Limitations
Although positive outcomes were reported by both men and women, the HF intervention and its evaluation were not informed by gender or feminist theory and thus were implemented in a gender-neutral manner. Gender neutrality tends to be biased towards the experiences of men and marginalise the circumstances of women. In some cases, gender neutrality can lead to harms due to reliance on negative stereotypes. Thus, this may have precluded a comprehensive or close look at the specific needs of women in the delivery of services and evaluation, such as trauma recovery from violence, and the pathways of change identified may not fully capture these nuances. Unique needs, such as income, skills, addiction treatment and social support, were demonstrated by men with corresponding challenges which influenced their difficulty in achieving housing stability and other target outcomes. Therefore, further research is necessary to consider gender (including those who do not identify as men or women) in study designs that enable multiply marginalised populations to co-lead such studies, programme development, implementation and adaptation in order to improve effectiveness, reach positive outcomes and achieve overall well-being. The initial interview guide lacked specific questions about gender, and the data collection methods did not allow for thorough examination of gender dynamics. Future research should include gender-specific questions and gender-related theoretical frameworks at the beginning to better capture these complexities. Additionally, the limited sample size of women inhibits our ability to comprehensively interpret the findings. Future studies should focus on increasing the representation of both men and women and gender diverse people, allowing for a deeper understanding of gender differences (mechanisms/pathways of change) in HF interventions. Finally, the qualitative nature of this study means that the results are not intended to be generalisable. Rather, they provide rich insights into participants’ experiences and perceptions of gender within the ToC framework.
Conclusion and recommendations
This study highlights the significant differences in the experiences of men and women within the HF programme, providing valuable insight into how these programmes can better address the unique needs of men and women. While establishing basic housing stability is crucial, it is equally important for programmes to quickly implement supports that enhance participants’ life skills, address their specific needs and help them achieve personal goals. Failure to address the key challenges such as mental health and substance use places participants’ long-term housing stability at risk. Our findings emphasise the need for ongoing programme adaptations and evaluation to effectively meet the diverse needs of HF participants. For men, gender-specific interventions are necessary to reduce social isolation, provide targeted substance use treatment, integrate well-established evidence-based interventions (eg, ACT and jail diversion programmes) and offer rehabilitation services. Additionally, given the prevalence of maladaptive anger and violent behaviours among men experiencing homelessness, interventions focused on anger management and violence prevention could lead to significant positive outcomes. Women, on the other hand, would benefit from tailored interventions designed to address their unique challenges. Gender-specific programmes for women should include trauma-informed care, reproductive health support and services that address the specific needs of women who have experienced domestic violence. Additionally, providing childcare assistance is essential to support women in maintaining housing stability and achieving their socioeconomic goals. These interventions should involve regular meetings with social workers, psychotherapy when needed and training in basic life skills. Beyond the scope of HF interventions, it is crucial to address the financial limitations faced by participants who are unable to work. Current levels of financial support are often insufficient to meet their basic needs, and increased financial assistance is necessary to ensure long-term stability and well-being for both men and women.
Supplementary material
Acknowledgements
The authors are thankful to the study participants for agreeing to share information and their perspective.
Footnotes
Funding: The authors have not declared a specific grant for this research from any funding agency in the public, commercial or not-for-profit sectors.
Prepublication history and additional supplemental material for this paper are available online. To view these files, please visit the journal online (https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2024-094840).
Provenance and peer review: Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Patient consent for publication: Not applicable.
Ethics approval: Ethical approval for this secondary analysis was obtained from the Research Ethics Board of St. Michael’s Hospital in Toronto. The original AH/CS trial was registered with International Standard RCT Number (ISRCTN42520374). In the original AH/CS trial, interviews were conducted by trained researchers at the Toronto site. After the study protocol and aims were explained, participants provided both verbal and written informed consent. Confidentiality was ensured by using study numbers and removing identifying information from interview transcripts and quotes.
Patient and public involvement: Patients and/or the public were not involved in the design, conduct, reporting or dissemination plans of this research.
Data availability statement
Data are available upon reasonable request.
References
- 1.National Alliance to End Homelessness Cost of homelessness. www.endhomelessness.org/section/about_homelessness/cost_of_homelessness Available.
- 2.Gaetz S, Dej E, Richter T, et al. The state of homelessness Canada. Toronto, ON: Canadian Homelessness Research Network; 2016. [Google Scholar]
- 3.Serme-Morin C. The state of emergency shelters in Europe. 2019.
- 4.Baggett TP, Hwang SW, O’Connell JJ, et al. Mortality among homeless adults in Boston: shifts in causes of death over a 15-year period. JAMA Intern Med. 2013;173:189–95. doi: 10.1001/jamainternmed.2013.1604. [DOI] [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
- 5.Bowen EA, Mitchell CG. Homelessness and residential instability as covariates of HIV risk behavior among residents of single room occupancy housing. J HIV AIDS Soc Serv. 2016;15:269–83. doi: 10.1080/15381501.2015.1123210. [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- 6.National Health Care for the Homeless Council Homeless Mortality. https://nhchc.org/homeless-mortality/?gclid=Cj0KCQiA7bucBhCeARIsAIOwr--X1fxNE-J51pz4rN7xzyDPe8seLYIryaImAF90wBPUyiiptrOPtugaAliQEALw_wcB Available.
- 7.City of Toronto, 2021 Annual Review of Statistics on Deaths of Shelter Residents. 2021. https://www.toronto.ca/city-government/data-research-maps/research-reports/housing-and-homelessness-research-and-reports/deaths-of-shelter-residents/annual-review-of-statistics-on-deaths-of-shelter-residents Available.
- 8.Mitchell E, Waring T, Ahern E, et al. Predictors and consequences of homelessness in whole-population observational studies that used administrative data: a systematic review. BMC Public Health. 2023;23:1610. doi: 10.1186/s12889-023-16503-z. [DOI] [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
- 9.Schwan K, Vaccaro M, Reid L, et al. The Pan-Canadian Women’s Housing & Homelessness Survey: Canadian Observatory on Homelessness, Toronto, ON. 2021.
- 10.Laporte A, Vandentorren S, Détrez M-A, et al. Prevalence of Mental Disorders and Addictions among Homeless People in the Greater Paris Area, France. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2018;15:241. doi: 10.3390/ijerph15020241. [DOI] [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
- 11.Calvo F, Watts B, Panadero S, et al. The Prevalence and Nature of Violence Against Women Experiencing Homelessness: A Quantitative Study. Violence Against Women. 2022;28:1464–82. doi: 10.1177/10778012211022780. [DOI] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
- 12.Wilkins C, Elliot J. Background Paper-Chronic Homelessness. 2010.
- 13.Bretherton J, Pleace N. Women and rough sleeping: A critical review of current research and methodology. 2018.
- 14.Bretherton J. Reconsidering gender in homelessness. Eur J Homelessness. 2017;11 [Google Scholar]
- 15.Montgomery AE, Byrne TH. Services utilization among recently homeless veterans: a gender-based comparison. Mil Med. 2014;179:236–9. doi: 10.7205/MILMED-D-13-00426. [DOI] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
- 16.Perri M, O’Campo P. A gap in knowledge surrounding urban housing interventions: a call for gender redistribution. Health Promot Int. 2021;36:908–12. doi: 10.1093/heapro/daab062. [DOI] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
- 17.Perri M, Schmidt RA, Guta A, et al. COVID-19 and the opportunity for gender-responsive virtual and remote substance use treatment and harm reduction services. Int J Drug Policy. 2022;108:S0955-3959(22)00231-6. doi: 10.1016/j.drugpo.2022.103815. [DOI] [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
- 18.O’Campo P, Nisenbaum R, Crocker AG, et al. Women experiencing homelessness and mental illness in a Housing First multi-site trial: Looking beyond housing to social outcomes and well-being. PLoS One. 2023;18:e0277074. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0277074. [DOI] [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
- 19.Winetrobe H, Wenzel S, Rhoades H, et al. Differences in Health and Social Support between Homeless Men and Women Entering Permanent Supportive Housing. Womens Health Issues. 2017;27:286–93. doi: 10.1016/j.whi.2016.12.011. [DOI] [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
- 20.Woodhall-Melnik JR, Dunn JR. A systematic review of outcomes associated with participation in Housing First programs. Hous Stud. 2016;31:287–304. doi: 10.1080/02673037.2015.1080816. [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- 21.Stefancic A, Tsemberis S, Messeri P, et al. The Pathways Housing First Fidelity Scale for Individuals With Psychiatric Disabilities. Am J Psychiatr Rehabil. 2013;16:240–61. doi: 10.1080/15487768.2013.847741. [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- 22.Dopp AR, McKenna S, Gilbert M, et al. Supportive Housing for Sexual and Gender Minority Individuals with Criminal Justice Histories: Challenges and Opportunities Identified by Providers and Clients. Hous Policy Debate. 2024;34:108–31. doi: 10.1080/10511482.2022.2055615. [DOI] [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
- 23.Lord A, Tickle A, Buckell A. Change readiness in individuals experiencing homelessness and multiple complex needs. HCS. 2021;24:1–13. doi: 10.1108/HCS-11-2020-0017. [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- 24.van der Laan J, Boersma SN, Al Shamma S, et al. Differences in housing transitions and changes in health and self-determination between formerly homeless individuals. Eur J Public Health. 2020;30:900–5. doi: 10.1093/eurpub/ckaa054. [DOI] [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
- 25.Palepu A, Hubley AM, Russell LB, et al. Quality of life themes in Canadian adults and street youth who are homeless or hard-to-house: a multi-site focus group study. Health Qual Life Outcomes. 2012;10:1–11. doi: 10.1186/1477-7525-10-93. [DOI] [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
- 26.O’Campo P, Kirst M, Schaefer-McDaniel N, et al. Community-based services for homeless adults experiencing concurrent mental health and substance use disorders: a realist approach to synthesizing evidence. J Urban Health. 2009;86:965–89. doi: 10.1007/s11524-009-9392-1. [DOI] [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
- 27.Tsemberis S, Eisenberg RF. Pathways to housing: supported housing for street-dwelling homeless individuals with psychiatric disabilities. Psychiatr Serv . 2000;51:487–93. doi: 10.1176/appi.ps.51.4.487. [DOI] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
- 28.Tsemberis S, Gulcur L, Nakae M. Housing First, consumer choice, and harm reduction for homeless individuals with a dual diagnosis. Am J Public Health. 2004;94:651–6. doi: 10.2105/ajph.94.4.651. [DOI] [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
- 29.Tsemberis S. Housing First: The Pathways model to end homelessness for people with mental health and substance use disorders. 2015.
- 30.O’Campo P, Stergiopoulos V, Davis O, et al. Health and social outcomes in the Housing First model: Testing the theory of change. EClinicalMedicine. 2022;47:101387. doi: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2022.101387. [DOI] [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
- 31.Hwang SW, Stergiopoulos V, O’Campo P, et al. Ending homelessness among people with mental illness: the At Home/Chez Soi randomized trial of a Housing First intervention in Toronto. BMC Public Health. 2012;12:1–16. doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-12-787. [DOI] [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
- 32.Tong A, Sainsbury P, Craig J. Consolidated criteria for reporting qualitative research (COREQ): a 32-item checklist for interviews and focus groups. Int J Qual Health Care. 2007;19:349–57. doi: 10.1093/intqhc/mzm042. [DOI] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
- 33.Nelson G, Patterson M, Kirst M, et al. Life changes among homeless persons with mental illness: a longitudinal study of housing first and usual treatment. Psychiatr Serv . 2015;66:592–7. doi: 10.1176/appi.ps.201400201. [DOI] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
- 34.Kirst M, Zerger S, Wise Harris D, et al. The promise of recovery: narratives of hope among homeless individuals with mental illness participating in a Housing First randomised controlled trial in Toronto, Canada. BMJ Open. 2014;4:e004379. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2013-004379. [DOI] [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
- 35.Azungah T. Qualitative research: deductive and inductive approaches to data analysis. QRJ . 2018;18:383–400. doi: 10.1108/QRJ-D-18-00035. [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- 36.Charmaz K. Constructing grounded theory: a practical guide through qualitative analysis. Sage; 2006. [Google Scholar]
- 37.Nowell LS, Norris JM, White DE, et al. Thematic analysis: Striving to meet the trustworthiness criteria. Int J Qual Methods. 2017;16:1609406917733847. [Google Scholar]
- 38.Isaak CA, Nelson G, Roebuck M, et al. Females and Housing First: An analysis of 18-month outcomes in a randomized controlled trial. J Community Psychol. 2024;52:817–34. doi: 10.1002/jcop.23131. [DOI] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
- 39.O’Campo P, Stergiopoulos V, Nir P, et al. How did a Housing First intervention improve health and social outcomes among homeless adults with mental illness in Toronto? Two-year outcomes from a randomised trial. BMJ Open. 2016;6:e010581. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010581. [DOI] [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
- 40.Nelson G, Roebuck M, Agha A, et al. Narratives of people with serious mental illness in Housing First: a qualitative analysis of factors contributing to housing instability and housing stability. J Soc Dis Home. 2024;33:231–42. doi: 10.1080/10530789.2023.2176738. [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- 41.Woodhall-Melnik J, Dunn JR, Svenson S, et al. Finding a Place to Start: Exploring Meanings of Housing Stability in Hamilton’s Male Housing First Participants. Housing, Theory and Society . 2017;34:359–75. doi: 10.1080/14036096.2016.1266382. [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- 42.Merdsoy L, Lambert S, Sherman J. Perceptions, needs and preferences of chronic disease self-management support among men experiencing homelessness in Montreal. Health Expect. 2020;23:1420–30. doi: 10.1111/hex.13106. [DOI] [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
- 43.Stadler SL, Collins D. Assessing Housing First programs from a right to housing perspective. Hous Stud. 2023;38:1719–39. doi: 10.1080/02673037.2021.1982873. [DOI] [Google Scholar]
- 44.Aschbrenner KA, Mueller NM, Banerjee S, et al. Applying an Equity Lens to Characterizing the Process and Reasons for an Adaptation to an Evidenced-based Practice. Implement Res Pract . 2021;2:26334895211017252. doi: 10.1177/26334895211017252. [DOI] [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
- 45.Phipps M, Dalton L, Maxwell H, et al. Women and homelessness, a complex multidimensional issue: findings from a scoping review. J Soc Distress Homeless. 2019;28:1–13. doi: 10.1080/10530789.2018.1534427. [DOI] [Google Scholar]