1   //  SAFEANDJUST.ORG   @SAFEANDJUST
 
DRAFT
Latino
CES:
VOI
The Impacts 
of Crime and
Criminal Justice
Policies on Latinos
June 2014


2   //  SAFEANDJUST.ORG   @SAFEANDJUST
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This report is an extension of research conducted by 
the Tomás Rivera Policy Institute, an interdisciplinary 
community of scholars, students, practitioners and 
journalists across the University of Southern California. To 
view the full suite of research, visit: SafeandJust.org/Latinos.
We also would like to acknowledge the National Council 
of La Raza for their ongoing collaboration on this report, 
as well as the input and partnership of a number of Latino 
elected officials and leading national and statewide Latino 
organizations (read more on page 27): 
•	 Central American Resource Center (CARECEN-LA)
•	 Coalition for Humane Immigrant Rights of Los Angeles 
(CHIRLA)
•	 Consejo de Federaciones Mexicanas en Norteamérica 
(COFEM)
•	 League of United Latin American Citizens (LULAC)
•	 Homeboy Industries
•	 Homies Unidos
•	 New Alliance for Public Safety
•	 Presente.org
•	 Salvadoran American Leadership and Education Fund 
(SALEF)
About 
Californians 
for Safety  
and Justice
Through  
policy advocacy,  
public education,  
partnerships and support  
for local best practices, 
Californians for Safety and Justice 
promotes effective criminal justice 
strategies to stop the cycle of 
crime, reduce over-reliance  
on incarceration and  
build healthy  
communities.
Californians for Safety and Justice, a project 
of the Tides Center, is a nonprofit working 
with Californians from all walks of life to 
replace prison and justice system waste with 
common sense solutions that create safe 
neighborhoods and save public dollars. 


3   //  SAFEANDJUST.ORG   @SAFEANDJUST
 
  @SAFEANDJUST    SAFEANDJUST.ORG   //   3
Table of
CONTENTS
Foreword . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
The Impact of Crime on Latinos  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .8
Unequal Experiences in the Justice System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Latino Perceptions and Opinions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
Partners for Change . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Citations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29


4   //  SAFEANDJUST.ORG   @SAFEANDJUST
 
GOOD POLICY STARTS  
WITH SOUND RESEARCH
Our criminal justice system is profoundly important — and impactful. 
Criminal justice policies and professionals, in their efforts to keep us 
safe, affect not just victims and those accused or guilty of a crime but, 
ultimately, all of us. 
We must understand how our policies and practices impact people if our justice system is to actually  
work — and work for all people. This includes identifying, understanding and eliminating disparities in how 
certain populations are treated. 
In 2004, I was working for the National Council of La Raza, the nation’s largest Latino civil rights 
organization. We partnered with the Center for Youth Policy Research and Michigan State University’s 
Office of University Outreach & Engagement to publish a report that aimed to rectify the lack of research on 
inequity in the criminal justice system — and drive a meaningful conversation about how racial disparities in 
our justice system adversely affect Latinos and the communities they live in.
Today, many of the challenges we identified — from data collection to harsh treatment of Latinos in justice 
and immigration systems — persist. This takes on greater importance with Latinos now representing more 
of the U.S. population — and becoming the largest non-white population in the U.S. In fact, as of July 2013, 
Latinos in California equaled and began to exceed the number of non-Latino whites in the state.
That’s why I’m grateful that Californians for Safety and Justice and the University of Southern California’s 
Tomás Rivera Policy Institute are spotlighting the latest research on Latinos’ experiences in the justice 
system, their disproportionate rates of victimization, their views on the system and justice policies and, 
importantly, recommendations on how to create a safer and smarter justice system. 
This data is vital to better understanding Latinos — and, in effect, America itself. More importantly, it can 
shed light on what we must change, through policy, to improve outcomes and safety in our communities.
Angela Arboleda
Senior Policy Advisor for Latino Affairs
United States Senate
Foreword


By being both more vulnerable to crime as well as 
disadvantaged in every phase of the criminal justice system, 
Latinos are poorly served by current policies and practices. 
Matters are made worse by the special circumstances that 
arise when a large share of the Latino population is foreign 
born: Immigrants are actually less likely to commit crimes 
than U.S.-born individuals, yet law enforcement and criminal 
justice practices can be unnecessarily harsh for immigrants.
NATURAL LEADERS OF REFORM
Because Latinos suffer unduly as victims of crime and yet 
often experience unequal treatment in the system, it is not 
surprising that surveys of Latinos reveal a desire for change. 
Many policies and practices do not align with Latinos’ values, 
needs or preferences — or serve them well. 
 
SUMMARY
Executive
A DIVERSE AND GROWING ELECTORATE 
Latinos are now the second-largest ethnic and racial group 
in the U.S., after whites, with a population of 50.5 million. 
Nearly one in every six people in America (16%) and nearly 
one in four children ages 18 and under (23%) are Latino.1 
In California, the Latino population equaled the total 
number of non-Latino whites in July 2013,2 and they 
will make up nearly half the state’s population by 2050, 
according to a January 2014 report commissioned by the 
California Legislative Caucus.3 
Within this label Latino* is an incredibly diverse array of 
populations: Chicanos who have lived in California for 
centuries, descendants of immigrants from all over the world 
(from Mexico, Central and South America to Cuba 
and Puerto Rico) and new immigrants. Just as 
Latinos’ origins vary, so too do their experiences 
in California and the U.S.
THE CUMULATIVE DISADVANTAGE
Research to date has not differentiated 
between these diverse populations, which can 
misappropriate certain experiences and opinions 
amongst dramatically different people. But the data 
that does exist — specifically research on Latino victimization 
rates and their treatment in the justice system — paints a 
troubling picture of “cumulative disadvantage” for the safety 
of Latino individuals, families and communities.
Despite representing a similar portion of the state 
population as whites, Latinos are dramatically 
overrepresented as crime victims — and in our courts, jails 
and prisons. Research shows that Latinos receive harsher 
treatment in arrests, pretrial proceedings and sentencing 
than whites, even when charged with the same offenses. 
* 	In the 1970s, the U.S. government established “Hispanic” as the term for people of Spanish descent. In California and the western U.S., “Latinos” has been used 
more commonly, and the federal government adopted that term as well in 1997. Since “Latinos” is increasingly replacing “Hispanic” throughout the country — 
and for consistency — we use Latino in this report, even if the research it cites referred to Hispanics. 
By being both more vulnerable to crime as well 
as disadvantaged in every phase of the criminal 
justice system, Latinos are poorly served by 
current policies and practices. 
Because Latinos now represent a majority of 
Californians — and the state’s fastest-growing voter  
bloc — more than ever before Latino voices could prove 
to make the difference on how the state reforms its 
criminal justice systems.
WHAT RESEARCH EXISTS
The following is a compilation of what research 
exists to help drive these policy discussions. Many 
studies in this report come from a fuller suite of 
research gathered by the Tomás Rivera Policy Institute 
(accessible at SafeandJust.org/Latinos).
  @SAFEANDJUST    SAFEANDJUST.ORG   //   5


6   //  SAFEANDJUST.ORG   @SAFEANDJUST
 
Research to date paints a partial picture and reveals where 
more study is required to help policymakers more effectively 
reduce both crime and disparities. For example, past 
studies cover various time periods and geographies in the 
U.S. and often lack differentiation between various Latino 
populations and broader gaps in what criminal justice data 
is collected. 
This must change; increased knowledge and understanding 
of how Latinos are affected by crime and the criminal justice 
system are critical in determining the best solutions to 
these troubling trends. Through this greater understanding 
and the ongoing work of Latino-led organizations working 
for change, we have the opportunity to create safer, more 
welcoming policies and communities.
DISPARITIES FOR AFRICAN AMERICANS
NOTE: Because Latinos now equal California’s white 
population, this report primarily focuses on comparisons  
between those two populations. While some comparisons are 
made to African Americans and other races or ethnicities, it 
is important to note that oftentimes African Americans face 
greater disparities in the criminal justice system and higher 
rates of victimization.
Key findings from this report include: 
THE IMPACT OF CRIME ON LATINOS
•	 Latinos are murdered in California at twice the rate of 
whites (5.1 per 100,000 compared to 2.4). The homicide 
rate is even higher for Latinos under age 30 (6.1),  
and Latinos — of any age — are more likely to have been 
killed by strangers in California than whites are (40.5% 
versus 26.1% of homicide victims).4
•	 The Bureau of Justice Statistics reports that from 1994 to 
2011, Latinos were more likely to be shot than whites (but 
less likely than African Americans)5 and had generally 
higher home burglary rates than white households (but 
lower than African-American households).6
•	 Latinos are more likely to experience multiple crimes:  
A 2013 survey of California survivors found that 43%  
of Latinos had experienced three or more crimes  
within the past five years, compared with 36% of crime 
survivors overall.7
•	 Evidence suggests that hate crimes against Latinos — 
from 1997 to 2008 — are on the rise,8 and such crimes 
increase as Latino immigration increases.9
•	 Concerns over immigration enforcement may reduce 
the reporting of crime. In a 2013 survey in several 
southwestern counties (including L.A. County), 44% of 
Latinos said they would be hesitant to report being a 
victim of crime for fear that the police would ask them or 
others about immigration status.10
•	 After the trauma of a crime, survivors often need financial, 
medical and/or mental health assistance to recover and 
avoid negative outcomes — including repeat victimization. 
Services do exist, but a survey of Californian survivors 
revealed that less than half of Latinos were aware of the 
following options: assistance with victims’ compensation 
application (34%), assistance with medical or other crime-
related expenses (37%) and mental health counseling (41%). 
Of those who were aware, one-third (35%) found counseling 
difficult to access and nearly two-thirds of Latinos (64%) 
found the victims’ compensation application difficult.11
UNEQUAL TREATMENT OF LATINOS IN THE 
JUSTICE SYSTEM
•	 Studies discovered unequal treatment of Latinos awaiting 
trial. For example, a 2005 analysis of felony defendants 
in urban courts found that Latinos were less likely to be 
released on their own recognizance and more likely to be 
denied bail, and their bail was set at significantly higher 
amounts (on average approximately $25,000 higher) than 
African Americans or whites under similar circumstances.12
•	 When given the option to post bail, only 33% of Latino 
defendants were able to do so, compared with 47% of 
African Americans and 58% of whites. The same study 
found that 51% of Latinos were incarcerated pretrial, 
compared to 32% of whites.13
Issued significantly higher bail amounts*
*than African Americans or whites under similar circumstances.
Latinos were: 
A 2005 analysis of felony defendants in urban courts found
Less likely to be released on their 
own recognizance
More likely to be denied bail


•	 A 2004 analysis of rulings in urban courts across  
the country found that the likelihood of incarceration  
for Latinos is 44% higher than whites when convicted  
of property crimes and 53% higher than whites for  
drug crimes.14  
•	 Latinos are deeply impacted by “mandatory minimum” 
sentences (required penalties for a conviction that limit 
judicial discretion): A 2011 report found that Latinos more 
than any other ethnic group were convicted of an offense 
receiving a mandatory sentence.15 
•	 Similar to disparities found at the pretrial and sentencing 
periods, a 2009 study of 15 states’ data over a 15-year 
period found that while Latino rates of re-arrest and 
conviction after release from prison were similar to those 
of whites, Latinos were punished with incarceration at 
much higher levels than whites were.16 
•	 Latinos make up two-thirds of the people listed in 
California’s gang injunctions database — a list compiled 
to alert law enforcement of a person’s involvement with a 
gang. Names can be added to this list without verification 
or someone’s knowledge, and individuals can then receive 
harsher treatment (including longer sentences) for an 
offense, even if it is unrelated to gangs.17  
•	 Three-year recidivism rates for all prison releases in 
California were highest among whites (67.1%), African 
Americans (71.4%) and Native American/Alaska Natives 
(72.4%), yet only 59.5% for Latinos.18 
LATINO PERCEPTIONS AND OPINIONS
•	 In a May/June 2014 survey of 1,050 California Latino 
voters (63% born in the U.S., 37% outside), more than  
four in 10 (44%) believe that the state incarcerates too 
many people for nonviolent offenses and want officials to 
focus on policies less, not more, reliant on incarceration 
(47% vs. 40%).19 
•	 Respondents believed the state should focus more on 
supervised probation and rehabilitation (51%), compared 
to those believing we should send more people to jail/
prison (11%) or that the current mix is about right (32%).20  
•	 Nearly eight in 10 Latinos (78%) support the state 
shortening longer criminal sentences and using the 
savings in prison costs to invest in education, health 
services and crime prevention.21 
•	 In a 2001 survey by the Public Policy Institute of 
California, 65% of Latinos believed racial profiling by the 
police was widespread, compared with 82% of African 
Americans and 43% of whites.22 
•	 National surveys have found that 77% of Latinos believe 
that enforcing immigration laws should be the “exclusive 
responsibility of federal authorities.” (Levels of concern 
are greater for those born outside of the country and/or 
who predominantly speak Spanish.)23  
•	 A September 2013 survey by USC/Los Angeles Times 
found that California Latinos favor the use of county 
custody instead of state prisons (75%) and support more 
rehabilitation opportunities (65%).24
•	 By a ratio of two to one, Latino crime survivors in 
California want the state to focus more on providing 
supervised probation and rehabilitation programs than 
sending people to jail or prison.
RECOMMENDATIONS 
Based on the key findings in this report, we and our partners 
propose a variety of recommendations on page 22.
California Latinos cited the 
amount of money spent on prisons 
and the use of incarceration for
non-serious and nonviolent people 
as their top concerns with the 
justice system. 
  @SAFEANDJUST    SAFEANDJUST.ORG   //   7


8   //  SAFEANDJUST.ORG   @SAFEANDJUST
 
THE IMPACT 
Latinos — especially young Latinos ­— face disproportionate risks of 
experiencing crime, including violence. 
Latinos under 30 are 2.5 times as likely to be murdered 
than whites of the same age. Latinos are more likely to be 
threatened or attacked with a gun. And when Latinos report 
crimes, the report can be less likely to lead to an arrest than 
when whites are victims of the same crimes. 
Making matters worse, data collection on Latino 
victimization has been insufficient and inconsistent 
over the decades. Until recently, studies focused more on 
perpetrators than victims, and more on white and African-
American victims primarily. Also, government data has 
sometimes failed to include “Hispanic” or “Latino” as a 
category, making it difficult to examine how crime has 
affected Latinos over time. 
This section summarizes research about Latinos as victims 
in California and nationwide, including differences in 
victimization rates by ethnic or racial groups. 
Adela's Story
Growing up in Los Angeles, I experienced two worlds. From my schooling, marriage and 
time raising children, I experienced the warmth and protection of a loving, supportive 
family. But my neighborhoods were another story — riddled with crime and neglect.
These two worlds collided in 1998, when my sister-in-law’s mother was murdered by a 
stray bullet from a drive-by shooting. I was very close to my sister-in-law, Laura, and I 
watched her grieve for years. Then, in 2007, the unthinkable happened: Laura was also 
murdered in front of her home, a case of mistaken identity by drive-by shooters.
I was devastated, but I worked through my grief to help raise Laura’s four children — children struggling with the 
trauma of witnessing their mother’s violent death. 
I also grew angry. I was tired of the crime that affected my community — from car and home burglaries to attacks 
on our streets that my children, nieces and nephews too often witnessed. Even worse was the lack of response and 
support for families subjected to these crimes. 
To turn the tide, I formed the nonprofit L.A.U.R.A. (Life After Uncivil Ruthless Acts) to connect families affected by crime 
to the services they need, leading youth groups and inspiring neighbors to create the change they want to see.
I am also joining efforts to educate policymakers about crime victims and what survivors need to recover. Many 
Latinos understand, from firsthand experience, how much crime impacts people. Now it’s time their stories and their 
perspectives influence lawmakers and law enforcement working to keep our communities safe.
of Crime on Latinos  


  @SAFEANDJUST    SAFEANDJUST.ORG   //   9
HOMICIDE
The California Attorney General’s Office25 tells a troubling 
story about disparate homicide rates for Latinos. In 2011:
•	 5.1 per 100,000 were murdered, roughly twice the 2.4 
rate for whites (but far less than the rate for African 
Americans of 21.2).
•	 The homicide rate for Latinos under age 30 jumps to 6.1 
per 100,000 people, compared to 2.4 for whites.
•	 Firearms were the cause of Latino murders 72.9% of the 
time, versus 54.2% for whites.
•	 Murdered Latinos were more likely to have been killed by 
strangers than were whites (40.5% versus 26.1%).
Homicide disparities vary across California. In 2011, 
three times as many Latinos were murdered than whites 
in Los Angeles and San Francisco counties, at a rate of 
7.2 homicides per 100,000 Latinos. The rate for Latino 
homicides reached its highest levels in the state in Tulare 
County (16.7), located in the Central Valley. 
Why the disparities? Researchers have consistently linked 
economic and social factors to Latino murder rates in U.S. 
cities, particularly because Latinos (more than whites) 
experience more negative social conditions, such as 
unemployment and lower incomes.26
NONLETHAL CRIME
Latinos are also more likely to experience nonfatal  
crimes — violent or otherwise. The National Criminal 
Victimization Survey, which asks people across the U.S. 
about their experiences with crime, has generally found that 
Latinos have higher rates of experiencing “serious violent 
crime” (e.g., sexual assault, robbery and aggravated assault) 
than whites and Asian Americans (but lower rates than 
African Americans and American Indians). 
In addition, the Bureau of Justice Statistics reports that from 
1994 to 2011, Latinos were more likely to be shot than whites 
(but less likely than African Americans)27 and had generally 
higher home burglary rates than white households (but 
lower than African-American households).28
And Latinos are more likely to experience multiple crimes:  
A 2013 survey of California survivors found that 43% of 
Latinos had been victimized three or more crimes within the 
past five years, compared with 36% of crime survivors overall.29 
RELUCTANCE TO REPORT CRIMES — FOR 
IMMIGRATION AND OTHER REASONS
A 2013 survey of Californians found that one-third of 
survivors of robbery, property theft and assault did not 
report the crime to police, and one half of rape survivors 
did not.  Another study found that white victims of sexual 
assault were twice as likely to report the crime as Latinos, 
and whites and Asian Americans were much more likely to 
report robbery than Latinos.34   
Latino immigrants, especially those without 
documentation, face disincentives to reporting crime if 
they believe police will, in turn, question their or their 
families’ immigration status.
•	 In a 2013 survey in several southwestern counties 
(including L.A. County), 44% of Latinos said they 
would be hesitant to report being a survivor of crime 
for fear that the police would ask them or others about 
immigration status.35  
A recent study of shifts in crime against 
Latinos shows them to be more vulnerable 
in economic downturns than whites. During 
bad economic times between 1973 and 
2005, robbery and aggravated assault by 
strangers increased more for Latino and 
African-American men than for white men.30 
Evidence also suggests that hate crimes 
against Latinos — from 1997 to 2008 — rose,31 
just as Latino immigration increased.32  
From 2011 to 2012, the Bureau of Justice 
Statistics found that hate crimes against 
Latinos more than tripled.33
Uniquely Vulnerable  
to Crime 


10   //  SAFEANDJUST.ORG   @SAFEANDJUST
 
•	 A 2009 study in Costa Mesa, California, found that 
Latinos would be less likely to report robbery or 
vandalism they have witnessed after local police began 
cooperating with federal immigration authorities.36 
DO LATINO SURVIVORS RECEIVE JUSTICE?
When crimes against Latinos are investigated by police, 
several studies suggest that they are less likely to result in 
arrests than similar crimes with white victims.
Two studies in Chicago found that cases with a Latino 
homicide victim were less likely to be solved than those 
with white victims.37 A study in Ohio discovered that 
Latino homicides were less likely to be cleared than those 
with white or African-American victims.38 Similarly, in Los 
Angeles (1990-1994), homicides of whites were more likely 
to be cleared than those with Latino victims.39
Research into nonlethal crimes also finds that, nationwide, 
arrests are less likely for cases with Latino rather than 
white victims for assaults and robberies.40
BARRIERS TO VICTIMS’ SERVICES
After the trauma of a crime, survivors often need financial, 
medical and/or mental health assistance to recover and 
avoid negative outcomes — including repeat victimization. 
Services do exist, but a survey of Californian survivors 
revealed that less than half of Latinos were aware of these 
options: assistance with victims’ compensation application 
(34%), assistance with medical or other crime-related 
expenses (37%), and mental health counseling (41%). Of 
those who were aware, one-third (35%) found counseling 
difficult to access and nearly two-thirds of Latinos (64%) 
found the victims’ compensation application difficult.48 
Specific examples of barriers Latino immigrants face in 
accessing support can be found in domestic violence 
crimes. Immigrant Latinas who faced intimate partner 
violence (largely in Southern California) who were 
interviewed in 2010 revealed that key barriers to seeking 
help included: language, immigration status, lack of 
financial security to leave and law enforcement attitudes.49   
Language access also proved crucial in a home-visit 
intervention program in New Haven, Connecticut, where 
Latina participants were more likely to engage with police 
when interventions were conducted in Spanish.50  
Immigrant  
Neighborhoods  
Can Reduce Crime
Latino immigration has been linked with a reduction in 
crime — known as the Latino or Immigrant Paradox.41   
The term “paradox” is used because some people 
assume that certain demographic features of a typical 
immigrant neighborhood (low incomes, poorer health 
outcomes, under employment of young males, etc.) 
could increase crime. In reality, that is not usually the 
case in Latino immigrant or other close-knit immigrant 
communities, for a variety of reasons. For example:
•	 A 2013 study found that neighborhoods with larger 
numbers of Latino immigrants in Los Angeles led to 
less violent crime.42 
•	 Researchers in 2010 reported that high 
concentrations of Latinos plus low household 
turnover led to reductions in violence in  
Los Angeles.43
•	 Another 2010 analysis of Latino homicides in  
San Diego found that higher numbers of immigrants 
corresponded to fewer murders44 — a result echoed 
in El Paso, Texas, by another study.45
This relationship may exist most in cities that have a 
longer history of Latino immigration and residency: 
Studies find more violent crime in cities that have been 
newer destinations for immigrants.46   
Why would immigrant communities experience less 
crime? Some point to fears that reporting crime might 
expose someone’s immigration status, masking the 
actual numbers of crimes. But other researchers have 
speculated that tight-knit immigrant communities might 
buffer residents from victimization typically associated 
with economic and social disadvantage. To prove this 
theory, a study used language ability as a sign of 
cultural cohesion, finding that higher concentrations  
of people with limited English were associated with  
a lower rate of Latino homicides, including counties  
in California.47 


  @SAFEANDJUST    SAFEANDJUST.ORG   //   11
DRAFT
JUSTICE SYSTEM 
Researchers have attempted to measure such disparities 
for decades, and their findings have prompted policy 
debates that remain contentious and unresolved to this 
day. The growth of the Latino population has added several 
dimensions of complexity to the issue, such as disparities 
among other people of color and between foreign- and  
U.S.-born Latinos.
In the past 20 years, data collectors have begun to separate 
Latinos from the overall white demographic, allowing for 
more nuanced studies,  
but those need to be 
conducted more consistently 
to broadly capture a more 
accurate picture. 
 
The following is a summary 
of notable research to date.  
THE SCHOOL-TO-PRISON PIPELINE  
Well before they are adults, Latinos experience 
different treatment than their white peers — 
treatment that can increase their likelihood of 
involvement in the adult criminal justice system 
in the future. This is known as the “school-to-
prison pipeline,” where punishments and the 
labels that come with punishment within the 
school system can make it harder for at-risk 
youth to stay on their right path with their peers. 
For example, U.S. Department of Education data reveals that 
African Americans and Latinos make up 70% of students 
arrested or referred to law enforcement in the 2009-10 school 
year.49 “Harsh school punishments, from suspensions to 
arrests, have led to high numbers of youth of color coming 
into contact with the juvenile-justice system and at an earlier 
age,” reads the report. 
DISPARITIES IN ARREST RATES
Discrimination faced at the arrest stage is significant 
because it is the first point of contact between an individual 
and the criminal justice system, setting the stage and tone 
for someone’s experiences and trust in the system.
A 2011 meta-analysis of 40 different reports found that 
suspects of color are more likely to be arrested than white 
suspects (but did not differentiate between Latinos and 
other people of color).52 Another study found that police 
officers search Latino male drivers more often than white 
male drivers, and white officers conducted more searches 
than African American and Latino police officers.53 
In California, a 2004 study found that the Latino arrest rate 
was 1.5 times higher than that of whites.54 
LATINOS JAILED BEFORE TRIAL
If you are ordered to stand trial for a crime, a court has 
several options on where you await trial: The court may 
release defendants on their own recognizance or with the 
posting of bail, or it can detain them until trial. 
higher than that  
of whites. 
The Latino arrest 
rate was 1.5 times 
UNEQUAL
Experiences in the
Do Latinos receive the same treatment as whites  
and other racial and ethnic groups in the criminal justice system?


12   //  SAFEANDJUST.ORG   @SAFEANDJUST
 
When making pretrial detention and release decisions, 
the court must weigh its responsibility to protect victims 
and the community against its responsibility to protect 
the defendant’s rights to due process. Research shows that 
pretrial detention “may interfere with the defendant’s ability 
to prepare an adequate defense and may lead to more severe 
sanctions upon conviction.”55
Pretrial detainment and release decisions are based on the 
type of offense, but also the defendant’s criminal history, 
employment status and ties to the community. Judges and 
prosecutors have great latitude in deciding individual cases, 
and some researchers have concluded that that judges’ racial 
and ethnic bias can seep into pretrial decisions.56  
One of two nationwide studies that discovered unequal 
treatment of Latinos pretrial was a 2005 analysis of felony 
defendants in urban courts: Latinos were less likely to be 
released on their own recognizance and more likely to be 
denied bail, and their bail was set at significantly higher 
amounts (on average approximately $25,000 higher) than 
African Americans or whites under similar circumstances.57  
Since Latinos often have fewer economic resources, they are 
less likely to post bail and therefore more likely to remain in 
jail — and possibly take a plea faster. For example, when given 
the option to post bail, only 33% of Latino defendants were able 
to do so, compared with 47% of African Americans and 58% 
of whites. Related to that, the study found that 51% of Latinos 
were incarcerated pretrial, compared to 32% of whites.58 
In 2008, the U.S. Justice Department released a study on  
the probability of pretrial release for Latinos. Covering 15 
years of data, the study found that Latinos and African 
Americans are almost always less likely to be eligible for 
pretrial release than whites — and that these disparities have 
been increasing over time.”59   
LANGUAGE BARRIERS AND ACCESS  
TO COUNSEL
If someone has limited English skills, they can encounter 
major challenges throughout the justice system. That starts 
with their interactions with law enforcement and continues in 
court, compromising their right to a fair trial. 
With no access to an interpreter, individuals with limited 
English proficiency cannot communicate with or be 
understood by judges, clerks and sometimes even their own 
lawyers.60 An examination of interpretation services in 35 
states found that 46% of those states failed to require that 
interpreters be provided in all civil cases, and 37% failed to 
require the use of credentialed interpreters.61 
In California, courts that receive federal funding are 
mandated to provide free interpreters in all court 
proceedings, but the Legal Aid Foundation of Los Angeles 
has filed complaints for many of its clients who have been 
denied access to court interpreters.62
Lack of English proficiency also can be a barrier to proper 
legal counsel, although this is also a problem for Latinos 
and low-income defendants in general. CHIRLA (the 
Coalition for Humane Immigrant Rights of Los Angeles) 
and its legislative partners (such as former California 
Assemblymember Felipe Fuentes) have worked to improve 
awareness of and opportunity for access to counsel. This is 
critical in ensuring fair deliberations when you consider that 
eight in 10 California cases are settled and that many people 
are unaware that “no contest” is recognized as an admission 
of guilt.63 
SENTENCING DISPARITIES
After a person is convicted of a crime, either by plea or trial, 
a judge or jury sets the sentence or punishment for that 
crime. Research reveals that racial bias can play a part in 
who is sentenced to what punishment. 
By the end of 2005, Latinos became the largest ethnic group 
in California’s prisons, reaching 41% in 2010 (followed 
Average bail amount
$53,031
LATINO 
average bail amount 
 $28,340
WHITE  
average bail amount


  @SAFEANDJUST    SAFEANDJUST.ORG   //   13
by African Americans at 29% and whites at 25%).64 When 
accounting for the state’s population, that translates to Latino 
males being incarcerated at 1.7 times the rate of white males.65 
(For every 100,000 adult white males in California, 671 were 
incarcerated in a California institution in 2010. Meanwhile, 
black and Latino adult males were incarcerated at a rate of 
5,525 and 1,146 per 100,000, respectively.66)  
Some may wonder if Latinos commit more crimes than 
whites as an explanation of the disparities. However, 
research paints a different picture. Research shows that 
Latinos and other people of color receive harsher sentences 
than whites convicted of the same crimes. 
A 2004 analysis of rulings in urban courts across the country 
found that the likelihood of incarceration for Latinos is 44% 
higher than whites when convicted of property crimes and 
53% higher than whites for drug crimes.67  
Similar disparities exist within different Latino populations: 
Defendants who were here legally but not citizens were 30% 
more likely to be incarcerated than defendants who were 
citizens, and people without documentation were 44% more 
likely to be incarcerated than citizens.68  
And a 2009 study compared the length of sentences for 
Mexican and non-Mexican Latinos, finding that Mexican 
Latinos received harsher sentences, and the harshness of 
sentences grew if undocumented Latinos were Mexican.69 
The likelihood of incarceration for 
Latinos is 44% higher than whites 
when convicted of property crimes 
and 53% higher than whites  
for drug crimes. 
Mandatory 
Minimums and 
Enhancements
Over the years, policymakers passed laws that 
have increased the length of prison terms for many 
people of color. 
For example, “mandatory minimum” sentences 
are set penalties for a conviction that aim to deter 
certain crimes. Many of these were enacted as part 
of the “War on Drugs.” However, such requirements 
limit a judge’s discretion for each individual case. 
And a 2011 report found that Latinos more than any 
other ethnic group were convicted of an offense 
receiving a mandatory sentence.71  
Another example is “enhancements”: additional 
charges that bring extra penalty (i.e., prison time). 
For example, California Penal Code 186.22 states 
that someone who is on the gang injunction list 
because of past gang affiliation (even if gang 
involvement is never proven) can receive additional 
time for that on top of the original offense. 
While aimed at deterring gang involvement, the 
enhancements have ended up snaring many 
Latinos in longer prison terms than they otherwise 
would serve for a particular offense. 
Gun-related enhancements are also common. 
Example: If two people are arrested for buying 
drugs and one person has a gun in their possession 
(even if it is legally registered and not used in the  
transaction), both individuals can be charged with a 
gun enhancement. 


14   //  SAFEANDJUST.ORG   @SAFEANDJUST
 
DISPROPORTIONATELY SNARED BY  
“GANG INJUNCTIONS”
In 1982, in response to growing concerns about gang 
violence, Los Angeles County created the nation’s first “gang 
injunction” — a civil court order against groups of people 
(i.e., a group restraining order). Intended to alert police to 
an individual’s involvement in gangs and potential criminal 
A contingent of “Banished Veterans” — U.S. military 
veterans — currently live in Rosarito, just south of the 
U.S.-Mexico border. These are men and women who 
came to the U.S. legally as children and went on to 
serve in America’s armed forces (in Iraq, Afghanistan and 
elsewhere). But when they were arrested for minor crimes 
after their service, they were deported.
Between 1999 and 2008, more than 70,000 legal non-
citizens enlisted in the U.S. military (comprising 4% of the 
armed forces). Less than half of those legal residents had 
finished the process of becoming U.S. citizens as of June 
2010, making them vulnerable to deportation if convicted 
of a crime (which can range from domestic violence to drug 
possession to writing a bad check).
Immigration and Customs Enforcement officials say they 
don’t keep track of how many such veterans are deported 
but estimate it ranges from hundreds to thousands.
Advocates opposed to these policies are working to 
change the aspects of the immigration act that allow legal 
residents to be deported for certain crimes. For example, 
Banished Veterans has launched a website, Facebook 
page and created a network of advocates and attorneys 
who provide legal and emotional support to U.S. veterans 
who face deportation. For more information, visit: 
Facebook.com/banished.veterans.
Latino  
Veterans
DISHONORABLE  
TREATMENT  
OF
activity, such injunctions create geographic “safety zones” 
where law enforcement can arrest, prosecute and incarcerate 
anyone on the injunction list for non-criminal activities (e.g., 
breaking a curfew, having a cellphone or beeper, associating 
with other individuals, etc.). 
Critics raised concerns that these safety zones were not 
where the county was experiencing the most violence but 
rather in or near predominantly white and middle-class 
neighborhoods. 
In 1997, L.A. County worked with state officials to expand 
statewide a database used to collect and access individuals’ 
personal information if they are alleged to be involved in a 
gang. Association with a gang member (even if a relative) 
was essentially criminalized, regardless of whether actual 
crimes are committed. Two-thirds of the people (66%) listed 
on the injunction database in 2012 were Latino.70  
People can be added to the list without having been arrested 
or even accused of a crime. Law enforcement can use the list 
to question someone of any age, and youth as young as 10 
are named in the database. 
THE DIFFERENCE A DAY MAKES
Between 1997 and 2007, 897,099 people were deported 
from the U.S. for committing crimes. Seven in 10 were for 
nonviolent offenses, and 20% of these people were in the  
U.S. legally. 72
A lawful permanent resident in California can lose their 
green card and be deported if, within the first five years after 
being admitted to the U.S., they are convicted of a crime 
that carries a sentence of one year or more (even if no jail or 
prison time is served). 
Currently, numerous California misdemeanors carry 
a yearlong sentence, and because federal deportation 
laws are based on 365 days, that means families are 
destabilized by deportations over many non-violent, non-
serious misdemeanors, such as petty theft or driving on a 
suspended license. 
If California law were changed to make those yearlong 
sentences be one day less (364 days), we would avoid 
triggering the high cost (to families and taxpayers) of 
immigration hearings and deportations. That common 


  @SAFEANDJUST    SAFEANDJUST.ORG   //   15
sense reform was identified by the Coalition for Humane 
Immigrant Rights of Los Angeles (CHIRLA) as a key 
priority in 2014 to partner with legislators and other 
organizations (including Californians for Safety and  
Justice) to achieve. 
RECIDIVISM 
Similar to disparities found at the pretrial and sentencing 
periods, a 2009 study of 15 states’ data over a 15-year period 
found that Latinos’ rearrest and reconviction levels were 
similar to those whites, but Latino reincarceration levels for 
those convictions were much higher (the study controlled 
for other influential factors such as a one’s prior record and 
offense severity).73   
This study suggests justice officials might stereotype 
Latinos as more dangerous or a flight risk, but other 
research shows that despite higher levels of reincarceration, 
recidivism rates in California are lower for Latinos than for 
African Americans and whites. Three-year recidivism rates 
for all releases in California were highest among whites 
(67.1%), African Americans (71.4%), and Native American/
Alaska Natives (72.4%), yet only 59.5% for Latinos.74 
Data from the California Department of Corrections and 
Rehabilitation for fiscal year 2006-2007 also reveals that 
Latinos also are among the lowest to recidivate during the 
first, second and third year after their initial release. 
Javier's Story
Leaving the “The Devil’s Workshop”
Javier, born in 1978 in Hayward, California, idolized his older brother growing up. At age 11, he began hanging out with his 
brother’s neighborhood friends. They were members of the “Northerner” or Norteno gang, and Javier eventually joined. 
He began getting into drugs, drinking and criminal activity at age 12 — and ended up in and out of the juvenile justice 
system until adulthood. Through his late 20s, he was arrested for reckless driving, resisting arrest, car theft, drug 
possession, receiving stolen property and numerous parole violations. 
For these crimes, Javier has served a total of eight years in various jails and state prisons, 
including Folsom Prison and San Quentin. In 2004, Javier received a visit in jail from the 
brother he always looked up to. “There was another way to live,” his brother told him — 
he needed to come clean. Javier agreed to attend a drug rehabilitation meeting, after 
which he knelt down and promised to “make it right with God.”
In 2005, Javier enrolled in the six-month program at the Seven Step Foundation, a 
nonprofit that uses mentorship to help people turn their lives around. A supervisor there 
encouraged Javier to go back to school, so he enrolled and completed a six-month 
internship at the CAARR Institute (California Association of Addiction Recovery Resources). 
Such community-based intervention programs are proving pivotal to changing lives and 
reducing the drivers of crime, but too few of them exist in or outside of jails. Javier feels fortunate, as he reflects on his past 
and looks forward to his future. 
Today, Javier has a family and has been clean and sober for more than eight years. He is a successful Certified Addiction 
Specialist and Addiction Counselor in Oakland, working for the Seven Step Foundation and with people on probation. 
“I want to have a good impact on youth — because the streets are the devil’s workshop. I should have stayed in school.”  
He teaches youth to “put your consequences in front of you before you act. Play the whole tape before you act.”
“There was 
another way to 
live,” his brother 
told him — he 
needed to come 
clean. 


 Amount of California’s general 
fund spent on prisons
16   //  SAFEANDJUST.ORG   @SAFEANDJUST
 
Once someone pleads or is found guilty, judges have 
varying discretion in how to hold the person accountable. 
There are an increasing number of courts that use a 
collaborative approach (with the prosecution, defense and 
community and government service providers) to determine 
the most effective forms of accountability and programming 
for certain individuals. 
Specialty courts focus on specific issues certain people face, 
ranging from veterans and the homeless to drug addiction 
and mental illness. More and more judges are recognizing 
that this tailored approach to an individual’s risk factors and 
needs is not only better at changing behavior but also a way 
to reduce costs and congestion in the court system.
An example is the Collaborative Courts of San Joaquin — and 
a key partner in its efforts is a community-based nonprofit 
that has a deep understanding of the people, including 
Latinos, who are referred to the court. Fathers and Families 
of San Joaquin, based in Stockton, is often tapped to provide 
everything from tattoo removal to fatherhood classes to job 
and housing placements. 
These programs combined with other forms of accountability 
(e.g., supervised probation, community service, victim 
restitution, drug/alcohol treatment, etc.) are helping  
counties to reduce costly uses of their jails — and reduce 
recidivism rates.
Judges Focus on Behavior Change, Not Just Incarceration
BY THE NUMBERS: 
The High Cost of  
High Incarceration Rates
as many people 
in state prison 
in 2012 than in 
1962 (when the 
crime rate was 
similar)
5.6X
CALIFORNIA PRISON POPULATION 1962-2012
number of 
California 
prisons built 
since the 
1980s, versus 
just one 
university
3%
in 1981
in 2010
61%
number of people 
who return to 
California prisons 
after release 
within three years
sentenced to  
county probation:
$3.42
Average cost per day for being:
an inmate in  
a California 
county jail:
$114
For sources, visit: SafeandJust.org/costs 
PER STUDENT IN 
K-12 SCHOOLS 
$8,219
CALIFORNIA’S ANNUAL COST (2013-14)
18% 
increase in 
cost since 
1994
TO IMPRISON 
SOMEONE
$60,032
82% 
increase in 
cost since 
1994
$10
BILLION
ANNUAL COST OF  
CALIFORNIA’S PRISON SYSTEM
22
9%
200,000
180,000
160,000
140,000
120,000
100,000
80,000
60,000
40,000
20,000
1962      1972     1982      1992      2002      2012


17   //  SAFEANDJUST.ORG   @SAFEANDJUST
 
     SAFEANDJUST.ORG   //   17
There is growing recognition by policymakers and law 
enforcement that pervasive health problems (e.g., mental 
illness and drug/alcohol addiction or abuse) require health 
solutions to change behavior. Latinos are no different, yet 
they experience greater obstacles to recovery. 
Among state prisoners (throughout the U.S.), nearly half of 
Latinos (46%) were found to have a mental health problem. 
That number reaches 51% for Latinos in county jails.75 One 
potential reason is that among Latinos (outside of the 
justice system) with a mental disorder, fewer than one in 11 
contact a mental health specialist. Even fewer immigrants 
seek help.76  
Latinos are also identified as at high-risk for substance 
abuse.77 Additionally, they make up half of all DUIs 
in California and more than half of arrests for powder 
cocaine and marijuana.78 Yet Latinos often access 
treatment at far lower numbers than other ethnicities.  
One study revealed that Latinos in federal prison were 
half as likely to receive drug/alcohol treatment than 
whites, and treatment numbers of Latinos in state prisons 
was almost as disproportionate.79  
Meanwhile, California has failed to adequately fund 
treatment: A fund established by voters in 2000 for 
substance abuse treatment has not been funded since 
2006, only 10 of 58 counties have residential drug 
treatment facilities,80 and the state’s cuts to mental health 
programs 2009-2011 were the largest in the U.S.81 
Reducing health problems starts with access to health 
care. Latinos represent the largest uninsured ethnic 
group in the U.S.: Nearly one-third (32%) did not have 
health coverage in 2011, compared to 13% of whites.82 The 
implementation of federal health reform will increase the 
number of Latinos eligible for coverage, but many will still 
fall through the cracks.
Health Problems Require Health Solutions
Disparities in Latinos’ access to health and health outcomes may appear to be a 
separate body of research, but it has a definite, although overlooked, connection to 
Latino safety and their experiences with the criminal justice system.
Nearly one-third 
of Latinos (32%) 
did not have 
health coverage  
in 2011, compared 
to 13% of whites. 
That includes incarcerated Latinos, who are ineligible  
for state or federal health coverage during imprisonment. 
Some prisons and jails offer mental health and addiction 
treatment programs, but their numbers and quality  
vary widely. 
This is especially true in California county jails, which  
now have greater responsibility for local justice  
populations — including large numbers of Latinos. Without 
quality treatment that addresses the health factors that 
drive certain behaviors, counties increase the likelihood of 
seeing the same people cycle in and out of their jails. 
Regardless of setting, there is also a need to increase 
the cultural competency of health care, including having 
more Latino and/or Spanish-speaking providers. A 
national survey revealed that out of 596 licensed (active) 
psychologists who were members of the American 
Psychological Association, only 1 percent were Latino.83  
Similarly, the Center for Mental Health Services calculated 
in 1999 that there were only 29 Latino mental health 
professionals for every 100,000 Latinos in the U.S. 
Unless the gaps in coverage and cultural competency are 
closed, Latinos will continue to face steeper barriers to 
finding preventative  
solutions to the 
health drivers 
in our justice 
system.  
  


18   //  SAFEANDJUST.ORG   @SAFEANDJUST
 
DRAFT
A May/June 2014 survey found that
Surveys find that Latino opinions align with Californians 
at large, though their views tend to fall between those of 
whites and African Americans (who are more polarized). 
And their attitudes are uniquely influenced by immigration 
(e.g., including views on the intersection of immigration and 
justice policies and differences between U.S.-born and foreign-
born Latinos on broader justice issues). 
Latino
California Latinos in recent polls show a clear interest in 
changing the criminal justice system, including reducing the 
number of people imprisoned and increasing alternatives 
(e.g., supervised probation and mental health or drug 
treatment for people convicted of nonviolent offenses). 
Such opinions could prove to be a catalyst for more rapid 
action on reforming current practices and policies. While 
there are still major gaps in consistent polling of Latinos 
nationwide, the following are key findings and trends 
gathered from a variety of existing public opinion surveys of 
Latinos (especially in California).
GROWING SUPPORT FOR PRISON AND 
JUSTICE REFORMS
•	 In a May/June 2014 survey of 1,050 California Latino 
voters (63% born in the U.S., 37% outside), finding:84 
– 	More than four in 10 (44%) believed that the state 
incarcerates too many people for nonviolent offenses.
– 	47% want officials to focus on policies less, not more 
(40%), reliant on incarceration.
– 	Respondents believed the state should focus more 
on supervised probation and rehabilitation (51%), 
compared to those believing we should send more 
people to jail/prison (11%) or that the current mix is 
about right (32%). 
– 	Nearly eight in 10 Latinos (78%) supported the state 
in shortening longer criminal sentences and using the 
savings in prison costs to invest in education, health 
services and crime prevention.
AND
OPINIONS
Perceptions
GIVING JUDGES 
FLEXIBILITY INSTEAD 
OF MANDATORY 
MINIMUMS 
USING COMMUNITY 
SUPERVISION, NOT JAIL, 
FOR LOW-RISK PEOPLE 
AWAITING TRIAL 
California Latino 
voters supported:
REDUCING LONG 
SENTENCES
78%
76%
69%


19   //  SAFEANDJUST.ORG   @SAFEANDJUST
 
  @SAFEANDJUST    SAFEANDJUST.ORG   //   19
In June 2013, 
Californians for 
Safety and Justice 
released a report with 
the first-ever survey 
data from California 
crime victims.88 The 
findings dispel the 
myth that survivors 
prioritize harsh 
punishments, with 
Latinos responding 
this way:
– 	Three in four (76%) supported giving judges 
flexibility in sentencing for individual cases 
instead of having mandatory minimums.
– 	Nearly seven in 10 (69%) also supported allowing 
low-risk people awaiting trial to be supervised in the 
community instead of being jailed.
•	 An April 2014 survey by Latino Decisions of 400 
California Latinos found that seven in 10 (69%) believed 
California should minimize penalties for drug possession, 
and eight in 10 (79%) felt that treatment should be the 
focus for such offenses.85 
•	 In a July 2013 survey by David Binder Research, California 
Latinos cited the amount of money spent on prisons and 
the use of incarceration for non-serious and nonviolent 
people as their top concerns with the justice system, and 
78% supported providing treatment for the mentally ill 
instead of jailing them.86  
•	 A September 2013 survey by USC/Los Angeles Times 
found that California Latinos favored using county 
custody instead of state prisons (75%) and providing more 
rehabilitation opportunities (65%). These levels of support 
were lower than those of African Americans but matched 
those by whites and Asian Americans.87 
SUPPORT FOR SAFER GUN LAWS
Latinos are more likely to be injured or killed by guns than 
whites,89,90 yet they are less likely to own guns compared to 
whites (18% versus 33%).91 Considering these numbers, it 
is perhaps no surprise that in a 2013 poll of Latino voters 
nationwide, a majority supported requiring background 
checks for potential purchasers; creating a national database 
of gun owners; banning semi-automatic and assault weapons; 
and prohibiting people with mental illness from owning or 
buying a gun.92 Previous surveys show higher support for gun 
restrictions among Latinos than among whites.93
PERCEPTIONS OF POLICE 
The evidence shows that Latinos generally hold less positive 
views of local law enforcement than whites, characterized 
by tepid confidence, low job ratings and concerns about 
discrimination. A 2009 national study echoed previous 
reports finding that Latinos’ confidence in the justice system 
to adequately police their communities is closer to the low 
levels expressed by African Americans than to the high 
levels expressed by whites.94 
Latino Crime Survivor Views Dispel  
the Stereotypes
•	 More believed California sends too many people to prison than too few.
•	 They believe, by a two-to-one margin, that prisons teach people how to be better  
criminals or have no impact versus rehabilitating them.
•	 By a ratio of two to one, they wanted California to focus more on providing supervised  
probation and rehabilitation programs than sending people to jail or prison. 
•	 83% thought California should invest more money in education as opposed to prison  
(compared with 76% of white victims). 
•	 78% wanted to invest more in mental health and drug and alcohol  
treatment than in jails and prisons (compared to 71% of whites). 


20   //  SAFEANDJUST.ORG   @SAFEANDJUST
 
A 2003 study conducted for the Department of Justice in 
Los Angeles found that 80% of Latinos rate police officer 
behavior positively, compared to 88% for whites and 68% for 
African Americans. The study also reported that Latinos 
held the lowest rating of job approval for police at 67%.95  
One reason may be the perception of excessive force used 
by police against Latinos: A federal study found that Latinos 
reported being a victim of police force at twice the rates of 
whites in 2005.96
 
The Latino population is not homogeneous, however; 
confidence levels were even lower among youth  
and immigrants.97
PERCEPTIONS OF RACIAL PROFILING
The research also makes it clear that Latinos’ perceptions of 
law enforcement is tied to perceived bias and profiling:
•	 An April 2014 survey by Latino Decisions of 400 
California Latinos found that eight in 10 felt that racial 
disparities in drug enforcement is a serious problem.98
•	 A 2001 study in California on racial attitudes found that 
65% of Latinos believed racial profiling by the police was 
widespread, compared with 82% of African Americans and 
43% of whites.99
•	 A 2000 study of ethnicity and views of legal authority 
conducted in Los Angeles and Oakland found that Latinos 
(along with African Americans) report unfair treatment by 
the police at higher levels than whites.100
•	 A national 2004 poll asked if being stopped at airport 
security checkpoints was a widespread occurrence. More 
Latinos answered yes (54%) than any other ethnic group 
(48% of African Americans and 40% of whites).101
•	 Interestingly, Latinos more than whites (38% to 24%) 
believed that racial profiling is justified when shoppers in 
malls or stores are questioned about possible theft.102 
THE IMPACT OF POLICE ENFORCING 
IMMIGRATION LAWS
In 1996, Congress expanded the role of state and local law 
enforcement in immigration matters. This change appears to 
have affected Latino trust in and cooperation with local police.
A 2013 survey in several southwestern counties (including 
L.A. County) found that nearly four in 10 (38%) Latinos 
felt like they were under more suspicion since 1996. Forty-
four percent of all Latinos (regardless of immigration 
status) were less likely to contact police officers if they had 
experienced a crime (out of fear that law enforcement would 
ask them or those around them about their immigration). 
The author argues that increased police involvement with 
immigration enforcement leads to Latinos’ isolation and 
disconnectedness from police, withdrawal and diminished 
sense of public safety in their communities.103 
In light of these fears, it is not surprising that national 
surveys have found that 77% of Latinos believe that enforcing 
immigration laws should be the “exclusive responsibility of 
federal authorities.” (Levels of concern are greater for those 
born outside of the country and/or who predominantly  
speak Spanish.)104
NOTE
In October 2013, California Governor Jerry Brown signed 
Assembly Bill 4 (the TRUST Act) to limit the discretion of 
law enforcement in detaining undocumented immigrants for 
potential deportation, except for some crimes.105  The precedent-
setting legislation states that immigrants in this country illegally 
would have to be charged with or convicted of a serious offense 
to be eligible for a 48-hour hold and transfer to U.S. immigration 
authorities for possible deportation.
Because Latino public opinion can change — especially 
in reaction to changing law enforcement practices and 
criminal justice policies — more updated public opinion 
data is needed to determine how Latinos currently perceive 
police and the justice system, and how they believe each 
could be improved.
of Latinos surveyed 
believe that enforcing 
immigration laws 
should be the “exclusive responsibility 
of federal authorities.”
77%


DRAFT
Deldelp's Story
The Wrong Priorities  
Make Us Unsafe 
In 2005, my family was rocked when my aunt was murdered. The shock and anguish we felt did not surprise 
people, but law enforcement and others were taken aback when they heard that we wanted to help, not punish, 
the person responsible.
That’s because the person who killed my aunt was my cousin, her son, after he suffered a mental breakdown.  
We learned — for the first time — that he had schizophrenia and needed treatment. 
My family was able to eventually convince the District Attorney to drop the death penalty charge and instead place 
the young man in a mental health facility, where he remains today.
The entire experience was an eye-opener on many levels, forever 
changing my views of the justice system. The early disregard for my 
cousin’s schizophrenia epitomizes how little emphasis our system puts 
on mental health treatment as a more appropriate tool for changing 
behavior. And immediately after the tragedy, law enforcement’s 
emphasis was on punishment and retribution, not what the victim’s 
family wanted or needed. 
I also have been discouraged at how much I see state and local 
governments spending on incarceration as the primary response to 
crime. Too many other proven methods for creating safe neighborhoods 
are fighting for public funds, yet we pour more and more taxpayer 
dollars into prisons and jails that don’t seem to make anyone better. 
Survivors of crime are not monolithic in their views on accountability, 
and neither are Latinos. But I know from speaking with family, friends, colleagues and other survivors that a 
consensus is growing around the need to shift our focus away from incarcerating nonviolent people to more 
effective — and less expensive — strategies for keeping our neighborhoods safe.
The early disregard 
for my cousin’s 
schizophrenia 
epitomizes how little 
emphasis our system 
puts on mental health 
treatment as a more 
appropriate tool for 
changing behavior. 
  @SAFEANDJUST    SAFEANDJUST.ORG   //   21


22   //  SAFEANDJUST.ORG   @SAFEANDJUST
 
Based on gaps in or challenges with past research on 
Latinos, more intentional data collection is needed to tell a 
fuller, more nuanced story of the myriad Latino populations 
and their needs. For example: 
•	 Population subsets: Someone’s experience with crime 
and the justice system — and their subsequent opinions 
about each — varies based on many demographic factors. 
Surveys and other studies that use “Latinos” as a catchall 
will inevitably tell a partial story. Future research on 
Latinos should breakdown statistics and recommendations 
based on how long participants have lived in the U.S., 
language proficiency and other factors. 
•	 Experiences with crime: Research on the relationship 
between immigration and Latino experiences with crime is 
sparse — or insufficiently structured. The National Crime 
Victimization Survey, conducted annually by the Bureau 
of Justice Statistics, is a critical source of information, and 
yet its lengthy questionnaire does not include a question 
about where the respondent was born.
•	 Arrest rates vs. convictions: California provides data on 
arrest rates by type of crime and racial or ethnic group, but 
data are lacking on conviction rates by types of crime and 
different populations. There is a need for comparative data 
on the first time someone is arrested or convicted.
•	 Racial profiling: To truly understand the level of racial 
profiling that takes place in a local jurisdiction or 
statewide, consistent data must be collected about stops, 
searches and arrests. Lawmakers should consider how 
legislation could ensure that such data is compiled to 
inform more effective, fair policing practices.
•	 Pretrial detainment: Further research studies with 
access to court records in California could be conducted 
to examine disparities between Latinos and other ethnic 
groups, as well as analyze the effects of immigration 
detainers on pretrial detainment for Latinos. 
•	 Sentencing: There is a void in sentencing data for Latinos 
in California. Requesting sentencing data from California 
courts would make it possible to conduct a study that  
compares sentences between Latinos and non-Latinos. 
Factoring in the effect of immigration policy on the effects 
of sentencing lengths would also be crucial. 
•	 Community reintegration: Although research exists 
on how effectively Latino youth reintegrate into the 
community, there is a lack of documentation on how well 
Latino adults are reentering society. 
To address many of the problems revealed by existing research on 
Latinos — as well as identified gaps in research — Californians for 
Safety and Justice makes the following recommendations.
Expand and standardize data collection and analysis
  ations
RE
comm
end


  @SAFEANDJUST    SAFEANDJUST.ORG   //   23
For Latinos with limited English proficiency — and  
coming from a variety of different backgrounds and 
experiences — it is important for the justice system to 
provide quality services in Spanish and that recognize 
different cultural needs. For example:
•	 Language needs: While California’s Constitution 
states that a person “unable to understand English who 
is charged with a crime has a right to an interpreter 
throughout the proceedings” (Article 1, Section 14), 
the state must keep pace with population growth by 
providing an adequate number of certified interpreters 
to meet the needs of defendants. This includes providing 
appropriate funding to meet the constitutional 
requirement, along with additional training for law 
enforcement, legal and medical professionals regarding 
best practices for identifying the need for language 
services — and connecting people to those services.  
 
•	 Community-based organizations: Many counties 
have not-for-profit organizations (including faith-based 
ones) working to improve safety, health outcomes and 
success rates for people reintegrating into society after 
incarceration, and to support crime survivors. These 
include a range of reentry supports, housing assistance, 
pathways to employment and mental health and 
substance abuse services. Too often these organizations 
do not receive enough resources to scale up their work 
to meet community needs. Often they are also not fully 
engaged as partners by local law enforcement and 
government agencies. While philanthropic organizations 
can increase their investment in these organizations, 
local governments can also contract with these 
providers to more directly and effectively reach certain 
populations. And regardless of funding, government 
agencies can develop more collaborative models that 
integrate community-based prevention efforts.
Funding and services for crime victims already 
exist in California, but problems with their 
restrictions and accessibility must be addressed 
to better help people recover from the trauma of 
their experiences. For example:
•	 Culturally competent partnerships: In 
order to provide survivors with services and 
to help law enforcement solve crimes, the 
relationship between law enforcement, service 
providers and the Latino community must 
be strengthened. We recommend increased 
training and culturally competent community 
Expand language services and cultural competency
Improve supports and services for Latino survivors of crime
outreach by victim services agencies and law enforcement, 
including partnerships with local organizations.
•	 Spanish-language options: State and local services 
for survivors of crime (including the California Victims 
Compensation Program) must include Spanish-language 
materials and speakers, as well as clear standards to 
ensure cultural competency. Otherwise many survivors 
of crime will be unaware of existing services, unclear on 
how to utilize them and can be more likely to experience 
financial and/or psychological hardship. 


24   //  SAFEANDJUST.ORG   @SAFEANDJUST
 
•	 Victim compensation policies: Currently the California 
Victims Compensation Program (Cal VCP) has certain 
limitations on whether an individual or family can 
receive state-allocated funds after a crime. This includes 
someone on parole or probation who is victimized 
(unrelated to their original offense or anything else they 
have done); women who have been assaulted (if they have 
Many people in California’s justice system — including 
Latinos — have underlying mental health and/or substance 
abuse problems. We can better solve these problems 
through the following:
•	 Access to drug treatment: Many people in jail could 
more effectively address health problems and change 
behavior in a residential program that addresses 
substance abuse. With the implementation of the 
Affordable Care Act, California has an opportunity to 
increase the use of federal Medi-Cal dollars to fund  
drug treatment programs as an effective alternative  
to jail, specifically if current barriers are removed to  
allow more people to be covered by Medi-Cal in 
residential treatment centers. Local and state jurisdictions 
should do an analysis of treatment options available and 
the needs of specific populations.
•	 Culturally competent treatment providers: The state 
and counties should provide outreach and support 
to culturally competent treatment organizations with 
strong ties to Latino communities that are interested 
in becoming certified by the state to provide and be 
reimbursed for drug treatment covered by Medi-Cal.  
In contracting for drug and mental health treatment, 
counties should prioritize providers with a record of 
success serving diverse, multilingual patients.
been convicted of prostitution); and family members of 
someone on parole who is murdered (who normally would 
be eligible for assistance with burial costs). Cal VCP has 
shown a willingness to update some of their requirements 
to help more crime survivors, but much more can be done 
to remove unnecessary barriers to existing supports.
Solve health problems with health solutions
•	 Funding proven programs: Since 2011, the 
California state government provides counties 
with more funding than ever before (to spend 
as they see fit) on local justice matters. County 
Boards of Supervisors should evaluate how to 
allocate more of these funds to local programs 
that have successfully addressed health drivers 
of crime and disparities between different 
ethnic and racial populations. 
•	 Health coverage enrollment for justice 
populations: In 2013, California enacted 
Assembly Bill 720, which provides counties 
new guidance and opportunities to enroll 
people on probation and exiting jail in Medi-
Cal (covered by federal dollars) in order to 
save money and provide access to care that 
can, ultimately, reduce recidivism. Probation 
and sheriff departments in California counties 
should take advantage of this public safety 
and fiscal opportunity to establish enrollment 
protocols — with Spanish-language support.


25   //  SAFEANDJUST.ORG   @SAFEANDJUST
 
  @SAFEANDJUST    SAFEANDJUST.ORG   //   25
Reduce disparities in arrest and conviction rates
Policies and protocols can be examined and enhanced  
in law enforcement agencies, courts and elsewhere to 
prevent unnecessarily harsh or unfair treatment of Latinos. 
For example:
•	 Racial profiling: Some law enforcement agencies have 
strong definitions of what constitutes racial profiling— 
and training on how to avoid the practice. Such standards 
should be in place in jurisdictions across the state and 
nation. Additional best practices in policing Latino 
communities across the country include Spanish-speaking 
liaisons (if officers do not speak Spanish), specific 
education and training of officers, Spanish hotlines and 
increased officer participation in community events. 
•	 Risk assessments: When someone is arrested, 
determining their individual risk as they await trial (to 
reoffend, to show up to court, etc.) is key to managing 
jail space and minimizing undue disruption to families. 
Consistent use of proven risk-assessment tools can help 
local jurisdictions effectively manage their jail populations 
while also preventing unnecessary or biased decisions 
from disproportionately affecting Latinos.
Reducing disparities in sentencing
Current and proposed legislation pertaining to 
criminal sentences need to be reexamined — for the 
entire population but specifically as it pertains to 
impacts on people of color. For example:
•	 Racial Impact Assessments: Iowa, Connecticut 
and Oregon have laws requiring racial impact 
statements before changing or adding criminal 
laws, as a way to guard against unintended 
consequences for people of a certain race 
or ethnicity. A racial impact statement is a 
nonpartisan analysis that examines the impact 
of justice policy changes on racial and ethnic 
populations. For example, when new legislation is 
proposed in California, such an analysis could be 
conducted by an existing state agency (e.g., the 
State Interagency Team Workgroup to Eliminate 
Disparities & Disproportionality) and reported 
back to legislative committees on the potential 
adverse effects of the proposed bill. 
•	 The Gang Injunction list: Despite its intention, 
the list of current, past or alleged gang-involved 
individuals used by law enforcement and 
prosecutors has unfairly snared too many 
people, especially Latinos. It is too easy for 
someone to be added to this list — including 
children as young as 10 — and too hard to avoid its harsh 
consequences if you commit an unrelated offense. A task 
force of community members and local officials should be 
formed to evaluate how to reform this tool.  
•	 Mandatory minimums: The California penal code 
includes mandatory minimum sentences that remove 
judicial discretion when considering each individual’s 
offenses. For example, this can be the case for drug 
offenses, with each charge automatically carrying an 
additional penalty, even when the offenses are nonviolent 
in nature. Judges and defendants — and taxpayers — 
deserve more flexibility so that sentences are based 
on what will change an individual’s behavior and keep 
communities safe. 
•	 Enhancements: Currently the penal code can add 
“enhancement” charges to an offense to increase the 
ultimate penalty. For example, if someone is arrested 
for one offense but is also a member of a gang, a gang 
enhancement can add to the severity of the punishment, 
even if it is unrelated to the original offense. Similarly 
severe enhancements can be added for gun possession. To 
reduce overly excessive sentences that disproportionately 
affect Latinos, lawmakers should reevaluate any outdated 
or ineffective enhancements in the penal code.


26   //  SAFEANDJUST.ORG   @SAFEANDJUST
 
For the portion of the Latino population that has immigrated 
to the U.S., there are a variety of immigration and law 
enforcement policies — or lack of them — that impact how 
welcoming (and fair) those communities and the agencies 
that serve them are. We can improve such conditions and 
policies through the following:
•	 365-day deportation triggers: Some California 
misdemeanors can carry a year-long sentence, and federal 
immigration laws dictate that non-citizens (including 
legal residents) with a 365-day or longer sentence can 
be deported, even for non-serious, nonviolent offenses. 
Because of the high cost that immigration hearings 
and deportations carry for families and taxpayers, 
policymakers should explore solutions proposed by 
CHIRLA and others to reduce these sentences by a  
single day.
•	 Right to Counsel at detention centers: People charged 
with criminal offenses in the U.S. are allowed (by law and 
regardless of their immigration status) legal counsel for 
their defense. This is not the case for someone detained 
for immigration reasons. Similar to our criminal justice 
system, policymakers should explore requiring a Right to 
Counsel at detention centers so that people charged with 
immigration violations fully understand what they are 
accused of, the consequences and their options are during 
any proceedings. 
•	 Immigration vs. law enforcement: While 
California has advanced previous legislation to 
reduce overlap between local law enforcement 
and immigration priorities, there is still fear 
and mistrust of police among immigrant 
communities. The state could address these 
fears by prohibiting local authorities from 
entering into agreements with the Department 
of Homeland Security regarding immigration-
related matters.
•	 Conflicts with federal law: Currently legal 
residents convicted of certain non-serious, 
nonviolent crimes can be deported, including 
those who have served in the U.S. military. We 
believe that exceptions can be made to avoid 
deportation and hold people accountable more 
effectively and fairly without destabilizing their 
homes and lives. This, however, would need to be 
rectified within federal law. 
Lessen the impact on and role of immigration status
“The data available on Latinos and the justice system is, ultimately, a call to action. 
It shows the clear need for more consistent research as well as deeper analysis 
of the ripple effect current practices have on communities. More importantly, it 
is a compelling opportunity for leaders and advocates to collaborate on smarter 
justice policies — for all of us.”
	 —	DELIA DE LA VARA, VICE PRESIDENT, CALIFORNIA REGION 
	 	
NATIONAL COUNCIL OF LA RAZA
26   //  SAFEANDJUST.ORG   @SAFEANDJUST
 


PARTNERS
for Change
THE CENTRAL AMERICAN RESOURCE 
CENTER (CARECEN-LA) was founded by a group 
of Salvadoran refugees whose mission was to secure legal 
status for the thousands of Central Americans fleeing civil 
war. Over the past 25 years, CARECEN has transformed 
itself from a small grassroots group to the largest Central 
American organization in the country. Its clients have 
similarly changed from refugees fleeing war to families who 
have put down roots in the U.S. and who are building vibrant 
lives for themselves and their children. 
THE COALITION FOR HUMANE IMMIGRANT 
RIGHTS OF LOS ANGELES (CHIRLA) was formed 
in 1986 to advance the human and civil rights of immigrants 
and refugees in Los Angeles; promote harmonious multi-
ethnic and multi-racial human relations; and through 
coalition-building, advocacy, community education and 
organizing, empower immigrants and their allies to build a 
more just society.
CONSEJO DE FEDERACIONES MEXICANAS 
EN NORTEAMÉRICA (COFEM) is a nonprofit 
creating opportunities for Latino Immigrants in North 
America, with a special focus in California. COFEM was 
established by a league of organizations to promote the 
advancement of the Latino community through public 
policy advocacy, community organizing, leadership and 
organizational development, educational and cultural 
programs, and bi-national economic development.
HOMEBOY INDUSTRIES is the nation’s largest  
gang-intervention program. For 25 years, it has provided 
hope, training and support to men and women who were 
formerly involved in gangs and/or incarcerated, allowing 
them to redirect their lives and become contributing 
members of the community. 
HOMIES UNIDOS is a nonprofit gang-violence-
prevention and intervention organization with projects in 
San Salvador, El Salvador and Los Angeles. For 10 years, 
Homies Unidos has been a catalyst for change, working 
to end violence and promote peace in our communities 
through gang prevention, the promotion of human rights 
in immigrant communities and the empowerment of youth 
through positive alternatives to gang involvement and 
destructive behavior.
The following organizations are not only leaders in their respective fields but also 
committed to collaborating on meaningful change for the lives of Latinos — in their 
communities and in the criminal justice system. We appreciate and applaud their 
leadership, as well as others who join in efforts to create safer neighborhoods and fairer 
justice practices. 
  @SAFEANDJUST    SAFEANDJUST.ORG   //   27


28   //  SAFEANDJUST.ORG   @SAFEANDJUST
 
THE LEAGUE OF UNITED LATIN AMERICAN 
CITIZENS (LULAC), founded in 1929, is the oldest 
Latino civil rights organizations in the U.S. Its mission is to 
advance the economic condition, educational attainment, 
political influence, housing, health and civil rights of the 
nation’s Latino population.
THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF LA RAZA 
(NCLR) is the largest national Hispanic civil rights and 
advocacy organization in the U.S. Through its network of 
nearly 300 affiliated community-based organizations, NCLR 
reaches millions of Hispanics each year in 41 states, Puerto 
Rico and the District of Columbia. To achieve its mission, 
NCLR conducts applied research, policy analysis and 
advocacy, providing a Latino perspective in five key areas: 
assets/investments, civil rights/immigration, education, 
employment and economic status, and health.
THE NEW ALLIANCE FOR PUBLIC SAFETY 
(NAPS) is a nationwide network of elected officials 
committed to juvenile and criminal justice policy reform. 
NAPS is motivated by the abandonment of countless youth 
and adults in the justice system and the disproportionate 
investment America continues to make in incarceration 
rather than on proven rehabilitation programs that  
are significantly cheaper, save lives and lead to  
productive adulthood. 
PRESENTE.ORG is a national organization that exists 
to amplify the political voice of Latino communities. 
Presente.org seeks to be a centralized organizing hub for 
issues facing Latinos, with a focus on online activation. This 
includes providing calls to action via email, social networks, 
and text message, coordinating on-the-ground events, 
organizing house parties, and advertising.
SALVADORAN AMERICAN LEADERSHIP AND 
EDUCATION FUND (SALEF) promotes the civic 
participation and representation of the Salvadoran and other 
Latino communities in the U.S., specifically the economic 
development and democracy in El Salvador, as well as 
to advocate for the country’s economic, educational and 
political advancement and growth.


CITATIONS
1 United States Census Bureau. (2010).
2 State of California, Department of Finance. (2013, January). 
Department of Finance, Report P-1: State and county populations 
projections, 2010-2060. 
3 California Senate Office of Research. (2014, January). A statistical 
picture of Latinos in California. Prepared for the California Latino 
Legislative Caucus. 
4 California Department of Justice. (2011).  Homicide in California.
5 Bureau of Justice Statistics. (2013d). Firearm violence, 1993–2011 (NCJ 
241730) by dM. Planty and J.L. Truman. 
6 Bureau of Justice Statistics. (2013b). Household burglary, 1994–2011 
(NCJ 241754) by J.H. Walters, A. Moore, M. Berzofsky, & L. Langton.
7 David Binder Research. (2013a). California crime victims quantitative 
research summary.
8 National Institute of Justice. (2011). Research briefing: Understanding 
trends in hate crimes against immigrants and Hispanic-Americans. 
9 Stacey, M., Carbone-López, K., & Rosenfeld, R. (2011, August). 
Demographic change and ethnically motivated crime: The impact of 
immigration on anti-Hispanic hate crime in the United States. Journal 
of Contemporary Criminal Justice, 27(3), 278-298.
10 Carlson, D. K. (2004). Racial profiling seen as pervasive, unjust. The 
Gallup Poll Tuesday Briefing, 16.
11 David Binder Research. (2013a). California crime victims quantitative 
research summary.
12 Schlesinger, T. (2005). Racial and ethnic disparity in pretrial criminal 
processing. Justice Quarterly, 22(2), 170–192.
13 Ibid.
14 Demuth, S., & Steffensmeier, D. (2004). Ethnicity effects on sentence 
outcomes in large urban courts: Comparisons among white, black, and 
Hispanic defendants. Social Science Quarterly, 85(4), 994–1011.
15 United States Sentencing Commission. (2011). Report to the Congress: 
Mandatory minimum penalties in the federal criminal justice system. 
16 McGovern, V., Demuth, S., & Jacoby, J. E. (2009). Racial and 
ethnic recidivism risks: A comparison of postincarceration rearrest, 
reconviction, and reincarceration among white, black, and Hispanic 
releases. The Prison Journal, 89(3), 309–327.
17 Youth Justice Coalition’s REALSEARCH Action Research Center. 
(2012, December). Tracked and trapped: Youth of color, gang databases 
and gang injunctions.
18 California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation (2011). 2011 
CDCR adult institutions outcome evaluation report. CDCR Office of 
Research, Research and Evaluation Branch. 
19 David Binder Research. (2014, May/June). California Latino voters 
and criminal justice reforms.
20 Ibid.
21 Ibid.
22 Public Policy Institute of California. (2001). Finding common ground: 
racial and ethnic attitudes in California by Z. Hajnal and M. Baldassare. 
San Francisco, CA.
23 Lopez, M. H., Morin, R., & Taylor, P. (2010, October 28). Illegal 
immigration backlash worries, divides Latinos. Pew Latino Center.
24 USC Dornsife/Los Angeles Times. (2013). Californians willing to fund 
prisoner rehabilitation to reduce overcrowding. 
25 California Department of Justice. (2011). Homicide in California.
26 Martinez, Jr., R. (1996). Latinos and lethal violence: The impact 
of poverty and inequality. Social Problems, 43(2), 131–146. Martinez, 
Jr., R., Stowell, J. I., & Cancino, J. M. (2008). A tale of two border 
cities: Community context, ethnicity, and homicide. Social Science 
Quarterly, 89(1), 1–16. Martinez, Jr., R., Stowell, J. I., & Lee, M. T. (2010). 
Immigration and crime in an era of transformation: A longitudinal 
analysis of homicides in San Diego neighborhoods, 1980–2000. 
Criminology, 48(3), 797–829.
27 Bureau of Justice Statistics. (2013d). Firearm violence, 1993–2011 (NCJ 
241730) by M. Planty & J.L. Truman.
28 Bureau of Justice Statistics. (2013b). Household burglary, 1994–2011 
(NCJ 241754) by J.H. Walters, A. Moore. M. Berzofsky, M., &  
L. Langton.
29 David Binder Research. (2013a). California crime victims quantitative 
research summary.
30 Lauritsen, J. and Heimer, K. (2010, November). Violent victimization 
among males and economic conditions. Criminology and Public Policy, 
9(4), 665-692. 
31 National Institute of Justice. (2011). Research briefing: Understanding 
trends in hate crimes against immigrants and Hispanic-Americans. 
32 Stacey, M., Carbone-López, K., & Rosenfeld, R. (2011, August). 
Demographic change and ethnically motivated crime: The impact of 
immigration on anti-Hispanic hate crime in the United States. Journal 
of Contemporary Criminal Justice, 27(3), 278-298.
33 U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics (2012). Hate 
crime victimizations.
34 Rennison, C. M. (2007). Reporting to the police by Latino victims of 
violence. Violence and Victims, 22(6), 754–772.
35 Carlson, D. K. (2004). Racial profiling seen as pervasive, unjust. The 
Gallup Poll Tuesday Briefing, 16.
  @SAFEANDJUST    SAFEANDJUST.ORG   //   29


30   //  SAFEANDJUST.ORG   @SAFEANDJUST
 
36 Vidales, G., Day, K. & Powe, M. (2009). Police and immigration 
enforcement: Impacts on Latino(a) residents’ perceptions of police. 
Policing, 32(4), 631–653.
37 Alderden, M. A., & Lavery, T. A. (2007). Predicting homicide 
clearances in Chicago: Investigating disparities in predictors across 
different types of homicide. Homicide Studies, 11(2), 115–132. Litwin, 
K. J. (2004). A multilevel multivariate analysis of factors affecting 
homicide clearances. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 
41(4), 327–351.
38 Roberts, A., & Lyons, C. J. (2011). Hispanic victims and homicide 
clearance by arrest. Homicide Studies, 15(1), 48–73.
39 Lee, C. (2005). The value of life in death: Multiple regression and 
event history analyses of homicide clearance in Los Angeles County. 
Journal of Criminal Justice, 33(6), 527–534.
40 Briggs, S. & Opsal, T. (2012). The influence of victim ethnicity on 
arrest in violent crimes. Criminal Justice Studies, 25(2), 177–189. 
41 Burchfield, K. B., & Silver, E. (2013). Collective efficacy and crime 
in Los Angeles neighborhoods: Implications for the Latino paradox. 
Sociological Inquiry, 83(1), 154–176. Harris, C. T., & Feldmeyer, B. (2013). 
Latino immigration and White, Black, and Latino violent crime: A 
comparison of tradition and non-traditional immigrant destinations. 
Social Science Research, 42(1), 202–216.
42 MacDonald, J. M., Hipp, J. R., & Gill, C. (2013). The effects of 
immigrant concentration on changes in neighborhood crime rates. 
Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 29, 191–215.
43 Boggess, L. N., & Hipp, J. R. (2010). Violent crime, residential 
instability, and mobility: Does the relationship differ in minority 
neighborhoods? Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 26(3), 351–370.
44 Martinez, Jr., R., Stowell, J. I., & Lee, M. T. (2010). Immigration and 
crime in an era of transformation: A longitudinal analysis of homicides 
in San Diego neighborhoods, 1980–2000. Criminology, 48(3), 797–829.
45 Lee, M. T., Martinez, Jr., R., & Rosenfeld, R. (2001). Does immigration 
increase homicide? Negative evidence from three border cities. The 
Sociological Quarterly, 42(4), 559–580.
46 Harris, C. T., & Feldmeyer, B. (2013). Latino immigration and White, 
Black, and Latino violent crime: A comparison of tradition and non-
traditional immigrant destinations. Social Science Research, 42(1), 
202–216.
47 Shihadeh, E. S., & Barranco, R. E. (2010). Latino immigration, 
economic deprivation, and violence: Regional differences in the effect 
of linguistic isolation. Homicide Studies, 14(3), 336–355.
48 David Binder Research. (2013a). California crime victims quantitative 
research summary.
49 Vidales, G. T. (2010). Arrested justice: The multifaceted plight of 
immigrant Latinas who faced domestic violence. Journal of Family 
Violence, 25, 533–544.
50 Stover, C. S., Poole, G., & Marans, S. (2009). The domestic violence 
home-visit intervention: Impact on police-reported incidents of repeat 
violence over 12 months. Violence and Victims, 24(5), 591–606.
51 Kerby, S. (2012, March). The top 10 most startling facts about people of 
color and the criminal justice system in the United States. The Center 
for American Progress. 
52 Kochel, T. R., Wilson, D. B., & Mastrofski, S. D. (2011). Effect of suspect 
race on officers’ arrest decisions. Criminology, 49(2), 473–512.
53 Withrow, B. L. (2004). Race-based policing: A descriptive analysis of 
the Wichita Stop Study. Police Practice and Research, 5(3), 223–240.
54 Ehlers, S., Schiraldi, V. & E. Lotke, E. (2004, October). Racial divide: An 
examination of the impact of California’s Three Strike Law on African-
Americans and Latinos. Justice Policy Institute.
55 Demuth, S. (2003). Racial and ethnic differences in pretrial release 
decisions and outcomes: A comparison of Hispanic, black, and white 
felony arrestees. Criminology, 41(3), 873–908.
56 Schlesinger, T. (2005). Racial and ethnic disparity in pretrial criminal 
processing. Justice Quarterly, 22(2), 170–192.
57 Ibid.
58 Ibid.
59 Levin, D. (2008). Pretrial release of Latino defendants. U.S. 
Department of Justice: Pretrial Justice Institute.
60 Abel, L. (2009). Language access in immigration courts. New York 
University School of Law: Brennan Center for Justice.
61 Ibid. 
62 Yeung, B. (2012, December 6). Calif. courts face federal scrutiny over 
interpreter access. California Watch. 
63 The Judicial Branch of California. How court cases work.  
64 California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation (2010). 
California prisoners and parolees, 2010. Department of Corrections and 
Rehabilitation Offender Information Services Branch, Estimates and 
Statistical Analysis Section. 
65 Grattet, R., & Hayes, J. (2013, June). California’s changing prison 
population. Public Policy Institute of California. 
66 Ibid. 
67 Demuth, S., & Steffensmeier, D. (2004). Ethnicity effects on sentence 
outcomes in large urban courts: Comparisons among white, black, and 
Hispanic defendants. Social Science Quarterly, 85(4), 994–1011.
68 Demuth, S. (2002). The effect of citizenship status on sentencing 
outcomes in drug cases. Federal Sentencing Reporter, 14(5), 271–275.
69Logue, M. A. (2009). “The price of being Mexican”: Sentencing 
disparities between noncitizen Mexican and non-Mexican Latinos 
in the federal courts. Hispanic Journal of Behavioral Sciences, 31(4), 
423–445. 
70 Youth Justice Coalition’s REALSEARCH Action Research Center. 
(2012, December). Tracked and trapped: Youth of color, gang databases 
and gang injunctions. 
71 United States Sentencing Commission. (2011). Report to the Congress: 
Mandatory minimum penalties in the federal criminal justice system.


72 Human Rights Watch (2009). Forced apart (by the numbers): Non-
citizens deported mostly for nonviolent offenses.
73 McGovern, V., Demuth, S, & Jacoby, J. E. (2009). Racial and ethnic 
recidivism risks: A comparison of postincarceration rearrest, 
reconviction, and reincarceration among white, black, and Hispanic 
releases. The Prison Journal, 89(3), 309–327. 
74 California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation (2011). 2011 
CDCR adult institutions outcome evaluation report. CDCR Office of 
Research, Research and Evaluation Branch. 
75 Bureau of Justice Statistics. (2006, September). Mental health 
problems of prison and jail inmates.  
76 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2001). Mental 
health: Culture, race, and ethnicity; A supplement to mental health: A 
report of the Surgeon General.
77 National Alliance for Hispanic Health. (2001). Quality health services 
for Hispanics: The cultural competency component.
78 Motivans, Mark. (2011). Federal Justice Statistics, 2009. U.S. 
Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, NCJ234184, p. 3.
79 Mumola, C.J. (1999). Substance abuse and treatment, state and 
federal prisoners, 1997. Bureau of Justice Statistics. 
80 California Hospital Association. (2012). California’s Acute Psychiatric 
Bed Loss.
81 National Alliance on Mental Illness. (2011). State Mental Health Cuts: 
A National Crisis.
82 Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured. (2013, April). 
Heath coverage for the Hispanic population today and under the 
Affordable Care Act. The Henry J. Kaiser Foundation. 
83 Williams, S. and Kohout, J. L. (1999). A survey of licensed practitioners 
of psychology: Activities, roles, and services. American Psychological 
Association. 
84 David Binder Research. (2014, May/June). California Latino voters 
and criminal justice reforms.
85 Latino Decisions. (2014). Poll Shows Major Support Among Latinos 
for Sentencing Reform.
86David Binder Research. (2013b). Latino voters overwhelmingly favor a 
wide variety of proposals that would ease prison crowding.
87 USC Dornsife/Los Angeles Times. (2013). Californians willing to fund 
prisoner rehabilitation to reduce overcrowding. 
88David Binder Research. (2013a). California crime victims quantitative 
research summary.
89 California Department of Justice. (2011). Homicide in California.
90Bureau of Justice Statistics. (2013d). Firearm violence, 1993–2011 (NCJ 
241730) by M. Planty & J.L. Truman.
91 Jones, J.M. (2013, February). Men, married, Southerners most likely to 
be gun owners. 
92 Pantoja, A. (2013, March). Latino voters favor gun restrictions.   
Latino Decisions. 
93 Leal, D. (2007). Latino public opinion: Does it exist? The University of 
Texas at Austin: Department of Government.  
94 Lopez, M. H., & Livingston, G. (2009). Latinos and the criminal justice 
system: Low confidence, high exposure. Pew Latino Center, Washington, 
D.C.
95 Maxson, C. L., Hennigan, K., & Sloane, D. C. (2003). Factors that 
influence public opinion of the police. US Department of Justice, Office 
of Justice Programs, National Institute of Justice.
96 Bureau of Justice Statistics. (2005). Contacts between police and the 
public.
97 Lopez, M. H., & Livingston, G. (2009). Latinos and the criminal justice 
system: Low confidence, high exposure. Pew Latino Center.
98 Pantoja, A. (2014, May). Poll shows major support among Latinos for 
sentencing reform. Latino Decisions.
99 Hajnal, Z., & Baldassare, M. (2001). Finding common ground: racial 
and ethnic attitudes in California. Public Policy Institute of California.
100 Huo, Y. J., & Tyler, T. R. (2000). How different ethnic groups react to 
legal authority. Public Policy Institute of California.
101Carlson, D. K. (2004). Racial profiling seen as pervasive, unjust. The 
Gallup Poll Tuesday Briefing, 16.
102 Ibid.
103 Theodore, N. (2013). Insecure communities: Latino perception of 
police involvement in immigration enforcement. University of Illinois at 
Chicago: Department of Urban Planning and Policy.
104 Lopez, M. H., Morin, R., & Taylor, P. (2010, October 28). Illegal 
immigration backlash worries, divides Latinos. Pew Latino Center.
105 White, J. (2013, October 6). New state law limits immigration holds to 
serious crimes. Sacramento Bee. 
  @SAFEANDJUST    SAFEANDJUST.ORG   //   31