BRIEF   •   OCTOBER  2025 
Medicaid Work Requirements Implementation Series 
Aligning Work Requirements Across SNAP and 
Medicaid to Support Public Benefit Continuity 
he Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) is the nation’s largest nutrition assistance 
program, providing over 22 million low-income households with the purchasing power to buy the 
food essential for their health and well-being. The 2025 budget reconciliation bill (H.R. 1, now 
P.L. 119-21), signed into law on July 4, 2025, includes provisions to reduce federal spending on SNAP by 
almost $187 billion over the next 10 years (FY2025-2034), marking the largest funding reduction in the 
program’s history. These reductions will be achieved through expanded work requirements and other 
significant changes to the program. 
What’s the issue? The SNAP reductions 
coincide with future reductions in federal Medicaid 
spending, also enacted through H.R. 1, which 
includes new work requirements for certain adults 
covered through Medicaid expansion. SNAP and 
Medicaid serve largely overlapping low-income 
populations including individuals and families who 
often experience economic hardship and poorer 
health as a result. 
Meeting SNAP work requirements exempts 
individuals from Medicaid work requirements. However, expanded SNAP work requirements may lead to 
fewer people qualifying for SNAP, and thus fewer qualifying as “specifically excluded” from Medicaid work 
requirements. As such, coordination between these programs is essential to ensure continued access to 
food and health care services for those who remain eligible. Without support and coordinated 
implementation efforts, these policy changes may present challenges for individuals navigating program 
requirements, potentially affecting access to benefits and worsening health outcomes. 
What do new SNAP Work Requirements look like? Prior to the passing of the 2025 budget 
reconciliation bill, SNAP had two sets of work requirements: general work requirements and the able-bodied 
adult without dependents (ABAWD) work requirements. This latter group had to meet a certain set of 
requirements to receive SNAP for longer than three months over three years. The bill’s passing significantly 
expanded these requirements through: 
• Expanded Age Range for ABAWDs: The age range for ABAWDs previously applied to adults aged 18 to 54 
and now extends to individuals up to 64 years of age (Note: ABAWDs largely overlaps with those targeted 
by Medicaid work requirements).  
T 
MEDICAID WORK REQUIREMENTS 
IMPLEMENTATION SERIES 
With new federal work requirements for Medicaid 
eligibility enacted, states have an opportunity to 
design strategies that mitigate the risk of 
unintended disenrollment. This series from the 
Center for Health Care Strategies (CHCS) offers 
actionable approaches to support implementation 
that minimizes administrative burden and is 
informed by the experiences of Medicaid members. 


BRIEF   •   Aligning Work Requirements Across SNAP and Medicaid to Support Public Benefit Continuity 
 
 
CHCS.org 
 
2 
• New Requirements for Parents and Caretakers: Parents or caregivers whose youngest dependent child 
is 14 or older are now subject to work requirements. This is a change from previous rules where parents 
with children of any age were generally exempt. 
• Removal of Exemptions for Specific Vulnerable Groups: H.R. 1 removes previous exemptions for 
veterans, individuals experiencing homelessness, and youth aging out of foster care. These groups are 
now required to meet work requirements to maintain their SNAP eligibility.  
• Harder to Obtain Waivers: States can only waive requirements in areas where the unemployment rate 
exceeds 10 percent. 
Exhibit 1. Comparing SNAP and Medicaid Work Requirements as Outlined in H.R. 1 
Category 
SNAP 
Medicaid 
Implementation 
Timeline 
November 1, 2025, with existing ABAWD waivers 
terminating 30 days from October 3, 2025 
December 31, 2026, or sooner through 
1115 waivers 
Work 
Requirements 
• General work requirements: 30 hours per week 
• ABAWD Work Requirement: 80 hours per month  
80 hours per month 
Population 
• General work requirements: Ages 16-59 
• ABAWD Work Requirement: Ages 18-64 
Adults aged 19-64  
Exemptions 
• Indian Health Service members 
• Caregivers (dependent child under the age of 
14 or somebody with a disability) 
• Individuals already meeting work requirements 
under TANF or unemployment compensation 
• Individuals participating in a qualifying 
substance use disorder (SUD) treatment 
program 
• Pregnant individuals 
• Medically certified as unable to work due to 
physical or mental limitation 
• Studying in school or a training program at 
least half time 
• Indian Health Service members 
• Caregivers (dependent child under the age of 
13 or someone with a disability) 
• Individuals already meeting work requirements 
under SNAP or TANF 
• Individuals participating in a qualifying 
substance use disorder (SUD) treatment 
program 
• Pregnant and postpartum individuals 
• Disabled veterans 
• Medically frail individuals (definition 
forthcoming from HHS) 
• Foster youth and former foster youth under the 
age of 26 
• Incarcerated or recently incarcerated 
individuals 
• Short-term hardship 
Outreach 
State agencies must provide households with 
written notice and oral explanation at 
certification, recertification and whenever a new 
household member becomes subject to work 
requirements 
Notice required in writing and one additional 
form of communication between June 30 and 
August 31, 2026 
Verification 
Process 
Look forward 
One- to three-month look back period and data 
matching 
Impact Estimates 
Two million people estimated to lose some SNAP 
benefits due to implementation of work 
requirements 
4.8 million people estimated to lose Medicaid 
coverage due to implementation of work 
requirements 
For a more comprehensive crosswalk of SNAP and Medicaid work requirements, please see this table from the American Public 
Human Services Association. 


BRIEF   •   Aligning Work Requirements Across SNAP and Medicaid to Support Public Benefit Continuity 
 
 
CHCS.org 
 
3 
Other SNAP Changes in H.R.1  
Beyond work requirements, which extends to more categories of recipients than ever before, the following 
provides an overview of additional changes to SNAP eligibility, benefits, and program administration that aim 
to reduce federal spending, as outlined in H.R. 1: 
• Increases state financial burden: Reduces federal contributions to states’ SNAP food benefit costs for 
states with error rates greater than 5% and shifts administrative costs to states from 50% to 75%. States 
are projected to double or even triple their current share of SNAP funding, with some facing increases of 
over 700%, or otherwise significantly reduce program availability overall. 
• Utility allowance cuts: Changes how utility expenses are calculated for non-elderly or disabled 
households, likely leading to decreased monthly SNAP benefit amounts. 
• Limitations on future benefit increases: Restricts future updates to the Thrifty Food Plan, the basis for 
calculating SNAP benefits, which may lead to SNAP benefits increasing by less over time. 
• SNAP-Ed Eliminated: Terminates federal funding for SNAP-Ed, reducing support around evidence-based 
nutrition education for SNAP participants. 
• Changes to immigrant eligibility: Limits eligibility to U.S. citizens and lawful permanent residents and 
excludes certain immigrant groups like refugees and people seeking asylum. 
What are Opportunities for SNAP and Medicaid Alignment 
and Partnership? 
Alignment and partnership across SNAP and Medicaid are critical to support the streamlined implementation 
of work requirements and facilitate continuous access to food and health care coverage for the individuals 
and families who rely on these programs. 
Coordinate Medicaid-SNAP Work Requirement Verification Systems 
To streamline processes and minimize unnecessary state expenditures, state Medicaid and SNAP-
administering agencies can better coordinate work requirement verification systems. This will look 
different in each state based on that state’s level of data integration. State data systems exist on a 
continuum from fully integrated, to aligned systems (i.e., processing dates), to no integration at all.  
States with fully integrated systems can incorporate work-requirement-specific tracking and processes into 
their existing systems. States with aligned systems or no current integration can develop new data-sharing 
agreements to ensure work requirement verification is integrated efficiently and accurately across 
programs. State Medicaid agencies in aligned or non-integrated states can also leverage SNAP Eligibility 
and Enrollment (E&E) systems and SNAP Employment and Training (E&T) systems to screen for individuals 
completing SNAP work requirements and automatically exempt them from Medicaid work requirements. 
States can leverage ex parte verification processes at all levels of integration to streamline eligibility and 
compliance efforts. This approach enables states to use available information to verify a member’s status, 
minimizing the need for additional action from the member. Ex parte verification can help identify 


BRIEF   •   Aligning Work Requirements Across SNAP and Medicaid to Support Public Benefit Continuity 
 
 
CHCS.org 
 
4 
members who qualify for work requirement exemptions and coordinate the verification process for those 
who are subject to requirements. Most states already use ex parte methods for determining SNAP/Medicaid 
eligibility and it is a useful strategy for reducing administrative burdens for both state eligibility workers 
and members.  
H.R. 1 appropriates $400 million to support work requirement implementation, with $200 million 
designated for direct distribution to states. States can leverage this funding to develop or bolster existing 
data verification systems. 
Invest in Cross-Trained Workforce 
At the staff level, states can invest in training eligibility workers and benefits specialists on eligibility 
criteria, work requirements, and exemptions across SNAP and Medicaid. This training can better equip 
staff to support individuals navigating these systems, reduce applicant burden, and improve 
administrative efficiencies. Investments could include technical assistance, such as live chat support or 
service representatives on phones, to provide a consistent resource for individuals facing work 
requirements. These efforts can increase the likelihood of eligible individuals keeping SNAP or Medicaid 
benefits and avoid the more time-consuming re-enrollment process, which is often more complex than a 
renewal in either program. A well-trained staff could also help reduce outreach costs by providing more 
accurate and efficient service and minimizing confusion around work requirement verification upfront. 
At the leadership level, although SNAP and Medicaid are administered by different federal agencies and 
governed by distinct state regulations, there is an opportunity for alignment across agencies, given that 
many state Medicaid agencies and SNAP offices operate within the same government buildings and/or 
under the same parent agency. State leaders can develop cross-agency advisory committees and host 
regularly scheduled meetings for policy discussions and problem-solving related to the implementation 
of work requirements. Such cross-agency efforts can foster improved communication and a more 
coordinated approach to improving member experience as they navigate new work requirements. 
Partner with Community-Based Organizations 
Community-based organizations (CBOs) can also serve as trusted resources for work requirement support 
for both SNAP and Medicaid. CBOs can invest in staff training on H.R. 1 changes, use their communications 
channels to raise awareness about new work requirements with the communities they serve, and provide 
hands-on support for individuals meeting work requirements and verifying work and volunteer 
opportunities. For example, food banks —  serving primarily low-income populations eligible for SNAP and 
Medicaid — are well positioned to serve a one-stop shop around work requirements. They can educate 
people about the new requirements, connect them to employment or volunteer opportunities, and offer 
on-site case workers to assist with work requirement verification. Organizations like Feeding America, the 
largest network of food banks in the nation, are well positioned for providing work requirement supports 
across communities. 


BRIEF   •   Aligning Work Requirements Across SNAP and Medicaid to Support Public Benefit Continuity 
 
 
CHCS.org 
 
5 
Looking Ahead 
Access to SNAP and Medicaid is critical to maintaining health and well-being. Aligning work requirement 
verification and other processes across these programs can reduce the administrative burden for state staff 
and enrollees, making it easier for individuals to retain their public benefit coverage and avoid unnecessary 
disruptions in care and support.   
At the same time, recent changes to how food insecurity is tracked at the federal level may complicate 
efforts to evaluate the impact of these policy shifts. In September 2025, the U.S. Department of Agriculture 
announced it would discontinue its annual Household Food Security Report — a key source of consistent 
data on hunger and food access. While alternative data sources may be developed, the change underscores 
the need for coordinated implementation and evaluation to ensure reforms do not unintentionally disrupt 
access to essential supports. 
 
 
ABOUT THE CENTER FOR HEALTH CARE STRATEGIES 
The Center for Health Care Strategies (CHCS) is a policy design and implementation partner devoted to 
improving outcomes for people enrolled in Medicaid. CHCS supports partners across sectors and 
disciplines to make more effective, efficient, and equitable care possible for millions of people across 
the nation. For more information, visit www.chcs.org.