Hispanic and Latino Populations and the
Criminal Justice System 
Published by The National Hispanic and Latino PTTC 
Date of publication: May 2023
Introduction
 
This mini e-book was developed to provide information and
resources to prevention professionals, providers, and community
members about the intersectionality between the criminal justice
system, mental health, substance use, and Hispanic/Latino
communities.
At the end of the document, you will find resources from trusted
sources and action and prevention tips to better support our
communities on the issue. 
We hope this resource is useful for you, and we hope you can share
the information with your family, friends, and colleagues.
Inclusivity Statement
The National Hispanic and Latino PTTC understands that there is a lot of important discussion focusing on the
terminology individuals choose to use for racial, ethnic, heritage, and cultural identification. Different terms,
such as Latinos, Latinas, Hispanics, Latinx, Latine, Chicano, and others, are all equally valuable. We advocate
for self-identification for every person. For purposes of this resource and additional materials, our Center will
be using the term Latina and Hispanic.


Introduction..............................................................................
How Does Incarceration Affect the Hispanic and Latino
Communities?..........................................................................
What is the relation with Substance Use?................................
What is the connection with Mental Health issues?.................
Message of Hope and Resources............................................
Resources................................................................................
References...............................................................................
Acknowledgment......................................................................
TABLE OF CONTENTS
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
4


INTRODUCTION
Racism, discrimination, and xenophobia are ever-present tools fueled by U.S. white
nationalism that has always been used against Latino populations but have
significantly increased in prevalence since 2016. In addition to the blatant racist
rhetoric propagated by former U.S. President Donald Trump, there has been a rise
in the alt-right conservative movement. Publicly broadcasting messages about
Latino communities resulted in severe consequences, including increased contact
with the legal system. 
Of the 62.3 million Latinos in the United States, 56% have had some contact with the
legal system and are often at risk of being targeted by police. Further, 44% of
Latinos are more likely to be convicted of property and non-violent offenses than
white citizens. 
 
In 2021, Latinos represented 20% of the prison and local jail population nationwide
but only represented 19% of the total U.S. population. Whites, who make up 76% of
the U.S. population, comprise 37% of the prison population. 
Further breaking down these statistics, Hispanic men are four times more likely to go
to prison than non-Hispanic white males, and Hispanic women are three times more
likely to serve a prison sentence than white women during their lifetimes. 
Additionally, when arrested, most Latino individuals are more likely to be given
higher bail amounts and are 33% less likely to be able to meet bail. Although these
statistics may raise questions regarding individual or community concerns within
Latino-identifying spaces, the primary issue is the historical and current conditions
that have allowed and justified the criminalization of minorities.
The fact that many incarcerated individuals are Latino has no doubt been influenced
by the lingering effects of redlining (being forced to live in substandard housing due
to financial constraints), the school-to-prison pipeline, and the general lack of access
to concrete support services. 
3
4
1
3
2,
2
3,
5,6
2


HOW DOES INCARCERATION AFFECT THE HISPANIC AND
LATINO COMMUNITIES?
The conditions in correctional facilities pose a high risk to Latino's health and safety
due to confinement and incarceration stress and physical injuries caused by fights
threatening their reintegration into their communities. Latinos integrating into society
face adversities that may increase recidivism risk factors, such as re-engagement in
criminal behavior and substance misuse. However, they often lack access to
services and support to address these behavioral health issues.  
 
There is a strong correlation between family, social, and community support and
emotional-cognitive regulation and healing throughout their involvement with the
criminal justice system. Without meaningful social and systems-based support and
actual opportunities to take accountability for the offense, formerly incarcerated
individuals may continue exhibiting high-risk behaviors that could lead to recidivism.
Ultimately, access to structural resources and support is one of the most crucial
protective factors for the Latino community. 
WHAT IS THE RELATION WITH SUBSTANCE USE? 
Despite the difficulty of determining the exact number of inmates suffering from
substance use disorders (SUDs), some research indicates that approximately 65%
of the prison population has an active SUD. Furthermore, 20% of incarcerated
individuals were under the influence of drugs or alcohol when they committed their
crime but did not meet the official SUD criteria. 
 
A study conducted in California on individuals with SUDs involved in the criminal
justice system indicated that Latinos were less likely to express the need for
treatment or participate in treatment than individuals from other ethnicities. 
National surveys indicate that Latinos have less access than other Americans to
substance misuse treatment or must wait longer to access such services. Once they
enter treatment, they are less satisfied with the services they receive, leading to
unsuccessful treatment and recovery journeys.
4
8
7
7
9
9


Studies have shown that treatment for substance misuse in the criminal justice
system during and after incarceration has significantly reduced substance misuse
and related crimes. However, less than 20% of incarcerated individuals with drug
misuse or dependence receive formal treatment. 
An analysis of correctional programs and organizations throughout the country found
that most correctional agencies provide treatment for substance misuse. However,
the median percentage of incarcerated individuals eligible for these services is
typically less than 10%. Even then, the individuals with access to treatment while
incarcerated do not receive post-incarceration treatment, which is essential to
recovery and reduced recidivism rates.
WHAT IS THE CONNECTION WITH MENTAL HEALTH ISSUES?
According to the National Survey on Drug Use and Health, 56.8% of Hispanic and
Latino young adults (ages 18–25) and 39.6% of adults (ages 26–49) did not receive
the treatment they needed for mental illness.  
Furthermore, the same study reports that 90% of Hispanic and Latino substance use
disorder patients did not receive care. This is important to note as Hispanics aged 18
and over with mental illness are more likely to have co-occurring substance misuse
disorders. 
However, services often attempting to address these comorbid disorders have
significant gaps in care and communication, contributing to a disconnect in services
overall, especially for the incarcerated Hispanic and Latino populations, as access to
treatment becomes more unattainable. The overwhelming lack of care and
combined stressors experienced by incarcerated individuals can ultimately elevate
mental and behavioral health issues. 
5
10
10
11
11,12
12


MESSAGE OF HOPE AND RESOURCES 
The League of United Latin American Citizens (LULAC) recognizes laws, policies,
and practices in the criminal justice system. They research racial profiling and the
disproportionate application of mandatory minimums. LULAC makes efforts to
reduce incarceration, reform practices that disproportionately impact communities of
color, create safe environments for all communities, and build trust between law
enforcement and the communities they serve and protect.  
 
The most hopeful message for Latino populations regarding their intersection with
the criminal justice system is prison abolition. Abolitionist perspectives argue that
attempts to reform the carceral system do not adequately target the root of harm for
minority communities.
The criminal justice system disrupts communities with policing, dehumanizing
individuals with a violent and isolating prison system and preventing a meaningful
return to society by withholding and disenfranchising opportunities when an
individual is released. For example, Latino immigrants and most impoverished Latino
individuals are disproportionate targets of policing, police violence, arrest and
sentence times for non-violent crimes, and exploitation and violence upon
incarceration.
Abolition movements, such as those embodied by the National Compadres Network,
seek to mitigate these outcomes by holding the criminal justice system accountable
for the harm it causes to Hispanic and Latino communities, applying political and
social pressure to dismantle prisons and policing, and implementing community-
based intervention practices.
6
13
2
13
13


RESOURCES
Additional Resources 
You can visit the following websites for additional support and information. 
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA)
5600 Fishers Lane
Rockville, MD 20857
Toll-free: 1–877–SAMHSA–7 (1–877–726–4727)
TTY: 1–800–487–4889
Email: samhsainfo@samhsa.hhs.gov
SAMHSA Store: https://store.samhsa.gov
SAMHSA Disaster Technical Assistance Center
Toll-free: 1–800–308–3515
Email: dtac@samhsa.hhs.gov
Website: https://www.samhsa.gov/dtac
SAMHSA Disaster Mobile App
Website: https://store.samhsa.gov/product/samhsa-disaster
SAMHSA Disaster Distress Helpline
Toll-free talk or text: 1–800–985–5990
Español: Llama o envía un mensaje de texto
1–800–985–5990 presiona “2”.
American Sign Language (ASL): Click on the “ASL Now” button on the website or call 1–
800–985–5990 from your videophone.
Website: https://disasterdistress.samhsa.gov
7


Latinos and Racism in the Trump Era
LULAC - Criminal Justice Reform
Correctional Populations in the United States, 2021 – Statistical Tables
United States Census Bureau
Hispanic Prisoners in the United States
Incarcerated Women and Girls
The Assets and Challenges of Formerly Incarcerated Latino Men’s Social Support Networks in Promoting Healthy Behaviors
Criminal Justice Drug Facts
Substance Abuse Prevalence and Treatment Among Latinos and Latinas
Treating Drug Abuse and Addiction in the Criminal Justice System: Improving Public Health and Safety
2018 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: Hispanics, Latino or Spanish Origin or Descent
The Relationship Between Community Public health, Behavioral Health Service Accessibility, and Mass Incarceration
National Compadres Network Mission and Purpose
RESOURCES
988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline
Call or text: 988
Chat: 988lifeline.org
(Español) Línea de Prevención del Suicidio y Crisis: 988
For TTY users: Use your preferred relay service or dial
711 and then 988.
Website: https://988lifeline.org
Website (español): https://988lifeline.org/help-yourself/en-espanol
SAMHSA’s National Helpline
Toll-free: 1–800–662–HELP (1–800–662–4357) (24/7/365
treatment referral information service in English and español)
TTY: 1–800–487–4889
Website: https://www.samhsa.gov/find-help/national-helpline
REFERENCES
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
8


ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Published in 2023 by the National Hispanic and Latino Prevention Technology Transfer
Center (PTTC), National Latino Behavioral Health Association (NLBHA) P.O. Box 1360,
Pena Blanca, NM 87041. 
PTTCnetwork.org/hispaniclatino 
This resource was prepared for the National Hispanic and Latino Prevention Technology
Transfer Center (PTTC), under a cooperative agreement from the Substance Abuse and
Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA). All material appearing in this
publication, except that taken directly from copyrighted sources, is in the public domain
and may be reproduced or copied without permission from SAMHSA or the authors.
Citation of the source is appreciated. Do not reproduce or distribute this publication for a
fee without specific, written authorization from National Hispanic and Latino Prevention
Technology Transfer Center (PTTC). For more information on obtaining copies of this
publication, call 720-607-7897. 
At the time of this publication, Miriam E. Delphin-Rittmon, Ph. D, served as Assistant
Secretary for Mental Health and Substance Use in the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services and the Administrator of the Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration. 
The opinions expressed herein are the view of PTTC Network and do not reflect the official
position of the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), SAMHSA. No official
support or endorsement of DHHS, SAMHSA, for the opinions described in this document is
intended or should be inferred. 
This work is supported by grants 1U79SP023012 from the Department of Health and
Human Services, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. 
Published 2023.
9