Patient Safety Learning stands with others around the world to celebrate International Women’s Day (8 March). The campaign theme for 2025 is ‘Accelerate Action’ and is a worldwide call to acknowledge strategies, resources and activity that positively impact women's advancement.
In this blog, we explore four key areas of patient safety relating to women’s health, where we believe action needs to be accelerated:
- Pain management.
- Waiting times for elective gynaecology care.
- Redress for harmed patients.
- Disparities in maternal outcomes.
Evidence shows that women are in pain more often and more severely than men.[1] [2]They are also more likely to have their pain dismissed or underestimated[3], with racial biases leaving Black women particularly vulnerable.[4] These inequities can prolong women’s suffering of both acute and chronic pain, can and lead to delays in diagnoses and treatment. Women’s pain is dismissed in areas of healthcare relevant to both men and women, for example cardiology,[5] as well as in areas specific to the female body, for example gynaecology or maternity.[6]
At Patient Safety Learning, we have heard too many accounts of patients attending gynaecology procedures where they have experienced unexpected high levels of pain that has not been managed or responded to appropriately.[7] [8] [9] [10] In many cases, these experiences have led to an erosion of trust in the healthcare system and an increased anxiety in attending future appointments that may play a critical role in their outcomes.
There is no nationally adopted, standardised patient feedback collection around pain experiences in gynaecology procedures. If patient-reported outcome measures were routinely collected, this data could be used by healthcare organisations to help identify the scale of harm and amplify the voices of the women affected so that pain is better managed and no one is at risk of trauma. These feedback mechanisms need to be co-designed with those who have lived experience to ensure the data being captured is meaningful, is designed to identify inequalities and used to improve care for all women.
Most importantly, whatever the setting, it is critical that women’s experiences of pain whether chronic or acute, are listened to, believed and appropriately responded to. Patients should be empowered with the information, compassion and respect needed to place them at the heart of the decision making around their pain management.
A 2022 report from the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists showed the number of women waiting over a year for elective gynaecology care in England had increased from 66 before the pandemic to nearly 25,000.[11] Their follow up report in 2024 showed that waiting lists had worsened in all parts of the UK, with those living in areas of deprivation most likely to wait longest.[12]
With debilitating conditions like endometriosis, already notorious for taking many years to diagnose,[13] [14] evidence of continued setbacks in this area, rather than progress, is devastating. Women seeking help and treatment for life-limiting symptoms are being left without the support they need and fearful that their health will worsen. This often has a negative repercussion on other areas of life, including relationships, work and mental health.[15]
The Women’s Health Strategy published in 2022 sets out plans for the roll-out of women’s health hubs to provide a ‘one-stop shop’, where services are centred on women’s needs, better coordination of care and reducing the elective backlog.[16] The Strategy notes the wide and varied range of stakeholders that will need to be involved in this effort and states that the Government” will develop a delivery plan for the commitments set out in this strategy”. However, there is currently no timetable for this, or indication of what resources may be allocated to support this work.
Despite some early evidence of their success in reducing waiting times,[17] there are concerns that central support for the women’s health hubs has recently been removed,[18] [19] and that women’s health has been deprioritised in the NHS health plans.[20]
Women’s health needs to urgently be prioritised and invested in to address the worsening wait times for gynaecological care. Healthcare professionals must be given access to the resources needed to be able to provide high quality, safe care to all women so that inequalities do not continue to widen. Without this, patients will continue to suffer avoidable pain and are at risk of further harm relating to their physical and mental health outcomes.
Last year the Patient Safety Commissioner for England published The Hughes Report, which sets out options for redress for those who have been harmed by valproate and pelvic mesh.[21]
Patient Safety Learning believes, like many individual patients and patient groups, that there must be redress options for patients harmed by the interventions covered by The Independent Medicines and Medical Devices Safety (IMMDS) Review.[22] There is considerable evidence that for many patients the clinical negligence route is simply not viable. In the absence of any system of redress, this leaves them with no assistance to help meet the cost of any additional care and support they may need.
We also believe that redress should extend to those affected by hormone pregnancy tests, who fell outside of the scope of The Hughes Report’s recommendations. Excluding patients and family members affected by hormone pregnancy tests from redress is not acceptable or in keeping with the spirit of the IMMDS Review’s recommendations.
We believe the Government must respond to this report promptly and take steps to deliver redress for all those affected by pelvic mesh, sodium valproate and hormone pregnancy tests as a matter of urgency.
The ‘Saving Lives, Improving Mothers' Care annual reports include:
- data on women who died during or up to one year after pregnancy in the UK
- lessons learned from the UK and Ireland confidential enquiries into maternal deaths and morbidity.[23]
The most recent report[24] highlights a continuation of inequalities with maternal mortality rates three times as high for women from Black ethnic backgrounds and twice as high for women from Asian ethnic backgrounds when compared to White women. The data also showed that women living in the most deprived areas of the UK and Ireland were twice as likely to die compared to those living in the least deprived areas.
The report also highlighted barriers to accessing maternity care for women who had recently arrived in the UK. Many didn’t get the support they needed to understand how to register with a GP to start receiving maternity care and would present for the first time in an emergency setting. Language and literacy barriers were also evident, with patient needs being poorly assessed, recorded and met. The availability of interpreters and accessible written information was inconsistent.
It is clear that a continued focus is needed to ensure disparities in maternity are better understood and addressed. All women have the right to access safe maternity care, free from racism, bias and a postcode lottery. Access to information in an accessible format that enables women to give consent to interventions and make decisions about their health and the health of their babies is also vital.[25] Translation capabilities within the health service must be prioritised and properly resourced across the board for these inequalities to be addressed.
There are many barriers to women receiving safe and equitable care. This blog has touched on just a few of the areas where action needs to be accelerated. We must recognise there are complex inter-relationships that compound these issues – intersectionality is an essential consideration. It is important to look at all variables in order to effectively identify the barriers and solutions to safer and more equitable care.
In the coming months, we hope to see the importance of patient safety in women’s health emphasised and supported through the development of the NHS 10 Year Health Plan. The Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists has also recently launched a project to identify the most pressing unanswered questions in the health of women and people from the perspective of members of the public themselves.[26] We look forward to hearing more about their findings.
We continue to await the Government’s response to the Hughes Report and to support the IMMDS Review’s recommendations for redress for those who have been harmed by valproate, pelvic mesh and hormone pregnancy tests.
Helen Hughes, Chief Executive Officer of Patient Safety Learning says:
“All patients have the right to access safe care, free from avoidable pain and harm. Women’s health has for centuries been side-lined and action must be accelerated now to address the inequities and barriers that continue to exist. This has to start with a focus on listening to and believing women when they share their experiences. Where harm has occurred, it is vital that we learn from the mistakes made and that this harm is appropriately responded to”.
[1] Nurofen. Gender Pain Gap Index Report Year 3. Oct 2024.
[2] Editorial. Gendered pain: a call for recognition and health equity. eClinicalMedicine Mar 2024 Vol 69.
[3] C de C Williams, A. Analysis: Women’s pain is routinely underestimated, and gender stereotypes are to blame. The Conversation. Apr 2021.
[4] Hoffman KM, Trawalter S, Axt JR et al. Racial bias in pain assessment and treatment recommendations, and false beliefs about biological differences between blacks and whites. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 Apr 19;113.
[5] Nabel EG. Coronary heart disease in women--an ounce of prevention. N Engl J Med. 2000 Aug 24;343.
[6] J. H. Bamber, R. Goldacre, D. N. Lucas et al. A national cohort study to investigate the association between ethnicity and the provision of care in obstetric anaesthesia in England between 2011 and 2021. Anaesthesia, 78(7), 820-829.
[7] Patient Safety Learning - the hub. Painful hysteroscopy. Community forum - accessed 03/03/25.
[8] Patient Safety Learning - the hub. Pain during IUD fitting. Community forum- accessed 03/03/25.
[9] Cohen, L. The pain of my IUD fitting was horrific…and I’m not alone. Patient Safety Learning - the hub. Jun 2021.
[10] Anonymous. My experience of an IUD insertion: frozen with shock - no one was asking if I was OK. Patient Safety Learning - the hub. Jan 2025.
[11] Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Left for too long. 2022.
[12] Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Waiting for a way forward. 2024.
[13] Endometriosis UK. “Dismissed, ignored and belittled”. The long road to endometriosis diagnosis in the UK. Mar 2024.
[14] All Party Parliamentary Group (APPG) on Endometriosis. APPG on Endometriosis Inquiry Report 2020. Endometriosis in the UK: time for change. 2020.
[15] Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. New RCOG report reveals devastating impact of UK gynaecology care crisis on women and NHS staff. Nov 2024/
[16] NHS England. Women's Health Strategy for England. Aug 2022.
[17] Crouch, H. Women's Health Hub aims to reduce wait lists for gynaecology. Barts Health NHS Trust. Nov 2024.
[18] Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. RCOG responds to reports that central support for women’s health hubs will end. Jan 2025.
[19] Donnelly, L. Wes Streeting dumps women's health target from NHS plan. The Telegraph online. Jan 2025.
[20] NHS England. NHS England 2025/26 priorities and operational planning guidance. Jan 2025.
[21] Patient Safety Commissioner. The Hughes Report: Options for redress for those harmed by valproate and pelvic mesh. Feb 2024.
[22] Cumberlege, J. First Do No Harm. The report of the Independent Medicines and Medical Devices Safety Review. July 2020.
[23] The National Perinatal Epidemiology Unit, MBRRACE-UK. Saving Lives, Improving Mothers' Care annual reports.
[24] The National Perinatal Epidemiology Unit, MBRRACE-UK. Saving Lives, Improving Mothers' Care 2024 - Lessons learned to inform maternity care from the UK and Ireland Confidential Enquiries into Maternal Deaths and Morbidity 2020-22. Oct 2024.
[25] NHS England. Accessible Information Standard (updated Aug 2017).
[26] Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Women's Health Research Priorities (WHRP). Jan 2025.