Explaining the Sexual Orientation Gap in Educational Attainment
Marta Murray-Close ∗
Alyssa Schneebaum †
November 19, 2018
Abstract
This paper uses data from three nationally representative US surveys to conﬁrm previous ﬁndings
that lesbians and gay men are more educated than heterosexual men and women and to assesses the
plausibility of ﬁve potential explanations for this diﬀerence: highly educated lesbians and gay men
are more likely to “come out”; sexual minorities diﬀer demographically, earn higher wage returns
to education, or have diﬀerent expectations about their future partners’ income; and education is a
gateway to more tolerant workplaces. The only explanation that is supported for both lesbians and
gay men highlights a non-pecuniary return to schooling: access to more tolerant workplaces.
∗U.S Census Bureau. Email: marta.murray.close@census.gov. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors
and do not reﬂect the oﬃcial views of the U.S. Census Bureau.
†Vienna University of Economics and Business. Email: alyssa.schneebaum@wu.ac.at. Schneebaum gratefully acknowl-
edges funding for this research from the Austrian Science Fund (FWF), grant number T 714-G11.


1
Introduction
Education is a key determinant of social and economic status, and diﬀerences in educational attain-
ment across demographic groups may improve or depress the relative well-being of minority groups. In
this paper, we use three nationally representative datasets to study the educational attainment of a
large minority group in the US, lesbians and gay men. Descriptive statistics in the literature on the
socio-economics of sexual orientation have often shown that the average lesbian and gay man has more
education than the average heterosexual woman and man. This is the ﬁrst paper to explore the reasons
why there is a sexual orientation education gap.
There are several reasons to study the educational attainment of lesbian and gay (LG) people and ask
why it may diﬀer from heterosexuals.1 First, the LG community is a growing subset of the US population
(Gallup Poll, 2017), and as with any group with particular social and economic circumstances, it is
important to understand how its members experience the economy and society. Second, LG people may
be an interesting reference point to see the direction in which the broader population (heterosexuals) is
developing in terms of economic behavior. Diﬀerent-sex couples exhibit patterns on a household division
of labor which have become increasingly similar to those of same-sex couples over time (Giddings et
al., 2014), and the concept of a “double income no kids” model of family economic life, in which both
partners work for pay and reproduction is put oﬀuntil later in life – as much as this is a standing myth
for the broader lesbian and gay population (Badgett, 2001) – is taken up by ever more diﬀerent-sex
couples (Ruggles, 2015; Trimarchi and Bavel, forthcoming).
It is also interesting to study LG education because the educational decisions made by this group
may be able to tell us something about educational investments in general. We look for evidence con-
sistent with several hypotheses to explain the sexual orientation education gap, including two based on
long-standing mainstream theories of educational investments. The ﬁve potential explanations for the
educational gap are based on diﬀerent strands of literature and reasoning. Exploring decisions regarding
the investment in education in this multi-pronged way can give important insight into the value that
various groups put on obtaining education.
In particular, we assess the extent to which each of the following ﬁve issues can help explain the sexual
orientation education gap, in the interest of ruling out implausible hypotheses and laying a foundation
for future research focused on the most plausible hypotheses. First, we test whether the higher levels of
educational attainment for lesbians and gay men are due to selection bias in who “comes out,” that is,
who reveals their sexual orientation, on survey data. If more highly educated LG people are more likely
to come out, perhaps because they are in a more economically and socially secure position to do so,
then the gaps we observe are capturing an artifact of a select group, not representative of the entire LG
1As we discuss in section 3 below, sexual orientation is a complex concept, and our empirical measures may be both
over- and under-inclusive with respect to the lesbian and gay population. For ease of exposition, however, we use the terms
“lesbian” and “gay” and the abbreviation “LG” throughout the paper.
1


population. Second, we assess whether the diﬀerences in educational attainment by sexual orientation
are driven by diﬀering demographic characteristics across the LG and heterosexual populations. If LG
people are younger, for example, and younger birth cohorts are more highly educated, then the sexual
orientation education gap could be driven by this fact.
The next two hypotheses are standard in the literature on human capital accumulation. Our third
test examines if LG people invest more in their education because they have higher wage returns to
their education than heterosexuals. If LG people were paid more for an additional degree or for more
years of schooling (perhaps because extra schooling serves as a barrier to wage discrimination for LG
people), then it would be no wonder than LG people make higher investments in their education. Fourth,
LG people may make their education decisions based on expectations of later household earnings and a
household division of labor. Lesbians, knowing that they will partner with a woman and that women
earn less than men, may choose to get more education to protect against this lower future household
income. Gay men, who will partner with another men, may choose to get less education, knowing that
their partner will likely earn more than a female partner would.
Finally, our ﬁfth hypothesis considers the possibility that the returns to education do not only take
the form of pecuniary rewards, but that education may also open doors to jobs in workplaces which
are more tolerant and accepting of sexual minorities. If more educated people have access to jobs in
workplaces with more tolerant co-workers, then LG people would have an incentive to invest more in
their education. Especially for sexual minority groups who face discrimination and even the threat of
violence (Badgett et al., 2007), access to jobs in which one’s colleagues are more likely to be accepting
of diﬀerence can be very much worth more years in school.2
The paper proceeds as follows.
In section 2, we discuss previous literature which has examined
the educational attainment of LG people and explore the theory behind our ﬁve hypotheses. Section
3 describes the data and methods used to test our ﬁve hypotheses, and includes an initial test of the
existence of a sexual orientation education gap in the datasets employed. Section 4 presents the empirical
explorations of our ﬁve hypotheses. Finally, we discuss the results and conclude in section 5.
2
Background
Most empirical studies on the economics of sexual orientation have identiﬁed an education premium
for lesbians and gay men (e.g. Black et al., 2000, 2007; Antecol et al., 2008; Daneshvary et al., 2009;
Giddings et al., 2014, among others). However, none of the papers in this literature have explicitly studied
potential explanations for why LG people are more highly educated than heterosexuals. Some papers
make arguments that are somewhat related, though, and these can help make sense of the LG education
2A related ﬁnding in the literature is that gay men are more likely than heterosexual men to report having had a faculty
member or administrator while in college with whom they could discuss a problem (Carpenter, 2009). In this case, higher
education institutions could also provide more tolerant environments.
2


premium. Daneshvary et al. (2009, pp. 433-3), for example, say that “at least part of the lesbian [wage]
premium originates from lesbians’ relative freedom from constraints associated with marriage and the
gender division of labor in traditional households.” This “freedom from constraints” could also mean
that lesbians have more time to pursue an education. Moreover, Black et al. (2003) theorize that lesbians
are less likely to form traditional households than heterosexual women. Heterosexual women are thus
more likely to anticipate specializing in household production and therefore invest less in market-oriented
skills. This could be a reason why lesbians are more highly educated than heterosexual women, as we
discuss below.
In this paper, we look for evidence consistent with ﬁve potential explanations of the sexual orientation
education premium. The ﬁrst addresses the possibility that the LG education premium we observe in
survey data is simply an artifact of who we can observe in the data. If gay and lesbian people with higher
education are more likely to come out, then the education premium we observe only exists because a
select group of highly-educated LG people appear in the surveys. This selection bias might occur, for
example, if the gain in economic security that education often provides (as in Card, 1999) enables highly
educated lesbians and gay men to feel more comfortable coming out. All studies of the socioeconomics
of sexual orientation face the possibility of biased samples; we follow the test proposed by Black et al.
(2000) to examine if this bias is driving the sexual orientation education gap.
A second possible explanation of the sexual orientation education premium is that LG people have
demographic characteristics associated with higher education, and these diﬀerences drive the education
gap. As an example, people in more recent birth cohorts have higher levels of completed education, on
average, than people in earlier birth cohorts (see, for example, ﬁgure 2 in Ryan and Bauman, 2016).
If lesbians and gay men are disproportionately concentrated in more recent birth cohorts, then their
educational advantage may reﬂect intertemporal change rather than intergroup diﬀerences. There are also
important diﬀerences in educational attainment by family background. People with more highly educated
parents tend to get more education themselves (Haveman and Wolfe, 1995).
Blacks and Hispanics
complete fewer years of schooling, on average, than whites and Asians and are less likely to have a
college degree (Ryan and Bauman, 2016), and people from southern states face similar disparities relative
to people from northern states (National Information Center for Higher Education Policy Making and
Analysis, 2013). If LG people are more concentrated in higher-education groups, then the LG educational
premium is related to these characteristics, instead of some mechanism that connects sexual orientation
with investments in education directly.
Third, we consider the insights of human capital theory, which says that people pursue education
because it yields pecuniary returns in the labor market; we call this the “schooling-raises-wages” theory.
According to this theory, educational attainment may diﬀer across demographic groups because the wage
returns to education diﬀer. Research on the gender gap in college attainment, for example, has found
3


that a substantial proportion of women’s advantage in educational attainment is explained by the fact
that women earn a larger wage premium for college than men (Jacob, 2002).
Lesbians and gay men might earn higher wage returns to schooling than heterosexual women and
men for two reasons.
First, education helps sexual minorities avoid labor-market discrimination.
If
discrimination against lesbians and gay men is attenuated in jobs requiring higher levels of education,
then any wage penalty sexual minorities experience will be lower in those jobs. Consistent with this
possibility, Antecol et al. (2008) show that the relatively high human capital investments of lesbians and
gay men are an important minimizing force in sexual orientation wage discrimination.
A second reason why lesbians and gay men may earn higher wage returns to schooling is that they have
diﬀerent characteristics than heterosexuals, such as the presence of children or labor force attachment.
Fewer lesbian- and gay-headed households have children, and employers may have lower expectations
that a lesbian or gay employee will be or become parents. Lesbians are also more attached to the labor
force than heterosexual women (Antecol and Steinberger, 2013), though the evidence on the labor force
attachment of gay men compared to heterosexual men is mixed (Black et al., 2007; Orreﬁce, 2011).
Greater labor supply and a lower likelihood of having children means that gays and lesbians could be
paid more than heterosexuals for the same investments into education.
A fourth potential explanation for the higher educational attainment of LG people relies on the
thinking on household specialization from human capital models. In particular, the labor-market returns
to education depend on time spent in the labor market, which depends, in turn, on household roles. Men
are more likely to be the higher earner in heterosexual households (though this gap has been closing
(Bertrand et al., 2015)) and women more often take on the care- and housework responsibilities (Horne
et al., Forthcoming). As there is also a division of labor in same-sex couple households (Giddings et
al., 2014), we may expect people to make decisions about their human capital investments based on
expectations about a later division of labor and household income.
At the age when young people make decisions about their education – whether to ﬁnish high school,
for example, or whether to attend vocational school or college – many expect to form a household with a
spouse or partner with whom they will divide responsibilities for paid market work and unpaid household
and childcare work. Young people who expect to form a household with a high-wage partner may plan
to spend less time in the labor market themselves and, consequently, face weaker incentives to invest
in education that increases their own wage (Becker, 1991). Within this framework, we would expect
lesbians to obtain more education than heterosexual women because they expect to form a household
with a woman rather than a man and recognize that women earn lower wages, on average. By the same
reasoning, we would expect gay men to obtain less education than heterosexual men because they could
expect to form a household with a man rather a woman and recognize that men earn higher wages (Black
et al., 2003, 2007).
4


Finally, we consider the possibility that the LG education premium is driven by other incentives that
LG people have to invest in their education. In particular, LG people may pursue more education because
education may serve as a gateway to jobs in workplaces with more tolerant co-workers. Workplaces
in which employees are more highly educated, on average, may be more tolerant of minority groups,
including lesbians and gay men. This potential access to more tolerant workplaces can be thought of as
a non-pecuniary return to education; it is a protection from discrimination, as in the theory of schooling-
raises-wages, but more from a social rather than economic point of view. The tolerance of one’s coworkers
is an important workplace amenity for which lesbians and gay men may be willing to get more education
to access. Blandford (2003), for example, suggests that some “low skill” (in the sense of not needing
formal education) jobs are “macho,” and that macho occupations may be less gay-friendly.
To be sure, this paper is certainly not the ﬁrst to consider the possibility that pecuniary labor market
returns are not the only beneﬁt of more education. Michael (1973) started the literature on the non-
material returns to human capital investments with a landmark paper modeling the returns to human
capital (seen not just as education, but also as good health, knowledge about markets, and so on). These
investments, he shows, aﬀect an individual’s activities beyond the labor market, such as in his or her
voting behavior. More recent literature has continued to follow this thinking. Oreopoulos and Salvanes
(2011), for example, show that education increases job satisfaction, improves health, increases family
stability, and has consumption value. DiPrete and Bauchmann (2006) and Chiappori et al. (2009) argue
that there are important returns to investments in education, especially for women, on the marriage
market, such as an increased ability to attract a high-earning partner and/or increases bargaining power
in marriage. This paper follows in this spirit of understanding the multitudinous returns to educational
attainment, and uses these various dimensions of rewards to education in looking for an explanation of
the sexual orientation education premium.
3
Data
Sexual orientation is a complex concept, and employing appropriate data to analyze the circumstances
faces by sexual minorities is not a straightforward task.
One can understand sexual orientation as
comprising three dimensions that do not always overlap: sexual attraction, sexual behavior, and self-
proclaimed identity (Laumann et al., 1994). We examine the relationship between sexual orientation
and educational attainment using three nationally representative datasets that capture this complexity;
each measures sexual orientation in a diﬀerent way. The three datasets are the 2013-14 samples of the
Integrated Health Interview Series (IHIS) from the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS)
(Minnesota Population Center and State Health Access Data Assistance Center, 2015), the 2013 sample
of the American Community Survey (ACS) from IPUMS (Ruggles et al., 2015), and the 1988-2014
5


samples from the General Social Survey (GSS). This section describes these data in more detail.
First, the ACS is the largest of our three datasets. The data come from an annual survey conducted
by the United States Census Bureau. We use ACS data from 2013 for this analysis. As there are no
questions about sexual orientation in the ACS, we identify lesbians and gay men based on the cohabiting
relationships within a household. More speciﬁcally, if a householder identiﬁes another person of the same
sex as their spouse or unmarried partner, we consider these people to be in a same-sex couple and thus
lesbian or gay. Because of problems which may exist in the recording of responses on sex or marital
status, we drop any couple in which one or both partners have an allocation ﬂag – meaning that the
Census Bureau changed the entered response because they had reason to believe that the data entered
were not of high enough quality to accept (an unclear mark, for example) – for either sex or marital
status. For comparability, we restrict our sample of heterosexual men and women to members of married
or cohabiting diﬀerent-sex couples. Our analysis sample includes 319,125 partnered heterosexual men,
336,094 partnered heterosexual women, 4,348 partnered gay men, and 4,515 partnered lesbians.
Education in the ACS is given in terms of the highest year of school completed if a person did not
ﬁnish high school and in terms of the highest degree earned if the person is a high school graduate. For
the sections of our analysis which investigate years of schooling, we use the data on the highest degree
received to create a variable which gives the minimum number of years necessary to complete the degree.
Our measure of race includes four categories: black, white, Asian, and other race. Our ethnicity measure
is a dummy variable indicating whether or not the person identiﬁed as Hispanic.
Our second data source is the 2013-14 samples of the IHIS. The IHIS contains a direct measure of
sexual orientation, and we classify people as lesbian or gay if they self-identify as such.3 Respondents
in the IHIS were asked to choose their sexual orientation “identity” from a list of four options (“lesbian
or gay,” “straight, that is, not lesbian or gay,” “bisexual,” or “something else,” with additional options
for “I don’t know the answer” or a refusal to answer). Our analysis sample includes 12,390 heterosexual
men, 14,842 heterosexual women, 347 gay men, and 288 lesbians.
Education in the IHIS is measured as the highest grade or degree achieved (e.g., “12th grade, no
diploma” or “high school graduate”). To calculate years of education, we use the minimum number of
years necessary to complete the level of schooling indicated. Our measure of race includes four categories:
black, white, Asian, and other race. Our ethnicity measure is a dummy variable indicating whether or
not the person identiﬁed as Hispanic.
Our third data source is the GSS. The sexual orientation measure in the GSS comes from a question
about sexual behavior, which asks the respondent to say how many male and female sexual partners
3The IHIS measure distinguishes between lesbian or gay identiﬁcation and bisexual identiﬁcation. Previous research
on sexual minorities has found that the economic behavior and outcomes of the bisexual population diﬀer in important
ways from those of the lesbian and gay population, and preliminary analysis of the IHIS data suggested a similar pattern
with respect to education. Unfortunately, the IHIS samples of bisexual men and women are too small to permit separate
statistical analysis of these groups, so we exclude men and women who identify as bisexual from our analysis sample.
6


they had in the last year. There are also behavioral questions that ask about sexual activity in the last
ﬁve years and since age 18; we choose to use the “in the last year” measure for two reasons. First, one’s
behavior in the last year could have more impact on their economic circumstances than something they
did at some point since they were 18, or even in the last ﬁve years. Second, the sample size of people
who have had only same-sex sex in the last year is larger than that of people who had only same-sex
sex in the last ﬁve years or since age 18. Our analysis sample includes 4,766 heterosexual men, 6,054
heterosexual women, 204 gay men, and 150 lesbians.
Education in the GSS is measured via a variable for years of schooling, top-coded at 20 years, and
a variable for the highest degree earned. The GSS race variable contains three categories: black, white,
and other race. We do not include a measure of ethnicity in our GSS analysis because the measure of
Hispanic identiﬁcation is not available before 2000.
In each of these three main datasets, we focus on the experiences of people born between 1955-1985
and who were born in the US (IHIS and ACS) or who lived in the US at age 16 (GSS). Because we
are interested in completed education, we further restrict our estimation samples to people who were at
least 25 years old in the year they were interviewed. Throughout the paper, we use sampling weights to
obtain nationally representative estimates. We also adjust our IHIS estimates for the stratiﬁcation and
clustering of the IHIS sample. Finally, because the GSS sample contains proportionally more people from
earlier birth cohorts than the IHIS and ACS samples, we reweight the GSS data to make the weighted
distribution of birth cohorts comparable across datasets.4
Along with these three main datasets, for some parts of the empirical analysis below, we use data
from from the 1978-2003 CPS Annual Social and Economic Supplement (CPS-ASEC), supplemented
with data from the 1970 and 1980 United States Decennial Censuses (because the CPS data are not
available for all states in all years prior to 1978) to construct estimates of state-year gender wage ratios
and state-year proportions of residents with college degrees. Speciﬁcally, we use data from the 1970
and 1980 Censuses and estimate values of each variable for the years 1973-77 by linear interpolation.
We compute the gender wage ratio as the median female wage divided by the median male wage. The
wage measure is annual wage and salary earnings in the year before the survey divided by the product
of weeks worked and usual hours worked per week. Our estimation sample for each state-year gender
wage ratio is workers age 25 to 55, excluding the self-employed, unpaid family workers and workers with
wages less than 3 or greater then 300 in 2000 dollars. We use the person weights from the Census and
the CPS-ASEC to obtain nationally representative estimates.
Table 1 presents the mean years of schooling and the proportion of people with a bachelor’s degree or
more, by sex and sexual orientation, in each of the three main datasets. The results in the table largely
4We multiply the GSS sampling weights by a reweighting factor computed as follows: for each birth year between 1955
and 1985, we compute the proportions of the ACS and GSS samples born in that year, and we divide the ACS proportion
by the GSS proportion. We normalize the resulting ratios to sum to one over all birth years by dividing the ratio for each
birth year by the sum of the ratios.
7


conﬁrm the ﬁndings in previous studies: LG people have higher educational attainment than their same-
sex heterosexual peers. In the IHIS, where sexual orientation is measured by self identiﬁcation, and in
the ACS, where it is measured by partnership, lesbians complete more than half of a year more schooling
and are 10 percentage points more likely to have a bachelor’s degree than heterosexual women. Even
more strikingly, gay men complete more than three quarters of a year more schooling and are between
12 and 16 percentage points more likely to have a bachelor’s degree than heterosexual men. In the GSS,
however, where sexual orientation is measured by sexual behavior, the comparisons in table 1 are mixed.
The results for men in the GSS sample are similar but slightly attenuated compared with the results for
men in the IHIS and ACS samples. The results for women, however, are diﬀerent: unlike in the IHIS
and ACS samples, lesbians and heterosexual women in the GSS sample have substantively comparable
and statistically indistinguishable levels of education.
[Table 1 about here]
The ﬁnding that the sexual orientation education gap is larger in the ACS and IHIS data than the
GSS data is important. It suggests that the educational advantage of lesbians and gay men is related to
elements of sexual orientation that are relatively persistent or public: identity (IHIS) and family structure
(ACS). Adopting an LG identity, especially when young, may inﬂuence expectations about work and
family and corresponding investments in household- and market-oriented human capital. Adopting an LG
identity may also encourage openness about same-sex attractions and behavior. Similarly, establishing
a household with a same-sex spouse or partner is a non-trivial commitment that may inﬂuence time
spent in household and market work and signal one’s minority sexual orientation to others. The sex
of one’s sexual partners in the last year (GSS) may be less closely tied to economic behavior and less
consequential for economic outcomes.5
In the next section, we turn to the tests of our hypotheses to explain the sexual orientation education
gap.
4
Results
4.1
Hypothesis 1: More highly educated LG people are more likely to come
out on a survey
We begin by testing our ﬁrst hypothesis regarding why we observe a sexual orientation education gap,
namely, that more highly educated LG people are simply more likely to reveal their sexual orientation on
a survey. If highly educated sexual minorities are more willing than their less-educated peers to disclose
that they identify as lesbian or gay, share a household with a same-sex spouse or partner, or have had
5Modifying the measure of sexual orientation to reﬂect sexual behavior over the last ﬁve years, instead of just in the
last year, does not substantively alter the results.
8


same-sex sexual partners, then the lesbian and gay educational advantage we observe may be inﬂated or
spurious.
Following Black et al. (2000), we test for the possibility that more highly educated LG people come
out on surveys by examining the relationship between revealed sexual orientation and parental education.
The literature on intergenerational mobility shows that the educational attainment of a person’s parents
is the strongest predictor of the person’s own educational attainment (Haveman and Wolfe, 1995). Given
the strong relationship between parental and descendant education, if there were selection of more highly
educated LG people coming out on a surveys, then we would expect parental education to predict
measured sexual orientation. In other words, under the hypothesis that highly educated lesbians and
gay men are more willing to disclose their sexual orientation, highly educated parents would be more
likely to have their LG children identiﬁed as LG in a survey. In this case, we would expect to observe a
positive relationship between parental education and measured LG orientation.
We test the null hypothesis that there is no relationship between level of education and coming out
on a survey, with its implication of no relationship between parental education and measured sexual
orientation, using data from the GSS. While it would be ideal to use data from all three of our surveys,
the ACS and IHIS do not ask adults about the educational attainment of their non-cohabiting parents,
nor do they contain measures of other background characteristics, such as parental income and wealth,
which are similarly strong predictors of educational attainment (Bowles and Gintis, 2002; Rumberger,
2010). An argument against using the GSS data for this analysis is that the GSS is the only dataset which
does not show an educational advantage for lesbians. The GSS does show an educational advantage for
gay men in terms of years of schooling, however, and there is reason to believe that any selection bias
would be stronger for gay men than lesbians. The Pew Research Center (2013) shows that LGBT people
themselves perceive greater acceptance of lesbians than gay men.6 In light of these perceptions, it is
likely gay men who would be more hesitant to come out on a survey. Thus, if the analysis does not show
selection bias for gay men, we think there is likely less concern for selection bias for lesbians.
To determine whether parental education predicts measured sexual orientation, we estimate a series
of logistic regressions, separately by gender. In each regression, the dependent variable is an indicator
for lesbian or gay orientation and the independent variable of interest is a measure of parental education:
mother’s years of schooling, father’s years of schooling, an indicator for having a college-educated mother,
and an indicator for having a college-educated father. All of the regressions include controls for age, race,
year of birth, and region and population density of location at age 16.
Table 2 shows the results of these regressions. For both men and women, the coeﬃcients on the
parental education variables have a mix of positive and negative signs, and in no case is the estimated
6For example, the study reports that “one-in-four respondents say there is a lot of social acceptance of lesbians, while
just 15% say the same about gay men. Similarly, there is more perceived acceptance of bisexual women (33% a lot) than
of bisexual men (8%).”
9


eﬀect of parental education on the probability of appearing as lesbian or gay statistically signiﬁcant at
the 5-percent level. Based on these results, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that parental education
is unrelated to measured sexual orientation.
We thus conclude that the data do not present strong
evidence that more highly educated LG people are more likely to come out on a survey. Thus, our ﬁrst
hypothesis that more highly educated LG people are more likely to come out on a survey cannot explain
why we observe a sexual orientation education gap.
[Table 2 about here]
4.2
Hypothesis 2: LG people have higher education because of other char-
acteristics, not because of sexual orientation
We therefore turn to our second hypothesis, namely that the sexual orientation education gap is
driven by diﬀering characteristics between LG and heterosexual people. In this case, the question is
if lesbians and gay men get more education than heterosexuals not because their sexual orientation
aﬀects educational investments, but instead because sexual orientation is correlated with demographic
characteristics that aﬀect educational investments.
To test this hypothesis, we estimate a logistic regression for men and women using each of our three
datasets, where the probability of having a bachelor’s degree or more depends on sexual orientation and
a set of demographic characteristics: age and race (IHIS, ACS, and GSS), ethnicity (IHIS and ACS),
birth state (ACS), region and population density of location at age 16 (GSS), and parental education
(GSS). Table 3 presents results from these regressions.
Taken together, the estimates indicate that
demographic characteristics account for little to none of the lesbian and gay educational advantage. The
estimated eﬀect of being lesbian or gay on educational attainment decreases slightly with the addition
of demographic control variables in some samples but increases sightly in others. In the IHIS and ACS,
the magnitude of these changes is substantively small relative to the magnitude of the underlying eﬀects.
In the GSS, surprisingly, controlling for demographic characteristics increases rather than decreases the
estimated eﬀect of being gay on the probability of obtaining a bachelor’s degree, but slightly lowers it
for lesbians.
[Table 3 about here]
Thus, neither the ﬁrst nor the the second of our ﬁve possible explanations of the sexual orientation
education premium have much explanatory power. The next two possible explanations have their theo-
retical roots in human capital theory, the standard economic approach to understanding investments in
education.
10


4.3
Hypothesis 3: LG people have higher education because they get higher
wage returns to their schooling
We test the “schooling-raises-wages” theory as it applies to understanding the lesbian and gay educa-
tional premia by examining whether there are diﬀerences in the returns to more years of schooling and to
obtaining a bachelor’s degree by sexual orientation. Speciﬁcally, we use data from the ACS to estimate
OLS regressions of the log hourly wage on an indicator variable for being lesbian or gay, a measure of
education (years of schooling or an indicator variable for having a bachelor’s degree or more), and an
interaction between sexual orientation and education, controlling for race, ethnicity, and age. Table 4
shows the results of these regressions.
[Table 4 about here]
As is standard in the literature on the wage eﬀects of sexual orientation, we ﬁnd that gay men face
a wage penalty while lesbians face a wage premium, as indicated by the negative coeﬃcient on the gay
indicator variable for men and the positive coeﬃcient on the lesbian indicator variable for women (see
Klawitter, 2014, for a meta-analysis of the sexual orientation wage gap literature). Both men and women
receive a wage boost of over 50 percent for having a bachelor’s degree and a boost of approximately 11
percent for each additional year of schooling. In this sense, the standard idea that schooling raises wages
is conﬁrmed. However, the last two rows of the table show that more education – be it extra years of
schooling or the attainment of a bachelor’s degree – does not beneﬁt lesbians or gay men any more than
heterosexuals. The coeﬃcients on the interactions between the LG indicator variables and the measures
of educational attainment are small and not statistically signiﬁcant. Thus, the schooling-raises-wages
hypothesis does not seem to explain the higher educational attainment of sexual minorities.
4.4
Hypothesis 4: LG people have higher education because of their expec-
tations regarding household specialization
We thus turn to our fourth potential explanation of the sexual orientation education premium, namely,
that people’s investments in education depend on their expectations of household specialization. As noted
above, one prediction of this theory is that young men and women invest more in their education when
they expect their future partner to earn less. In the case of sexual orientation, compared to heterosexuals
of the same gender, we would expect lesbians to invest more in their own education, because their female
partner will earn less than a male partner would, and we would expect gay men to invest less in their
own education, because a male partner earns more than a female partner would.
We test this prediction using data from the ACS. Of course, we cannot directly observe the eﬀect of
being lesbian or gay on the expectations of young women and men about the earnings of their future
partner. Instead, we use the gender wage ratio (median female earnings divided by median male earnings)
11


as a proxy for these eﬀects. Speciﬁcally, we use the gender wage ratio in a person’s birth state when s/he
was 18 as a proxy for the eﬀect of expecting to partner with a woman versus a man. We expect that,
where the gender wage ratio is higher (where women earn more relative to men), lesbians will expect
their partner to earn more relative to the partner of a heterosexual woman. Consequently, we expect
that lesbians who lived in states with higher gender wage ratios when they were 18 will invest less in
their education relative to heterosexual women. By parallel reasoning, we expect that gay men who lived
in states with higher gender wage ratios will invest more in their education relative to heterosexual men.
The ﬁrst two columns of table 5 show coeﬃcients from OLS regressions of years of schooling on
a lesbian or gay indicator variable, gender wage ratio in birth state at age 18, and their interaction.
The regressions include controls for race and ethnicity and ﬁxed eﬀects for birth state and year when
18. Because the gender wage ratio may be positively correlated with tolerant attitudes towards sexual
minorities, which may themselves be correlated with the educational attainment of lesbians and gay men,
the regressions also include several measures of tolerance: four measures of the attitudes in a person’s
birth region when the person was 18, described in detail below; the proportion of residents in the person’s
birth state when the person was 18 who had a bachelor’s degree or more; and the interaction of each of
these variables with the lesbian or gay indicator variable. The last two columns of table 5 show average
marginal eﬀects from logistic regressions of an indicator variable for having a bachelor’s degree or more
on the same set of independent variables.
[Table 5 about here]
The results in table 5 are consistent with the theory of household specialization for women. The
lesbian educational premium, both in terms of years of schooling and the probability of having a bachelor’s
degree, is much larger at the 10th percentile of the state-year gender wage-ratio distribution, where women
earn less relative to men, than at the 90th percentile, where women earn more. Indeed, at the 90th
percentile of the state-year gender wage-ratio distribution, the educational attainments of lesbians and
heterosexual women are statistically indistinguishable. This ﬁnding suggests that the lesbian educational
premium might fade if the wages of women approached those of men.
Perhaps not surprisingly, given that the fact that gay men are more educated than heterosexual men
contradicts our expectations based on the theory of anticipatory household specialization (that gay men
will be less educated because they expect their partner to earn more), the results in table 5 are weaker
for men than for women. Consistent with theoretical expectations, the point estimates suggest that the
educational attainment of gay men relative to heterosexual men increases slightly with the gender wage
ratio. These increases, however, are not statistically or substantively signiﬁcant. Taken together, the
results in table 5 suggest that the educational premium of gay men is neither caused nor substantially
oﬀset by household specialization in the context of gender wage inequality. Thus, our fourth hypothesis
that the sexual orientation education gap may be explained by the theory of household specialization
12


did indeed hold for women, but not for men.
None of the ﬁrst four potential explanations could explain the education premium for gay men, and
only one could be shown to be related to the education premium for lesbians. We therefore now consider
a ﬁfth alternative: that LG people pursue more education in an eﬀort to gain access to a job in more
welcoming, tolerant workplaces.
4.5
Hypothesis 5: LG people have higher education because education serves
as a gateway to more tolerant workplaces
To test this hypothesis, we estimate the eﬀect of education on workplace tolerance. In approximately
half of the calendar years (and most survey years) since 1973, the GSS has asked four questions designed
to measure attitudes toward sexual minorities. We operationalize workplace tolerance as the proportion
of workers in a person’s industry of employment who responded positively to four questions about the
participation of gay men in society and the morality of same-sex sex. More speciﬁcally, three of these
questions on tolerance ask about “a man who admits he is a homosexual”:
Suppose this admitted homosexual wanted to make a speech in your community. Should he
be allowed to speak, or not?
Should such a person be allowed to teach in a college or university, or not?
If some people in your community suggested that a book he wrote in favor of homosexuality
should be taken out of your public library, would you favor removing this book, or not?
A fourth question asks about the morality of same-sex sex:
What about sexual relations between two adults of the same sex – do you think it is always
wrong, almost always wrong, wrong only sometimes, or not wrong at all?
We use responses to these questions to construct four binary measures of tolerance: whether the respon-
dent believed a gay man should be allowed to make a speech, whether the respondent believed a gay man
should be allowed to teach, whether the respondent believed a book in favor of homosexuality should be
allowed in the public library, and whether the respondent believed same-sex sex is not wrong at all.
Our measures of industry tolerance toward sexual minorities are similar to our measures of region-
year tolerance used in table 5 above. For each of the binary measures of tolerance described above,
we compute the proportion of respondents in each industry who expressed a tolerant attitude. The
industry classiﬁcation scheme in the GSS has changed over time. From 1972 to 1987, industries were
classiﬁed using the 1970 Standard Industrial Classiﬁcation (SIC) codes; from 1988 to 2010, they were
classiﬁed using the 1980 SIC codes. Within each of these periods, we assign respondents to their detailed
SIC code (industry group) if the code contains at least 30 observations and to their general SIC code
13


(division) if their detailed code contains fewer than 30 observations.
Our estimation sample for the
measures of industry tolerance includes men and women who might reasonably represent the co-workers
of the lesbians and gay men in the 1955-85 birth cohorts: workers who were interviewed between 1977
and 2010, when members of the 1955-85 birth cohorts (although not all cohorts in all years) were in the
prime working age range of 22 to 64.
We focus on industries rather than occupations because we are interested in the attitudes of the co-
workers with whom a person interacts regularly. Occupations are deﬁned by the activities of the worker,
and many workplaces comprise workers performing a wide variety of tasks, so co-workers in the same
company often have diﬀerent occupations. In contrast, industries are deﬁned by the activities of the
employer, so co-workers are likely to be employed in the same industry. Co-workers in an oﬃce can have
very diﬀerent occupations but will work in the same industry. Since we are interested in the tolerance of
one’s co-workers – the people with whom they share a work space – we use the industry-level measure
of tolerance.
To determine whether education facilitates entry into tolerant workplaces, we regress each measure
of workplace tolerance (the proportion of industry coworkers who express tolerant attitudes toward
homosexuals) on an indicator variable for having a bachelor’s degree or more, controlling for age, race,
and region and year of GSS interview. Because we are interested in workplace tolerance as an incentive
for sexual minorities to pursue education, we restrict our estimation sample to lesbians and gay men.
Table 6 shows results from the regressions predicting the level of workplace tolerance experienced by
gay and lesbian workers, depending on their level of education. To aid in interpreting the coeﬃcients,
the table also presents the average value of each industry-level tolerance measure in the sample used to
compute the measure.
[Table 6 about here]
Consistent with the idea that college is a gateway to workplaces with more tolerant coworkers, the
relationship between having a bachelor’s degree and the tolerance of same-industry workers is positive
for all measures of tolerance, both for gay men and for lesbians. In particular, the proportion of same-
industry workers who expressed a tolerant attitude toward sexual minorities was between 2.3 and 6.8
percentage points higher for college graduates than non-graduates, with six of eight eﬀects statistically
signiﬁcant at the 5-percent level. By way of reference, the average proportion of same-industry workers
who expressed a tolerant attitude was between 38 and 40 percent with respect to the morality of same-
sex sex and between 78 and 84 percent with respect to the participation of gay men in public life. The
only measure of co-worker tolerance which does not vary regardless of the lesbian or gay man’s level of
education is the idea that “same-sex sex is not wrong at all.” Only 37.6% of lesbians’ co-workers and
39.6% of gay men’s co-workers agreed with this statement to begin with. Given the low acceptance of
same-sex sex “not being wrong at all,” it is perhaps not surprising that these attitudes do not vary much
14


across the education level of LG people in diﬀerent industries.
We thus ﬁnd support consistent with our ﬁfth and ﬁnal hypothesis, the the sexual orientation educa-
tion premium is in part motivated by a desire of LG people to have access to more tolerant workplaces.
An important caveat to this interpretation is that a positive relationship between education and work-
place tolerance may arise for many reasons. It is possible, for example, that lesbians and gay men pursue
additional education not because they seek tolerant workplaces, but because they seek workplace char-
acteristics that happen to correlate with tolerance. The evidence we have presented is consistent with
the idea that tolerant workplaces are a beneﬁt of education for sexual minorities and that social consid-
erations could plausibly play a role in their educational investment decisions, but it does not identify the
precise mechanism through with education and tolerance are related.
In sum, our empirical tests have shown that none of the ﬁrst four possible explanations of the sexual
orientation education premium held for men, while one held for women. In contrast, the last hypothesis
that LG people invest in higher education in order to access more tolerant workplaces could not be
rejected.
5
Discussion and Conclusion
In this paper, we have explored the oft-noted but never thoroughly assessed matter of the sexual
orientation education premium. In two of the three national datasets employed in this paper, we found
that lesbians and gay men have at least one-half more year of schooling and are 10 percentage points
more likely to have a bachelor’s degree compared to their same-gender heterosexual counterparts. In the
third dataset, the GSS, gay men also have higher education rates, though only the results for years of
schooling are statistically signiﬁcant. In the GSS, there is no statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the
educational attainment of lesbians and heterosexual women.
We explored ﬁve possible reasons why lesbians and gay men may choose to get more education than
heterosexuals. We ﬁrst assessed whether the sexual orientation education premium is driven by selection
bias of more highly educated LG people being more likely to come out on surveys. Second, we considered
whether the gap is driven by the fact that LG people have diﬀerent demographic characteristics than
heterosexuals that are also associated with higher education. Next, we tested whether two main theories
of educational attainment in economics – that schooling raises wages and that investments in education
are relative to expected partner earnings – could explain the higher education of LG people. While
the household specialization model could say more about lesbians’ educational decisions, neither theory
could explain why gay men are more highly educated than straight men.
We thus studied a ﬁfth theory, namely that individuals invest in education to receive not only pecu-
niary beneﬁts, but also in order to access more social rewards. In this case, we considered more tolerant
15


and accepting workplaces as a reward to higher education for LG people. Indeed, the empirical analysis
showed that more highly educated lesbians and gay men are able to work in more tolerant environments.
The ﬁndings suggest that LG people may be concerned not just with discrimination in terms of how it
will aﬀect their (individual and household) income, but also with respect to how they will be treated by
their colleagues at work. Lesbians and gay men do indeed report being very likely to face discrimination
at work, sometimes so much so that it aﬀects their job performance and desire to go to work (Badgett
et al., 2007). In order to avoid this discrimination, they may obtain more education in order to access
jobs in which they are less likely to face discrimination.
While this paper has assessed ﬁve potential explanations of the sexual orientation education gap,
others are, of course, possible. For example, LG people may invest more in their education because
the partnership rates of LG people are somewhat lower, meaning that LG people will be less likely to
depend on a partner’s earnings (Carpenter and Gates (2008) ﬁnds lower partnership rates for LG people
in California and Kurdek (2005) ﬁnds evidence that dissolution rates are higher for LG partnerships than
heterosexual marriages in the US). Another possibility may be that LG people obtain higher education
because they face less social pressure to marry and have children, thus giving them more time to pursue
an education (as suggested by Daneshvary et al., 2009). These and other hypotheses are diﬃcult to test
with survey data, though.
In being the ﬁrst to formally explore potential reasons for the observed higher education of lesbians
and gay men, this paper opens a conversation to understanding how one’s sexual orientation may inﬂuence
their choices about educational attainment. Future research can pursue this topic considering theories
and methodologies from other disciplines, such as interviews with younger and older LG people about
why they made the educational choices they did.
16


References
Antecol, Heather and Michael Steinberger, “Labor Supply Diﬀerences Between Married Hetero-
sexual Women and Partnered Lesbians: A Semi-Parametric Decomposition Approach,” Economic
Inquiry, 2013, 51, 783–805.
, Anneke Jong, and Michael Steinberger, “The Sexual Orientation Wage Gap: The Role of
Occupational Sorting and Human Capital,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 2008, 61 (4), 518–
543.
Badgett, M. V. Lee, Money, Myths, and Change: The Economic Lives of Lesbians and Gay Men,
Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press, 2001.
, Holning Lau, Brad Sears, and Deborah Ho, “Bias in the Workplace: Consistent Evidence of
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Discrimination,” The Williams Institute 2007.
Becker, Gary S, A Treatise on the Family, enlarged ed., Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1991.
Bertrand, Marianne, Emir Kamenica, and Jessica Pan, “Gender identity and relative income
within households,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2015, pp. 571–614.
Black, Dan A., Hoda R. Makar, Seth G. Sanders, and Lowell J. Taylor, “The Earnings Eﬀects
of Sexual Orientation,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 2003, 56 (3), 449–469.
, Seth G. Sanders, and Lowell J. Taylor, “The Economics of Lesbian and Gay Families,” Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 2007, 21 (2), 53–70.
Black, Dan, Gary Gates, Seth Sanders, and Lowell Taylor, “Demographics of the Gay and
Lesbian Population in the United States: Evidence from Available Systematic Data Sources,” Demog-
raphy, 2000, 37 (2), 139–154.
Blandford, John, “Earnings and the Nexus of Sexual Orientation and Gender,” Industrial and Labor
Relations Review, 2003, 56 (4), 622–42.
Bowles, Samuel and Herbert Gintis, “The inheritance of inequality,” Journal of Economic Perspec-
tives, 2002, 16, 3–30.
Card, David, “The Causal Eﬀect of Education on Earnings,” Handbook of Labor Economics, 1999, 3,
1801–1863.
Carpenter, Christopher and Gary J. Gates, “Gay and Lesbian Partnership: Evidence from Cali-
fornia,” Demography, 2008, 45 (3), 573–590.
Carpenter, Christopher S., “Sexual orientation and outcomes in college,” Economics of Education
Review, 2009, 28, 693–703.
Chiappori, Pierre-Andr´e, Murat Iyigun, and Yoram Weiss, “Investment in Schooling and the
Marriage Market,” American Economic Review, 2009, 99 (5), 1689–1713.
Daneshvary, Nasser, C. Jeﬀrey Waddoups, and Bradley S. Wimmer, “Previous Marriage and
the Lesbian Wage Premium,” Industrial Relations, 2009, 48 (3), 432–53.
DiPrete, Thomas A. and Claudia Bauchmann, “Gender-speciﬁc trends in the value of education
and the emerging gender gap in college completion,” Demography, 2006, 43 (1), 1–24.
Gallup Poll, “In US, More Adults Identifying as LGBT,” http://www.gallup.com/poll/201731/
lgbt-identification-rises.aspx January 2017.
Giddings, Lisa, John M. Nunley, Alyssa Schneebaum, and Joachim Zietz, “Birth Cohort and
the Specialization Gap Between Same-Sex and Diﬀerent-Sex Couples,” Demography, 2014, 51 (2),
509–534.
Haveman, Robert and Barbara Wolfe, “The Determinants of Children’s Attainments: A Review
of Methods and Findings,” Journal of Economic Literature, 1995, 33 (4), 1829–1878.
17


Horne, Rebecca M., Matthew D. Johnson, Nancy L. Galambos, and Harvey J. Krahn,
“Time, Money, or Gender? Predictors of the Division of Household Labour Across Life Stages,” Sex
Roles, Forthcoming.
Jacob, Brian A, “Where the Boys Aren’t: Non-Cognitive Skills, Returns to School and the Gender
Gap in Higher Education,” Economics of Education Review, 2002, 21 (6), 589–598.
Klawitter, Marieka, “Meta-Analysis of the Eﬀects of Sexual Orientation on Earnings,” Industrial
Relations, 2014, 1 (54), 4–32.
Kurdek, Lawrence A., “What Do We Know About Gay and Lesbian Couples?,” Current Directions
in Psychological Science, 2005, 14 (5), 251–254.
Laumann, Edward O., John H. Gagnon, Robert T. Michael, and Stuart Michaels, The Social
Organization of Sexuality: Sexual Practices in the United States., Chicago: University of Chigago
Press, 1994.
Michael, Robert T., “Education in Nonmarket Production,” Journal of Political Economy, 1973, 81
(2), 306–327.
Minnesota Population Center and State Health Access Data Assistance Center, “Integrated
Health Interview Series: Version 6.11,” 2015.
National Information Center for Higher Education Policy Making and Analysis, “Educa-
tional Attainment by Degree-Level and Age-Group (American Community Survey),” http://www.
higheredinfo.org/dbrowser/?level=nation&mode=map&state=0&submeasure=237 2013. Accessed:
29 January 2017.
Oreopoulos, Philip and Kjell G. Salvanes, “Priceless: The Nonpecuniary Beneﬁts of Schooling,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2011, 25 (1), 159–184.
Orreﬁce, Sonia, “Sexual orientation and household decision making.: Same-sex couples’ balance of
power and labor supply choices,” Labour Economics, 2011, 18 (2), 145–158.
Pew Research Center, “A Survey of LGBT Americans: Attitudes, Experiences and Values in Changing
Times,” http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2013/06/13/a-survey-of-lgbt-americans/ 2013.
Ruggles, Steven, “Patriarchy, Power, and Pay: The Transformation of American Families, 1800–2015,”
Demography, 2015, 52 (6), 1797–1823.
, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, and Matthew Sobek, “Integrated Public
Use Microdata Series: Version 6.0,” 2015.
Rumberger, Russell W., “Education and the reproduction of economic inequality in the United States:
An empirical investigation,” Economics of Education Review, 2010, 29, 246–54.
Ryan, Camille L. and Kurt Bauman, “Educational Attainment in the United States: 2015,” http://
www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/publications/2016/demo/p20-578.pdf 2016. Ac-
cessed: 29 January 2017.
Trimarchi, Alessandra and Jan Van Bavel, “Education and the Transition to Fatherhood: The
Role of Selection Into Union,” Demography, forthcoming.
18


Tables
Table 1: Educational Attainment by Sexual Orientation
Women
Men
Data
Hetero-
sexual
Lesbian
Hetero-
sexual
Gay
Mean years of schooling
IHIS
13.88
14.59∗
13.65
14.43∗
(0.03)
(0.22)
(0.04)
(0.25)
ACS
14.14
14.76∗
13.90
14.83∗
(0.01)
(0.05)
(0.01)
(0.05)
GSS
13.93
14.00
13.86
14.57∗
(0.04)
(0.24)
(0.05)
(0.26)
Proportion with
bachelor’s or more
IHIS
0.36
0.46∗
0.33
0.45∗
(0.01)
(0.04)
(0.01)
(0.04)
ACS
0.38
0.48∗
0.35
0.51∗
(0.00)
(0.01)
(0.00)
(0.01)
GSS
0.29
0.24
0.30
0.39
(0.01)
(0.04)
(0.01)
(0.05)
N
IHIS
14,842
288
12,390
347
ACS
336,094
4,515
319,125
4,348
GSS
6,054
150
4,766
204
Notes: Estimates computed using sampling weights for all samples and adjustments for stratiﬁcation and clustering of
IHIS sample. Standard errors in parentheses. ∗Heterosexual and lesbian/gay means are statistically diﬀerent within sex,
p < 0.05.
Table 2: Selection analysis
Measure of parental education
Women
Men
Mother’s years of schooling
−0.000
−0.003
(0.002)
(0.002)
Father’s years of schooling
0.000
0.000
(0.001)
(0.001)
Mother has bachelor’s degree
0.006
−0.014
(0.011)
(0.008)
Father has bachelor’s degree
−0.005
−0.008
(0.007)
(0.008)
N
4,244
3,569
Notes: Table presents average marginal eﬀects from logistic regressions of lesbian or
gay indicator variable on speciﬁed parental education variable and controls for age,
race, year of birth, and region and population density of location at age 16. Estimation
sample is GSS sample, excluding people with missing values of parental education.
Estimates calculated on weighted survey data.
Standard errors in parentheses.
No
estimate is statistically signiﬁcant at the 5-percent level.
19


Table 3: Eﬀect of being lesbian or gay on probability of having bachelor’s degree or more, controlling for
background characteristics
Regressors
Data
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Gay
IHIS
0.121∗
0.119∗
(0.036)
(0.035)
[12,737]
[12,737]
ACS
0.161∗
0.158∗
0.154∗
(0.009)
(0.009)
(0.009)
[323,473]
[323,473]
[323,473]
GSS
0.086
0.090
0.098
0.130∗
(0.064)
(0.063)
(0.065)
(0.065)
[3,569]
[3,569]
[3,569]
[3,569]
Lesbian
IHIS
0.102∗
0.104∗
(0.042)
(0.042)
[15,130]
[15,130]
ACS
0.094∗
0.097∗
0.092∗
(0.009)
(0.009)
(0.009)
[340,609]
[340,609]
[340,609]
GSS
−0.042
−0.048
−0.063
−0.057
(0.061)
(0.060)
(0.058)
(0.049)
[4,244]
[4,244]
[4,244]
[4,244]
Demographicsa
X
X
X
Location when youngb
X
X
Parental educationc
X
Notes: Table presents average marginal eﬀects from logistic regressions of indicator variable for having bachelor’s degree
or more on lesbian or gay indicator variable and speciﬁed control variables. Standard errors in parentheses. Sample sizes
in square brackets. GSS estimation sample excludes people with missing values of parental education. ∗Average marginal
eﬀect is statistically signiﬁcant, p < 0.05. aDemographic variables are age and race (IHIS, ACS, and GSS), ethnicity (IHIS
and ACS), and year of birth (GSS). bLocation variables are state of birth (ACS) and region and population density of
location at age 16 (GSS). cParental education variables are mother’s and father’s years of schooling and indicators for
whether mother and father have bachelor’s degree or more (GSS). Estimates computed using sampling weights for all
samples and adjustments for stratiﬁcation and clustering of IHIS sample.
Table 4: Wage eﬀects of education, by sexual orientation
Women
Men
Lesbian/gay
0.166∗
0.107∗
−0.168∗
−0.082∗
(0.066)
(0.017)
(0.083)
(0.018)
Years of schooling
0.110∗
0.105∗
(0.001)
(0.001)
Bachelor’s degree
0.514∗
0.548∗
(0.003)
(0.003)
Lesbian/gay X Years of schooling
−0.005
0.005
(0.004)
(0.006)
Lesbian/gay X Bachelor’s degree
−0.002
0.010
(0.024)
(0.027)
N
248,118
248,118
275,947
275,947
Notes: Table presents coeﬃcients from OLS regressions. Dependent variable is log wage. All regressions
include controls for race, ethnicity, and age. Estimation sample is ACS sample, excluding men and women
without wage observations. Estimates calculated on weighted survey data. Standard errors in parentheses.
∗Coeﬃcient is statistically signiﬁcant, p < 0.05.
20


Table 5: Average marginal eﬀect of being lesbian or gay on educational attainment, by female/male
median wage ratio in birth state at age 18
Percentile of birth state at age
18 in state-year gender
wage-ratio distribution
Years of schooling
Probability of
bachelor’s or more
Women
Men
Women
Men
10th percentile
1.016∗
0.878∗
0.169∗
0.144∗
(0.088)
(0.089)
(0.016)
(0.017)
50th percentile
0.643∗
0.913∗
0.099∗
0.154∗
(0.049)
(0.051)
(0.009)
(0.009)
90th percentile
0.156
0.959∗
0.008
0.168∗
(0.107)
(0.128)
(0.019)
(0.022)
p (10th = 90th)a
0.000
0.000
0.670
0.472
N
340,609
323,473
340,609
323,473
Notes: Table presents coeﬃcients from OLS regressions and average marginal eﬀects from logistic regressions of education
measures on lesbian or gay indicator variable, gender wage ratio in birth state at age 18, and their interaction.
All
regressions include controls for race, ethnicity, measures of tolerance towards sexual minorities in birth region and state at
age 18, interaction of sexual orientation with tolerance, and ﬁxed eﬀects for birth state and year when 18. Data are from
ACS. Estimates calculated on weighted survey data. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by combination of birth
state and year when 18. ∗Coeﬃcient or average marginal eﬀect is statistically signiﬁcant, p < 0.05. ap-value from test of
null hypothesis that average marginal eﬀects at 10th and 90th percentiles are equal.
Table 6: Eﬀect of having bachelor’s or more on workplace tolerance
Wronga
Speakb
Bookc
Teachd
Women
Coeﬃcient
0.025
0.038∗
0.064∗
0.068∗
(0.031)
(0.015)
(0.022)
(0.017)
Average outcome
0.376
0.877
0.783
0.829
(0.023)
(0.011)
(0.014)
(0.015)
N
123
123
123
123
Men
Coeﬃcient
0.023
0.031∗
0.041∗
0.044∗
(0.029)
(0.012)
(0.015)
(0.014)
Average outcome
0.396
0.872
0.795
0.837
(0.019)
(0.009)
(0.012)
(0.013)
N
164
164
164
164
Notes: Table reports coeﬃcients from OLS regressions of measures of workplace tolerance on indicator variable for having
bachelor’s or more. Dependent variable in each model is proportion of workers in person’s industry of employment who
expressed tolerant attitude toward sexual minorities. All models control for age, race, and region and year of interview.
Estimation sample is GSS sample of lesbians and gay men who reported an industry of employment. Standard errors in
parentheses, clustered by industry. ∗Coeﬃcient is statistically signiﬁcant, p < 0.05. aDependent variable is proportion who
believe same-sex sex is not wrong at all.
bDependent variable is proportion who believe “admitted homosexual” should
be allowed to make speech in community. cDependent variable is proportion who would not favor removing book in favor
of homosexuality from public library.
dDependent variable is proportion who believe “admitted homosexual” should be
allowed to teach in a college or university.
21