The 2026 Law Firm Pro Bono Challenge® Report, based on 2025 data from reporting Law Firm Challenge signatories, showed signs of stabilization in pro bono performed by law firms from 2024 to 2025 with slight declines in some areas offset by encouraging gains in others, including more law firms meeting the Challenge goal and increased charitable giving. Law Firm Challenge signatories reported performing a total of 5.14 million hours of pro bono in 2025.
The 2026 Corporate Pro Bono Challenge® Report, based on 2025 data from reporting Corporate Pro Bono Challenge signatories, saw overall participation increased in 2025 for both U.S. lawyers and legal staff at responding legal departments, with global pro bono engagement and collaboration with law firm partners also growing. The 2026 Report also coincides with the 20th Anniversary of the Corporate Pro Bono Challenge initiative and highlights the evolution of in-house pro bono into a standardized component of legal department culture and practice.
June 25, 2026
Through an innovative pro bono partnership, Duane Morris LLP* and Gilead Sciences are combatting HIV criminalization, supporting people living with HIV who face unjust criminal charges, sex offender registry requirements and other legal consequences rooted in outdated science and stigma.
In this Challenge Signatory Showcase episode of the Pro Bono Happy Hour podcast, Nihad Mansour, Associate Director of the PBI Law Firm Pro Bono Project and Innovation Specialist, is joined by Katharyn I. Christian Voit, Pro Bono Special Counsel at Duane Morris, and Joel Silver, Vice President of Legal at Gilead Sciences, to discuss their partnership on this powerful pro bono initiative.
July 23, 2026
In partnership with Latham & Watkins, and for the first time, the Thomson Reuters Foundation, PBI released the sixth edition of the Global Pro Bono Guide, formerly known as the Global Pro Bono Survey.
The newest version is the most comprehensive edition of the Guide to date, expanding coverage to more than 100 jurisdictions worldwide, up from 84 in the 2019 edition, and offering practical, jurisdiction-specific insight to support and strengthen pro bono practice globally.
Clearinghouses Chapter – 
Global Due Diligence Manual 
(updated May 2026)
This chapter covers the role of clearinghouses in pro bono and their origins, and highlights certain factors that law firms and in-house departments should consider when engaging with clearinghouses. 
It also includes an updated list of clearinghouses around the globe.
May 12, 2026
PBI is a catalyst, administering projects that support, guide, and inspire legal institutions to enhance access to justice. PBI selects and operates projects that, working in concert, promote synergies and inform and strengthen each other.
In cooperation with PLI, which provides accreditation services and learning opportunities around the world, PBI offers programming helpful to firms, in-house legal departments, and public interest organizations. These programs, which generally offer CLE credits, focus on topics ranging from reprising sessions from PBI’s most recent Annual Conference to current and evolving issues in pro bono.
Since 1996, Pro Bono Institute has shaped a global movement to ensure that pro bono is an essential, supported, and impactful part of the legal profession. Join us at the PBI 2026 Annual Dinner to celebrate this milestone together.
Learn more about PBI in our anniversary timeline.
Commemorate PBI’s 30th anniversary by supporting the work ahead.