https://johepal.com 
 
Cite article as: 
 
Fujita, M., Francis, G. L., Duke, J. M., & Raines, A. (2023). College choice 
among students with disabilities: Decision-making experiences. Journal of 
Higher Education Policy and Leadership Studies, 4(4), 102-123. 
https://dx.doi.org/10.61186/johepal.4.4.102 
Journal of 
Higher Education Policy 
 And  
Leadership Studies 
JHEPALS (E-ISSN: 2717-1426) 
 
 
College Choice Among 
Students with Disabilities: 
Decision-Making Experiences 
 
 
Megan Fujita 1 *   
Vice President of Education, Executive Director  
of Accreditation, Council on Social Work Education, USA 
Email: mfujita@cswe.org       
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1083-7480  
Grace L. Francis 2 *   
Email: gfranci4@gmu.edu  
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8707-9430  
 
  
Jodi M. Duke 3 *   
Email: jduke4@gmu.edu    
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2313-0935  
Alexandra Raines 4 *   
Email: araines4@gmu.edu  
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5775-0190  
 
*College of Education and Human Development, George Mason University, USA 
 
Article Received 
Article Accepted 
Published Online 
2023/08/08 
2023/12/02 
2023/12/31 
 
 
 [ DOI: 10.61186/johepal.4.4.102 ] 
 [ Downloaded from johepal.com on 2026-10-04 ] 


College Choice & Students with Disabilities (SWD) 
 
 
 Journal of Higher Education Policy And Leadership Studies (JHEPALS) 
102 
College Choice Among Students with 
Disabilities: Decision-Making Experiences 
 
 
Journal of Higher Education 
Policy And Leadership 
Studies (JHEPALS) 
 
E-ISSN: 2717-1426 
Volume: 4 Issue: 4 
pp. 102-123 
DOI: 
10.61186/johepal.4.4.102 
Abstract 
College decision-making among students without disabilities 
has been well-documented, highlighting factors that influence 
student decisions to attend college, which college they select, 
types of support networks, and their pathways to degree 
completion. Yet, despite increased college enrollment among 
students with disabilities (SWD) in the United States, little is 
known about the factors that influence the decision to attend 
college and the decision-making process overall among SWD. 
Therefore, the purpose of this qualitative study was to 
understand factors that influenced college decision-making 
among this population. Through interviews and a focus group, 
participants described engaging in cost-benefit decision-
making, uncertainty about financial aid and other loan policies, 
the influence of family and community, and personal disability 
considerations in college choice. Participants also provided 
recommendations for future students navigating college 
decision-making and for universities providing information to 
SWD and their families throughout the process. Implications 
for policy and practice, future research, and limitations are 
reported.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Megan Fujita * 
Grace L. Francis 
Jodi M. Duke 
Alexandra Raines 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Keywords: Higher Education; Student Loans; Students with Disabilities (SWD); Decision-
Making; Policy; Qualitative Research 
 
 
 
                                                                 
*Corresponding author’s email: mfujita@cswe.org        
 [ DOI: 10.61186/johepal.4.4.102 ] 
 [ Downloaded from johepal.com on 2026-10-04 ] 


Fujita, M., Francis, G. L., Duke, J. M., & Raines, A. 
 
 
 E-ISSN: 2717-1426 Volume: 4 Issue: 4 DOI: 10.61186/johepal.4.4.102 
103 
College Choice and SWD: Overview of Research Studies 
College enrollment among students with disabilities (SWD) in the U.S. has steadily increased 
(U.S. Department of Education, 2021; National Council on Disability, 2015), though college 
completion among SWD rates differ from their peers without disabilities (Mader & 
Butrymowicz, 2017). Among students without disabilities 68% graduation within six-years 
compared to 49% among SWD (National Center for Education Statistics, 2017). For this 
reason, higher education policies exist to require academic accommodations and support 
degree completion. 
Higher education policies like Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act (Section 504; 1973) 
attempt to diminish potential barriers to higher education among SWD. Section 504 is a 
federally mandated civil rights law that ensures SWD are provided equal opportunities to 
participate socially and academically in higher education. This is achieved by requiring 
colleges and universities that receive federal financial aid to provide accommodations for 
SWD, which may include extended time for exams or assignments, instructional adaptations, 
adjusted class schedules and grading, or modified textbooks or audiovisual materials (U.S. 
Department of Education, 2010). Students wishing to access accommodations are required 
to register through their institution’s disability support office (DSO) and provide formal 
documentation of their disability (United States, 2011). However, many SWD elect not to 
disclose their disability and therefore do not utilize accommodations through Section 504 
due to lack of resources, stigma, and disclosure barriers (Dryer et al., 2016; Francis et al., 
2019; Kognito, 2017). 
College SWD face barriers related to mental health needs and academic 
accommodations (Dryer et al., 2016; Francis et al., 2019; Kognito, 2017). Inadequate 
numbers of mental health staff, and lack of mental health professionals equipped to work 
with SWD, are common resource barriers on college campuses (Center for Collegiate Mental 
Health, 2019). Students seeking mental health services frequently turn to the university’s 
counseling and psychological services, where SWD are not as successful in reducing levels 
of psychological and academic distress than students without disabilities (O’Shea et al., 
2021). Relatedly, many staff are not trained to work with students with co-occurring 
disability and mental health diagnoses (Center for Collegiate Mental Health, 2019; Fujita et 
al., 2022). Such impediments to quality mental health services also serve as barriers to SWD 
seeking academic accommodations (Francis et al., 2019). 
Students seeking to access academic accommodations are required to re-disclose as 
a student with a disability each time they seek additional resources across campus, placing 
additional burden and potential for stigma with each new encounter (Francis et al., 2019). 
SWD seeking academic accommodations, such as extended time on exams, must self-
identify through the university’s DSO and notify faculty at the start of each course of this 
accommodation, resulting in fewer students reporting a disability (Burgstahler & Russon-
Gleicher, 2015; Cai & Richdale, 2016). Only about one-third of SWD inform their college of 
their disability (National Center for Education Statistics, 2022), as many are hesitant to 
disclose a disability for fear they will be embarrassed or stigmatized by faculty thereby 
limiting future academic opportunities (Kranke et al., 2013).  Some students face stigma 
upon disclosing a disability and are made to defend their disability diagnosis upon each 
disclosure (Francis et al., 2019). Despite well-documented accounts of SWD college 
 [ DOI: 10.61186/johepal.4.4.102 ] 
 [ Downloaded from johepal.com on 2026-10-04 ] 


College Choice & Students with Disabilities (SWD) 
 
 
 Journal of Higher Education Policy And Leadership Studies (JHEPALS) 
104 
experiences, little is known about the college decision-making process among SWD that 
leads an individual to make the decision to attend college, and what college to attend. 
Among students without disabilities, college decision-making literature highlights 
cost-benefit decisions that are influenced by student finances, community, policy factors, 
and the timing of understanding of cost and returns (Callendar & Jackson, 2005, 2008; 
Christie & Munro, 2003; Perna, 2006; 2008; Perna & Titus, 2004; Yoon et al., 2022). Many 
students and families engage in cost-benefit analyses to assist in college decision-making by 
determining if loan acquisition is beneficial to future outcomes. Through this process, 
students weigh the pros and cons of personal economic returns following completion of a 
college degree (e.g., will they be able to pay off student loans with enhanced employment 
opportunities and have a better future economic outlook than they would without a 
degree). Further, college decision-making literature investigates the types of colleges (e.g., 
location, in-state, type of campus) students elect to attend given family influence, 
socioeconomic status, and high school preparation (Boatman et al., 2017; Christie & Munro, 
2003; Perna, 2006; 2008). Decision-making is also influenced by the order with which 
students think about cost of college versus potential returns (Yoon, 2022). Still, given 
differences in college experiences among SWD (e.g., diminished graduation rates, barriers, 
accommodations) college decision-making and influences may look different. 
If SWD do not feel prepared to enter higher education, college decision-making may 
serve as a barrier for enrollment and thus degree completion. If SWD attend a university 
that is not the right fit for their needs or future goals, or is not adequately equipped to 
provide support, it may impact overall student experience and outcomes. Unfortunately, 
there is a paucity of literature related to the college decision-making experiences of SWD. 
Therefore, the purpose of this study was to explore college decision-making experiences 
among college SWD. Three primary research questions guided this work: (a) How did 
participants make decisions about college choice? (b) What factors informed participant 
college choice? and (c) What recommendations do participants have to support the success 
of SWD in making decisions about college? 
Research Methodology 
The PI had a background in higher education policy and social work. The research team      
included two special education faculty members and a doctoral student in special education. 
Together, the team brought expertise in higher education, financial aid policy, special 
education, disability, and student services. The PI used convenience sampling techniques 
(Etikan et al., 2016) to recruit participants for this study. Participants were recruited through 
the distribution of a researcher-developed online questionnaire sent to students registered 
at 11 university DSO across the U.S. The survey included 25 questions related to (a) 
demographic information, (b) debt attitudes, (c) current student loan balance, (d) the 
influence of the cost on college choice, (e) emotions toward student loans, and (f) 
willingness to participate in a follow-up interview, where participants could provide an email 
address for follow-up contact. 
A total of 348 participants participated in the survey. Of those, 122 respondents stated 
they were willing to participate in a follow-up interview. However, only 32 respondents met 
criteria for interview inclusion (i.e., providing an email for contact and acquiring student 
 [ DOI: 10.61186/johepal.4.4.102 ] 
 [ Downloaded from johepal.com on 2026-10-04 ] 


Fujita, M., Francis, G. L., Duke, J. M., & Raines, A. 
 
 
 E-ISSN: 2717-1426 Volume: 4 Issue: 4 DOI: 10.61186/johepal.4.4.102 
105 
loans to finance their undergraduate education). Of these 32 respondents, 16 were selected 
for interviews using maximum variation sampling which allowed for a small number of 
participants that maximized the diversity relevant to the research question (Cresswell, 2009; 
Lewis, 2015). Moser and Korstjens (2018) and Cresswell (2009) suggest between three to 
ten interviews and focus groups may be anticipated to address qualitative research 
questions. Therefore, the PI selected 16 participants to factor in participant attrition, using 
maximum variation along lines of disability, race, gender, and total loan acquisition. The PI 
contacted participants via recruitment email, which included (a) the purpose of the study, 
(b) institutional IRB approval information, (c) a link to a confidential scheduling poll, and (d) 
contact information for primary investigators.   
Of the 16 individuals contacted via recruitment email, ten completed the Doodle poll 
to schedule an interview while six did not respond to recruitment efforts (contacted a 
maximum of three times). Once interviews were scheduled, three participants did not 
attend the interviews and did not respond to follow-up communication, resulting in a total 
of seven participants. The PI conducted interviews for this portion of the study to elicit 
deeper discussion of student decision-making due to the sensitive financial and disability 
diagnosis information shared during these interviews. One to two additional researchers 
participated in each interview to take field notes and conduct member checks (Cresswell, 
2007). Merriam & Tisdell (2016) stress the importance in qualitative work of obtaining 
enough participants to address the research purpose. Although the PI had the option to 
recruit additional participants from the pool of 32 respondents, this was not necessary as 
saturation was met (e.g., repetitive answers, no new themes or information emerge; 
Cresswell, 2007) with the participant pool. Further, the PI elected to conduct additional data 
collection (i.e., focus group and follow-up interview) to obtain further information from the 
selected participants. This allowed a deep and rich understanding of the experiences of the 
participants of this study. 
Upon review of interview data, the PI decided it would be beneficial to collect 
additional information related to recommendations for college decision-making supports 
and resources. Therefore, the PI contacted participants via email to participate in a follow-
up focus group. The recruitment email included (a) the purpose of the study and focus 
group, (b) institutional IRB approval information, (c) date/time of the focus group, (d) a 
statement that participants would receive a $50 Visa gift card upon completion of the focus 
group for their time, (e) contact information for the PI, and (f) focus group topics and 
questions.  
Although all seven participants were invited to participate in the focus group, four 
attended, one requested an individual interview due to a scheduling conflict, one was 
unavailable, and one did not respond after two attempts to contact. A focus group was 
appropriate for this portion of the study due to the less-sensitive nature of the topic (i.e., 
recommendations) and to elicit conversation among participants (Cresswell, 2007).  
Participants  
Seven undergraduate students with self-reported disabilities agreed to participate in 
individual interviews, five of whom participated in a follow-up focus group/follow-up 
interview. Prior to participating in interviews all participants provided basic demographic 
information via a survey disseminated via Qualtrics software. Table 5 provides an overview 
 [ DOI: 10.61186/johepal.4.4.102 ] 
 [ Downloaded from johepal.com on 2026-10-04 ] 


College Choice & Students with Disabilities (SWD) 
 
 
 Journal of Higher Education Policy And Leadership Studies (JHEPALS) 
106 
of participant demographic information, including self-reported disabilities and level of 
participation in the study (i.e., interview, focus group). In total, four public universities were 
represented across the U.S., including one in the Mid-Atlantic region, one in the Pacific 
Northwest, one in the Southwest, and one in the Midwest. Some participants shared 
information during the interview, such as college major (i.e., psychology, nursing, child life 
specialist). Five participants noted transferring from a community college or professional 
program (i.e., culinary arts) to their current university. However, this data was not 
systematically collected among all participants.  
 
Table 1. 
Participant Information 
Pseudonym 
Gender  
Age   Race/Ethnicity  
Primary Disability  
Study Participation 
Robin  
Female 
29 
White/Caucasian 
ADHD 
Interview only  
Alex  
Non-binary  37 
White/Caucasian 
Mental Health Needs; 
Orthopedic/ Physical 
Disability     
Interview only  
Maria 
 
Female 
 
21 
Hispanic/ Latino 
Learning Disability    
Interview and focus 
group  
Thor  
 
Male 
 
23 
White/Caucasian 
Orthopedic/ Physical 
Disability     
Interview and 
follow-up interview  
Devon   
Female 
 
20 
Black/African 
American 
Autism  
Interview and focus 
group  
Cathy  
Female 
33 
White/Caucasian 
Health Impairment  
Interview and focus 
group 
Nicole  
 
Female 
19 
Black/African 
American; Multiple 
Races or Ethnicities  
ADD  
Interview and focus 
group 
Data Collection 
The PI conducted the interviews and focus group while one to two co-researchers took field 
notes and asked follow-up questions, as appropriate. The PI conducted seven interviews and 
one focus group via Zoom and one interview via phone, as requested by the participant. The 
PI conducted all interviews and the focus group in private rooms. Participants taking part in 
the focus group were asked to find a private space to protect the privacy of other 
participants. Prior to the interview, the PI obtained electronic consent via Qualtrics. To begin 
the interviews and focus group the principal investigator explained the purpose of the study 
and reiterated the related risks and benefits, including consent to record the sessions. No 
participant requested accommodations to participate. All interviews were conducted in 
English.  
The PI developed a research-informed semi-structured protocol (Merriam & Tisdell, 
2016) based on foundational literature surrounding college decision-making (Avery & 
Hoxby, 2003; Callendar & Jackson, 2005; Christie & Munroe, 2003; Eckel et al., 2007; Perna, 
2006; 2008). The interview protocol included questions related to (a) basic demographic 
information (“Tell us about your background, what you study/major in, where you’re 
from.”); (b) decision to attend college (“Tell us about what made you decide to attend 
college”); (c) college-making considerations (“Tell us about the types of things you 
considered when deciding where to attend college?”); (d) student loan knowledgeability 
 [ DOI: 10.61186/johepal.4.4.102 ] 
 [ Downloaded from johepal.com on 2026-10-04 ] 


Fujita, M., Francis, G. L., Duke, J. M., & Raines, A. 
 
 
 E-ISSN: 2717-1426 Volume: 4 Issue: 4 DOI: 10.61186/johepal.4.4.102 
107 
(“Tell us about your familiarity with student loans”); and (e) post-college considerations on 
decision-making (“When thinking about the cost of college and financing your education, 
what things do you consider?”). 
The focus group protocol focused on recommendations for programs or information 
that would be helpful to inform college decision-making among SWD. The protocol included 
questions related to (a) introductions (“Tell us a little about yourself.”), (b) 
recommendations for high school programing (“What would you have liked to receive in 
high school when making decisions about college?”), (c) recommendations for family (“What 
would you have liked to receive from your family when making decisions about college?”), 
(d) recommendations for prospective colleges (“What would you have liked to receive from 
your family when making decisions about college?”), (e) recommendations around students 
loans and financial literacy (“What do you wish you had known about the student loan or 
college financing process?”), and (f) general recommendations around a college decision-
making program for SWD (“What would your dream program to help students with 
disabilities make decisions about college, what would that look like?”). 
Data Analysis   
Zoom audio recordings were automatically transcribed using Microsoft Office 365, after 
which the PI and a CITI-trained graduate student read through all transcripts while listening 
to the audio recordings to ensure accuracy (Cresswell, 2009). All identifying information was 
removed from transcripts, including names, university information, and geographic location. 
To begin analysis, the principal investigator described the purpose of the study and 
open-coding procedures using basic inductive analysis to ensure consistency throughout the 
process (Hatch, 2002). Next, the analysis team independently read and coded a single 
transcript to determine keywords and emergent codes. The team met to debrief this process 
and developed an initial codebook identifying and determining initial codes and descriptive 
categories (Cresswell, 2009). The team used this codebook to independently code another 
transcript, then met again to discuss similarities and differences in coding resulting in a 
second version of the codebook. This version of the codebook was used to independently 
transcribe another transcript. The team met again to review this process and refine the 
codebook, resulting in the third and final version of the codebook. The PI used NVivo 
qualitative software to perform basic inductive analysis, which is ideal for data centered 
around a phenomenology as it is adaptable to participant responses to open-ended 
questions (Hatch, 2002). The PI continued to debrief with the research team throughout the 
analysis to ensure consistency.  
Trustworthiness 
The research team employed multiple measures to ensure trustworthiness. First, during the 
data collection phases, interviews and focus groups were recorded, and the PI debriefed 
with co-researchers to ensure a level of consistency in initial data collection (Wolcott, 1990). 
Further, field notes were collected by a co-investigator during the interviews and focus 
group. Field notes allow for recording additional observations during data collection and 
were used to conduct formal member checks following interviews by inviting participants to 
clarify or expand on information (Merriam & Tisdell, 2016).  
 [ DOI: 10.61186/johepal.4.4.102 ] 
 [ Downloaded from johepal.com on 2026-10-04 ] 


College Choice & Students with Disabilities (SWD) 
 
 
 Journal of Higher Education Policy And Leadership Studies (JHEPALS) 
108 
Next, the PI ensured consistency and accuracy across datasets by comparing interview 
and focus group transcripts to original audio recordings. Triangulation between transcripts, 
field notes, and member checking ensured research credibility through corroborating 
findings across sources of evidence (Shenton & Shenton, 2004). Finally, the PI met regularly 
with co-investigators during the analysis phase to consider researcher bias and to discuss 
and revise data analysis, as needed (Patton, 2002).  
Results  
The purpose of this study was to explore college decision-making experiences among SWD. 
Three primary research questions guided this work: (a) How did participants make decisions 
about college? (b) What factors informed participant college choice? and (c) What 
recommendations do participants have to support the success of students with disabilities 
in making decisions about college? While discussing these experiences participants 
described (a) financial considerations, (b) family and community influence, and (c) higher 
education factors.  
Financial Considerations  
Participants described financial considerations as a key factor in their college decision-
making. Specifically, participants discussed (a) financial impact and loan knowledgeability 
and (b) engaging in cost-benefit decision-making.  
Financial Impact and Loan Knowledgeability 
All participants had familiarity with student loans to varying degrees. Some participants, like 
Maria, were uncertain whether she had acquired student loans to finance her education 
because a sibling helped her through the process: “I was a little confused myself when my 
sister had to explain…I don’t know what [financial aid] is…is there a difference in that and 
student loans?”  Similarly, Nicole noted, “Since I’m first generation, I didn’t really have any 
idea how student loans work”. Cathy, who acquired loans in her early thirties, “didn’t really 
understand [that] financially, it was a loan,” instead thinking, “oh, that’s like a grant or 
scholarship”.  
Alex, a non-traditional college student (i.e., did not attend college right out of high 
school), stated that student loans “are actually the big reason I’ve waited so long to do 
college,” noting they earned low grades in high school due to absenteeism related to their 
disability. Consequently, they were ineligible for merit-based scholarships and did not feel 
adequately prepared to attend college when graduating high school. Now that they are 
enrolled in college, Alex described the loan process as “a complicated read…you must be 
Richie Rich…if you’re going to understand how all this is going to work out when you’re 18 
[laughs]”.  
 
Alex further explained they “haven’t been able to work” due to their disability, and 
only recently were approved for disability benefits, until which time they were forced to 
“live off student loans entirely.” This resulted in Alex acquiring the maximum possible 
amount of student loans each semester. Cathy echoed similar sentiments of being “unable 
to work” due to her disability, thus increasing her student loan acquisition. She obtained 
 [ DOI: 10.61186/johepal.4.4.102 ] 
 [ Downloaded from johepal.com on 2026-10-04 ] 


Fujita, M., Francis, G. L., Duke, J. M., & Raines, A. 
 
 
 E-ISSN: 2717-1426 Volume: 4 Issue: 4 DOI: 10.61186/johepal.4.4.102 
109 
“the max that [she] could…and will have at least $100,000 in student loans,” noting she has 
to “do this all by myself…I don’t have parents to pay for it”. 
Beyond course tuition, participants described additional disability-related costs, 
including the burden of additional expenses SWD often accrue, such as the cost of inclusive 
postsecondary education (IPSE) programs and disability testing. For example, once Devon’s 
younger sister enrolled in college, Devon stopped participating in her university’s 
postsecondary education program for individuals with intellectual or developmental 
disabilities because “it was already adding more money to the college financial aspect.” 
Devon expressed sadness over discontinuing the program “especially during Covid …they 
could have helped me figure out how to do internships or job interviews online.” Similarly, 
Robin described needing to make choices when it came to additional testing expenses so 
she could access university accommodations. Luckily, Robin’s university DSO awarded her a 
scholarship to obtain testing, otherwise “if I didn’t get the scholarship, I definitely couldn’t 
do [the testing]”.  
Participants described hope, and sometimes confusion, around numerous additional 
financial or disability policies for which they may qualify. A number of participants 
mentioned student loan programs (e.g., Public Service Loan Forgiveness) as an important 
factor in deciding to acquire student loans and attend college. Thor described the program 
as “The Department of Education program if you work for the government for greater than 
10 years, they’re willing to forgive your student loans.” Cathy described another program, 
confidently stating, “a lot of people know that if you’re on disability you can request for 
student loan forgiveness, but not if you’re already on disability when you start college.” She 
went on to, however, say that the “disability system is really hard to navigate.” Other 
participants were less sure of the programs they described, such as Alex who previously 
received Social Security Insurance, described how they “lost the benefit” once married, and 
were “unsure” if receiving social security insurance at one point impacted financial aid.  
Participants expressed confusion and concern about the instability of student loan 
interest rates and ideas of “predatory lending.” Thor expressed trepidation about adjustable 
interest rates after receiving targeted advertisements for “a 3.4% interest rate,” loan which 
he was interested in acquiring before a trusted advisor explained that the adjustable interest 
rate would “skyrocket up after 12 months.” Alex described similar concerns about predatory 
lending, stating that they have friends with disabilities “who have been signed up…to take 
on massive, massive amounts of debt with a low surety they would ever be able to use that 
degree.” Similarly, Cathy described many people “not understanding how the interest would 
accrue.” Robin acquired student loans for a culinary program before entering a four-year 
university. She described being in a “19-20 - year-old mindset…if I just ignore it, it doesn’t 
exist,” disregarding communication from the loan holders. She believed she would “just be 
able to talk them into taking the [interest] off, which isn’t how it works [laughs].”  Once Robin 
finally saw the amount of loans she had accrued with interest, she was hesitant to acquire 
additional loans for a four-year degree. However, Robin used this opportunity to engage in 
cost-benefit exploration of career options, searching for a degree that would allow her to 
pay off student loan debt.  
 [ DOI: 10.61186/johepal.4.4.102 ] 
 [ Downloaded from johepal.com on 2026-10-04 ] 


College Choice & Students with Disabilities (SWD) 
 
 
 Journal of Higher Education Policy And Leadership Studies (JHEPALS) 
110 
Cost-benefit Analysis 
Robin described researching potential career salaries and her ability to repay student loans: 
“I did a lot of research on what’s the least amount of schooling I can do to get a decent 
paying job and I finally just accepted that I had to have a bachelors [degree].” She added 
that she considered a “ratio of how much you have to pay [in college expenses] versus how 
much you make [in salary].” Cathy described a similar experience considering her career 
options if she did not have to repay student loans: “Oh my God…if it wasn’t for student loans 
and [that] my school is free, I would’ve studied art history.” Her key concern was 
“marketability” on the job market so she can “pay down all this money” she borrowed. Robin 
described her plan to pay off student loans as, “I’m just gonna live like I’m making $13 an 
hour…that way I can at least get a good chunk [paid] off”. 
Other participants emphasized cost-benefit decision-making beyond pecuniary 
considerations, focusing on types of employment that would be “doable” given their 
disabilities. For example, Alex considered future employment based on the physical 
demands of the job “I can’t do the able-bodied…stand for six hours,” leading to concerns 
around “choosing between health and keeping the job.” Thor described similar concerns 
that were influenced by past work experience, “The office manager just decided I could not 
do the work…despite [having the] knowledge [of the job skills].” He described feeling that 
not only was his “physical disability a problem…but [the employer] also started to treat me 
like I had a mental disability as well.” Thor explained that these experiences led him to realize 
“you’re going to need a degree” because some professional trades would not be accessible 
to him as a career option. Such considerations about the future also led to strong emotions 
among some participants.  
Some participants described deep emotional experiences related to student loans and 
future planning. Devon approached the process of acquiring student loans with “concern” 
and “unease.” Alex shared that the moment they signed their student loan promissory 
noting they “actually did have a panic attack because…I have no idea how I’m going to be 
able to pay this back.” Other participants adopted a sense of resolve about acquiring student 
loans, such as Cathy who described loans as a “necessary evil.” Maria said she did not want 
finances to dictate her future and gets “emotional” because she does not “want a job I hate” 
just to pay the bills.  
Family and Community Influence 
Participants described the role of support systems as crucial to their college decision-
making, including (a) family influence and (b) community mentors. 
Family Influence 
Regardless of age, participants consistently mentioned the role of family in their college 
decision-making journey. For example, Robin described conversations with her dad who 
“tried to talk me out of the vocational school because he literally did the exact same thing 
and couldn’t get a job right out of it.” Thor’s parents helped him “keep things realistic” and 
were “definitely a good asset” in reviewing college and career options. Thor, who has a 
physical disability, was considering a heavy construction job and described how his dad 
helped him think through “certain limitations” of the career given mobility limitations. 
Devon, who went on college tours her senior year of high school, indicating that her parents 
 [ DOI: 10.61186/johepal.4.4.102 ] 
 [ Downloaded from johepal.com on 2026-10-04 ] 


Fujita, M., Francis, G. L., Duke, J. M., & Raines, A. 
 
 
 E-ISSN: 2717-1426 Volume: 4 Issue: 4 DOI: 10.61186/johepal.4.4.102 
111 
accompany her was helpful so they could “ask all the questions to the campus tour guide,” 
even though ultimately her parents told her it was her decision where to attend.  
Family support systems extended beyond parents in playing an important role in 
college decision-making. Nicole emphasized the role of her sisters, who were also enrolled 
at the university she selected, who “encouraged me just to apply there.” The campus was 
close to their home so “I was just like my sisters, I just stayed home” even after considering 
out-of-state colleges that offered her preferred degree program. Similarly, Devon 
mentioned visiting the school her brothers attended, and although her brothers had the 
degree in the program she desired, ultimately, she stayed close to home for parental 
support. Cathy noted discussing her program options with her wife “so it’s not just the 
parents” who influence college decisions. 
However, not all relationships positively influenced college decision-making. Cathy 
emotionally told the story of her high school program for “troubled kids that did not 
encourage college,” but was “actively discouraged.” Even still, she applied for university and 
was accepted, but her mother would not provide the necessary support or information, “like 
she wouldn’t do the financial aid or anything [cries].” Thor also noted that his parents’ 
expectations did not always align with accommodations he would need to receive on 
campus: 
I would have liked [my dad] to know that the criteria that I’m looking for, in either 
direction, either career or for college, is going to be different than, let’s say, my 
sister’s. You know ’cause, it’s easy for parents or caregivers to get caught up in 
that, ‘oh, you know, my kid is disabled, but to me they’re not really different.’ 
You know, [parents] get comfortable with the accommodations you have at 
home to the point where they don’t see it as different. 
Community Mentors 
The role of formal and informal mentorship was key to participant college decision-making. 
For instance, Maria and Thor noted the impact of medical professionals on their decision-
making. Maria, who was in the hospital for much of her childhood, remembered, “…I met a 
lot of these Child Life Specialists and they helped me a lot [to] cope with a lot of things in 
the hospital so…I just wanted to give back and do the same thing hopefully [laughs].” Thor 
described the impact of his orthopedic surgeon whom he has known for many years, stating 
the doctor, “convinced me to do a gap year.” Thor described his doctor asking him: “Do you 
even know what you want to do? You know it’s possible for you to just take a year, work, 
live on your own for a little bit and see what happens.” Thor described his gap year as 
important in learning to live independently and “figuring out exactly what I need” in terms 
of resources and mobility devices, as well as what jobs and opportunities would be feasible 
for him. This helped Thor look for “realistic” career opportunities as the doctor told him, 
“yes, you have career options, but those have to have accommodations.” 
For Devon and Nicole, support from their religious community played an important 
role in college decision-making. Devon’s church community rallied around her to research 
how to prepare an art portfolio for her college of choice. Nicole’s pastor worked at the 
university she decided to attend, enabling her “to make some connections before” even 
getting to the university. Further, Nicole, a first-generation college student, was unsure 
about the college process so her family hired a college mentor to assist in the college 
 [ DOI: 10.61186/johepal.4.4.102 ] 
 [ Downloaded from johepal.com on 2026-10-04 ] 


College Choice & Students with Disabilities (SWD) 
 
 
 Journal of Higher Education Policy And Leadership Studies (JHEPALS) 
112 
application process. Nicole described the college mentor, “she really helped steer me 
towards where I needed to be.” Ultimately, Nicole’s religious affiliation influenced her 
college choice because she is a “Christian and [I] felt like going to this school steered [me] 
towards my calling.”  
Higher Education Factors  
Participants described several factors related the influence of higher education contexts on 
decision-making, which influenced college choice, including (a) institution type, (b) learning 
environment, and (c) campus location and accessibility.  
Institution Type 
Perceptions of universities based on their status as a public or private institution influenced 
participants’ college decision-making. This was especially true for participants who 
emphasized cost as a determining factor in selecting a university, noting that “private 
institutions are generally money-making machines and you often pay more for the 
education than what you might really get” (Cathy). Thor noted that he felt some private 
institutions “have very good campuses, [while] some of them you're really just paying for 
the name.” However, Nicole described her belief that private institutions could provide 
additional money to students, “private institutions can give you those [scholarships].”  
Additionally, tuition differences between in-state and out-of-state institutions played 
a major role in decision-making [e.g., “I was gonna have to take out a lot more loans because 
[preferred university] was an out of state school” (Nicole), “A lot of in-state schools are a lot 
more cost-effective and were pretty [physically] accessible” (Thor)]. Ultimately, university 
“prestige” dissuaded Nicole from even applying to the university, noting that “it was going 
to be really hard for me to get into the program”. 
Participants also held perceptions around timing of attending college and the type of 
“college experience” they anticipated. Cathy noted had she attended college right after high 
school she would have had that “glamorized college experience” but did not feel that she 
missed out having started college as an adult. Other participants noted issues such as being 
“a little suspicious” of a campus when there was a “large section of Greek frat houses” 
(Cathy) or attending a “party school” with “drugs and alcohol” (Nicole), where they would 
not feel comfortable in such environments.   
Learning Environment 
Participants described universities offering their desired degree program or major as a major 
decision-making factor. This was particularly true when the desired program aligned with 
ideal location or other aspects. For example, Devon noted that her university “had a very 
good art program” and was close to home, two factors that made it an appealing choice. 
Thor also noted that he wanted a university “that had a really good program on top of… 
[physical] accessibility and proximity [to family and doctors].” He explained that his current 
university is connected to graduate programs he would like to pursue, which influenced his 
decision to attend. Likewise, Robin noted that her professional degree program is the only 
accredited program in her state, making her decision much easier.  
 [ DOI: 10.61186/johepal.4.4.102 ] 
 [ Downloaded from johepal.com on 2026-10-04 ] 


Fujita, M., Francis, G. L., Duke, J. M., & Raines, A. 
 
 
 E-ISSN: 2717-1426 Volume: 4 Issue: 4 DOI: 10.61186/johepal.4.4.102 
113 
Beyond the emphasis of degree programs, participants described the importance of 
online versus on-campus learning environments. For Alex, who has a respiratory disability, 
the flexibility of online programming was crucial to their health and ability to learn: 
 
…Say I got a cold and it’s a really brutal cold and it has me stuck in the recliner 
with all my medicine and stuff around me, breathing treatments - that kind of 
thing - I can still check in on the lecture and be able to get make up work right 
away. As opposed to having to completely miss [class] because I can’t get there. 
Because I might have an asthma attack trying to get from my car to the building… 
I can watch this lecture now, or I can listen to a lecture while I’m taking a 
treatment. 
 
Cathy noted that the bright lights of a classroom sometimes trigger her health-related 
disability so she would not be able to “do her learning at a set time.” Therefore, she 
completes asynchronous online coursework “anytime I feel well enough.” Interestingly, 
Cathy noted this is likely true for students without disabilities as well (“a lot of people 
struggle”) and noted that all students may benefit from this type of flexibility. On the other 
hand, Nicole described struggling with courses that transitioned online due to Covid-19: “It 
was definitely much harder because everything with the pandemic happened … [professors] 
made everything virtually. I’m more of an in-person person, so it was hard, you know.” 
Whereas Alex noted an increased risk of Covid-19 symptoms due to their disability and was 
grateful for online courses because “I definitely don’t want to get Covid now.”  
Campus Location and Accessibility 
Participants described the importance of the campus location when selecting and being 
successful at a college. Notably, many participants described the importance of close 
proximity to family when selecting a college and choosing to live on campus. Through 
Nicole’s decision-making process she thought, “being here at [University] I realized I can go 
home probably every other weekend, just to see my family.” Devon felt the same: “I knew 
that [my parents] could help me out my freshman year if they were close by, they could 
drive to see me and help.” Devon noted that her parents help her with grocery shopping 
and “one-on-one advice” with “academics and social life.”  
Similarly, Thor noted that proximity to his orthopedic physician was an important 
consideration for the college he selected. When he narrowed down options between his top 
two college choices, he described his thought process: “This [university] is a lot closer to my 
orthopedic doctor…and [other university], it would be a six-plus hour drive to get to the 
[doctor].”  His current proximity to the doctor meant that he could make it to the doctor 
and still make it to “class and go to work later that day.” Maria desired to attend a college 
close to home so she could continue living with her family (“I just didn’t wanna leave home 
yet,”) because of the support her mother and sisters provided- adding there were additional 
benefits: “I saved a lot of money.”  
A discussed about the influence of mentors, participants also described the 
importance of the accessibility and physical aspects of campus, such as campus size, 
layout, buildings, and safety. Thor recounted reviewing campus layouts with meticulous 
 [ DOI: 10.61186/johepal.4.4.102 ] 
 [ Downloaded from johepal.com on 2026-10-04 ] 


College Choice & Students with Disabilities (SWD) 
 
 
 Journal of Higher Education Policy And Leadership Studies (JHEPALS) 
114 
detail, asking himself questions such as: 
 
…If I were going from building A to building B, how long would that take? What 
would be the best routes? Then following that up with a lot of questions like, 
what’s the public transportation like? Is there an overlap in bus schedules or in 
other transportation schedules? ... I have to know campus size. I have to know 
public transportation. I have to know living conditions. I have to know [eventual] 
graduate assistantships. 
Thor went on to describe visiting buildings ahead of time to view the “lecture bowl” 
to assess whether it was equipped with desks or tables, and whether he would need to enter 
from the lower level or the top. He noted the age of campus is important as “the likelihood 
of [old buildings] being accessible is not great” and that if someone could show him a 
“completely new age accessible campus…and [tell him] this is $80,000 a year, it would have 
made its way on the list.”   
Alex reported needing to consider access to handicap parking and proximity to classes- 
critiquing many campuses for lacking consideration for individuals with disabilities. They 
noted that “able-bodied people” design universities to “include a wheelchair ramp and that 
will be fine…just put it way down there at the end in the parking lot and we'll make sure that 
the wheelchairs can come up onto the ramp” without considering “are you serving just 
wheelchair users with this ramp? Or are you serving the people who have mobility 
impairments as well?” They described universities including a wheelchair ramp as following 
“the letter of the law” but having a ramp that is closer to parking and less steep as “being 
inclusive.”  
Two participants (Devon and Nicole) described researching building types before 
deciding on a college. Devon desired to view the university’s art facilities (her anticipated 
major), and both Devon and Nicole sought safety on campus “at different times of day” 
(Devon) or “the safety aspect” (Nicole). Devon also described visiting a campus that had a 
“safe space” for SWD and noted how impressed she was by this feature.  
Decision-Making Recommendations for SWD 
Throughout the interviews and focus group participants provided recommendations for high 
schools, colleges, and SWD making decisions about college. Recommendations related to: 
(a) mentorship and personal relationships, (b) college research and selection, and (c) policy 
and financial aid information.  
Mentorship and Personal Relationships 
Multiple participants discussed the desire for one-on-one mentorship in making college 
decisions and understanding the college-going process. Nicole and Marie agreed that high 
schools should start mentoring programs to prepare students for college. Nicole suggested 
that high schools provide personalized resources to SWD, “maybe assign someone, 
especially to guide SWD and help them throughout high school” because students just have 
“one counselor so they may [benefit] from additional help.” Further, Thor recommended 
bringing high school alumni who attended college back to speak with SWD who are 
considering college. This would allow students to hear “different aspects that they have 
personally gone through it.”  
 [ DOI: 10.61186/johepal.4.4.102 ] 
 [ Downloaded from johepal.com on 2026-10-04 ] 


Fujita, M., Francis, G. L., Duke, J. M., & Raines, A. 
 
 
 E-ISSN: 2717-1426 Volume: 4 Issue: 4 DOI: 10.61186/johepal.4.4.102 
115 
Maria described her experience being connected with a “disability mentor” once she 
enrolled in college but wished she “had a better connection” with that individual. Cathy 
recommended the “student success counselor” model implemented at her university who 
sometimes served “more like a talk therapist” but helps to encourage SWD by providing 
resources and someone to talk to when they are unsure of what to do. Cathy explained that 
“as a disabled student going through college, it’s more than just an education…it’s also 
breaking down the barriers that society has created between me and the next thing.” This 
informed Cathy’s recommendation that having someone one-on-one to help SWD be 
successful is key. Devon recommended it would be helpful to have the college mentor role 
be someone that could help “in terms of specific disabilities” so they can “relate” to the 
student’s unique situation. Devon, who has autism, noted this might include talk about social 
skills or interview techniques from someone who has had similar experiences.  
Participants spoke about the power of connecting with peers or mentors, and 
recommended college programs designed to connect SWD to one another on campus or 
online. Devon described a mentor from her postsecondary education program for students 
with intellectual or developmental disabilities, who encouraged her to “do events with other 
peers in a way that also helped with communicating…stuff like that could help me transition 
from college to the real world.” Similarly, Nicole recommended a group or “conference” of 
students on her campus with learning disabilities so they could “connect” through a “social 
group.” Cathy, who attended college online, described a social media group for students in 
their university who are “allies or who are disabled.” The group allowed students to form a 
community and discuss when they are having an issue related to seeking accommodations 
or other aspects of college. Cathy and other participants (Devon and Nicole) agreed that 
social media geared toward building community among SWD would be highly beneficial to 
building community.  
College Research and Selection 
When researching potential universities, participants recommended numerous strategies 
for students and colleges to adopt. Thor recommended SWD conduct an initial “resource 
interviews” with university staff when considering applying to a school and once they make 
the decision to attend. This would allow students to “know exactly what their 
accommodations are going to look like” so they can compare and contrast the processes 
across universities. Other participants noted being unsure where to turn once enrolled at 
their university, and agreed they wished they had additional information prior to starting 
courses. Devon described her college tour experience, “I felt like that they didn’t tell all of 
the information about services they offered.” Therefore, she recommended providing SWD 
with a checklist or additional information with questions to ask the university.  
Participants described the importance of university websites for students researching 
where to apply. Nicole and other participants noted that they would like to “start with the 
[college] website” and then be connected to someone to speak with one-on-one. 
Participants described difficulty finding the disability services webpage on many university 
websites, causing “frustration” with the process of researching accommodations and 
determining who to contact at the university. Therefore, participants recommended 
university websites prominently display a link to disability services on the homepage. Thor 
further recommended disability-specific information on disability webpages, so students 
 [ DOI: 10.61186/johepal.4.4.102 ] 
 [ Downloaded from johepal.com on 2026-10-04 ] 


College Choice & Students with Disabilities (SWD) 
 
 
 Journal of Higher Education Policy And Leadership Studies (JHEPALS) 
116 
could more easily understand the accessibility within a specific campus, given a student’s 
type of disability. During the focus group conversation, other participants with multiple 
disabilities were worried about needing “to choose” a disability option if this 
recommendation were adopted. However, participants agreed that specific accommodation 
information would be helpful on the website.  
Most universities house a career office that is specifically designed to assist students 
with career exploration, resume building, and interview preparation. Participants noted 
challenges with university career offices including a lack of staff equipped to work with SWD.  
Thor and Alex recommended disability training for these professionals in order to ensure 
they are equipped to interact with, and advise, SWD in potential career options. Along these 
lines, Cathy noted unique career considerations given her disability (e.g., limited movement) 
and needing “flexible work hours.”  As a result, Cathy and other participants (Thor and Alex) 
acknowledged the potential that certain degrees would not be best suited for flexible jobs 
and would have liked to explore career options with “someone at the university.” Thor noted 
a college career officer who had never advised students with physical disabilities about 
career options. Interestingly, participants also shared that beginning these career 
conversations in college is too late; all participants recommended career exploration 
programming specifically for SWD with caregiver involvement begin in high school. 
Participants explained that programming beginning senior year in high school would be too 
late and agreed that the conversation should begin in sophomore or junior year and then 
programming could get more specific (e.g., financial aid) as students neared college.  
Policy and Financial Aid Information 
Participants expressed concern with the lack of financial aid information they received when 
planning for college, particularly in high school. Nicole and other participants recommended 
that college decision-making programming and informational sessions (e.g., after school 
programs) must “cover financials and where you will be living.” Given participant uncertainty 
around types of student loans (i.e., federal, private), interest rates, and “predatory lending,” 
they recommended this content as crucial for preparing SWD for college. Further, 
participants noted lack of clarity around student loans or disability-related policies, such as 
Total and Permanent Disability Discharge (TPDD) and Social Security Insurance. They (Thor, 
Alex, and Cathy) described being unsure of exact policy names, qualification criteria, and 
specific benefits related to each policy. Therefore, they recommended “more information” 
related to disability-specific or student loan policies be included in high school or college 
programming for students with disabilities.  
Discussion 
The purpose of this study was to explore college decision-making experiences among SWD 
and to provide recommendations to inform successful college decision-making. This study 
adds to college decision-making literature by providing the perspective of SWD. Previous 
literature highlights ways in which policy, individual demographics, higher education, and 
community influence cost-benefit judgment among SWD and college decision-making 
among students without disabilities (Perna, 2006; 2008). Importantly, this study found that 
SWD engagement in cost-benefit analysis informs college choice among SWD, as evidenced 
 [ DOI: 10.61186/johepal.4.4.102 ] 
 [ Downloaded from johepal.com on 2026-10-04 ] 


Fujita, M., Francis, G. L., Duke, J. M., & Raines, A. 
 
 
 E-ISSN: 2717-1426 Volume: 4 Issue: 4 DOI: 10.61186/johepal.4.4.102 
117 
by weighing the potential costs of college (e.g., student loans, time away from job, 
social/academic barriers) against potential benefits (e.g., higher paying job, career options 
supportive of disability needs). 
Participants noted lack of information around financial aid policies and perceptions of 
higher education institutions (i.e., public versus private universities), consistent with 
previous higher education literature (Perna, 2008; Taylor & Bicak, 2019). This finding 
contributes to an understanding of how SWD make decisions based on access to and 
availability of financial aid resources. Participants noted loan forgiveness programs geared 
toward individuals with disabilities but were unable to identify names or exact requirements 
of policy. The PI asked participants to describe the nature of the policy, clarifying they were 
primarily referring to TPDD, a federally run government program that attempts to assist loan 
holders with disabilities by offering student loan forgiveness upon meeting pre-established 
criteria. To qualify for this program, documentation of the disability from the Social Security 
Administration (SSA), the Department of Veterans Administration, or a physician is required 
for eligibility (Federal Student Aid, 2023). In previous years, restrictions for eligibility of 
benefits were discernibly limiting and participants faced income monitoring post-TPDD 
approval, leading to reinstatement of loans during the monitoring period (Department of 
Education, 2021). In 2016, the Department of Education identified approximately 387,000 
borrowers eligible to apply for the TPDD program. Of those, 19,000 submitted applications 
to receive Total and Permanent Disability Discharge and only 8 percent were approved 
(Reinicke, 2018).  
Following Covid-19 era student loan policy revisions, the Biden-Harris administration 
indefinitely eliminated the three-year income monitoring period and began administrative 
data matching to automatically identify eligible individuals to begin loan relief (Department 
of Education, 2021b). In fact, 98% of reinstated loans for individuals taking part in TPDD was 
caused by failure to submit the requested forms rather than earnings that were too high 
(Government Accountability Office, 2016). Participants in this study expressed uncertainty 
around policy requirements, specifically whether they would qualify in the future or what 
the actual requirements were. These findings mean participants made decisions about 
higher education that were not always rooted in accurate policy interpretation. Despite 
revisions in loan policies to benefit TPDD-eligible borrowers, SWD are making decisions 
about college based on ideas of loan acquisition that may not accurately reflect their post-
degree loan discharge options. For example, a student may select a local college where they 
can live at home versus an institution further away that may be a better fit. Thus, missing 
out on valuable learning and living experiences that may benefit the student later in life.  
Participants discussed perceptions related to public and private universities. 
Participants largely described public institutions as a more affordable option and perceived 
private institutions as “money-making.” This finding indicates participants may only consider 
private institutions as for-profit rather than also acknowledging not-for-profit private 
institutions. This may have implications for college decision-making as students may 
preclude all private institutions as an option to attend. Interestingly, all participants 
attended public universities; therefore, perceptions of SWD attending private institutions 
may vary, and would be a consideration for future research. Remarkably, participants did 
not mention social media or similar digital influences as explicitly informing their college 
 [ DOI: 10.61186/johepal.4.4.102 ] 
 [ Downloaded from johepal.com on 2026-10-04 ] 


College Choice & Students with Disabilities (SWD) 
 
 
 Journal of Higher Education Policy And Leadership Studies (JHEPALS) 
118 
decision-making, which has shown to affect college decision-making among students 
without disabilities (Dang et al., 2023).  
Finally, participants described additional costs related to higher education, including 
testing and disability-specific support (i.e., IPSE programming, postsecondary education 
programs). While the participants of this study did not note these as barriers for attending 
college, one participant noted she would not have been able to access accommodations 
through the university if they had not provided her with a scholarship to receive disability 
testing.  Thus, these services are key to the success of some SWD. Cost and access barriers 
to these services may attribute to diminished graduation rates among SWD compared to 
students without disabilities. Further, additional costs incurred by SWD related to their 
disability place an inequitable financial burden on this population of students.  
Implications for Policy and Practice 
This study highlights the need for pre-postsecondary programming for students and 
caregivers on (a) career exploration, (b) college choice considerations, and (c) financial aid 
literacy. Such programming should be implemented in high school settings prior to college 
considerations to better equip students with college decision-making materials specific to 
SWD (e.g., accommodation and financial aid information). Given the support provided to 
SWD by parents, siblings, and other caregivers (Francis et al., 2018), it is important these 
individuals are included in conversations around financial aid and college choice. Further, 
this study highlighted lack of knowledge surrounding social policies for individuals with 
disabilities, including student loan and social policies (e.g., SSI). Participants described lack 
of information around Social Security Insurance and Medicare. Specifically, they noted 
confusion or lack of information around student loan policies geared toward loan 
forgiveness for public service and policies geared toward individuals with disability. 
Therefore, information about disability-specific policies, including financial aid and social 
policies, needs to begin in high school with programming that prepares young adults with 
disabilities to navigate these areas upon transitioning to postsecondary life. 
Implications for higher education include accessibility of public information related to 
services for SWD and training for university staff. Given findings related to career exploration 
at university career centers, it is evident that all staff interacting with SWD should receive 
training to explore how one’s role in the university considers the needs of SWD.  
Future Research 
This study included a limited number of participants, however, through maximum variation 
sampling and multiple data collection techniques (i.e., interviews and focus group) was able 
to address the research purpose. However, future research should seek to recruit a larger 
number of participants for interviews, including a larger number of participants across 
disability diagnosis. This will ensure a more representative sample to ensure findings 
illustrate the decision-making factors and recommendations across students. Further, 
future research may explore the experiences of additional individuals who are influential in 
the college decision-making process, including (a) parents and caregivers, (b) high school 
counselors and teachers, (c) college admissions professionals, and (d) college financial aid 
 [ DOI: 10.61186/johepal.4.4.102 ] 
 [ Downloaded from johepal.com on 2026-10-04 ] 


Fujita, M., Francis, G. L., Duke, J. M., & Raines, A. 
 
 
 E-ISSN: 2717-1426 Volume: 4 Issue: 4 DOI: 10.61186/johepal.4.4.102 
119 
representatives. Each of these groups would provide a unique vantage point to inform more 
holistic college choice programming. 
All participants in this study attended public universities and many expressed concerns 
around private institutions. Therefore, the perspectives of SWD attending private 
universities should be included in future research to explore differences in college choice. 
Finally, multiple participants discussed perceptions of “predatory lending” in their 
interviews. Participants discussed this related to student loan advertisements, interest rates, 
and loan policy. However, research should seek to understand how predatory lending and 
recruitment impact SWD and should be considered in future research. Finally, the influence 
of social media and emotional intelligence has shown to affect college decision-making 
among students without disabilities (Dang et al., 2023). Future research should explore how 
these factors may impact college choice among SWD.   
Limitations 
This study has four primary limitations. First, although the goal of qualitative research is not 
to generalize finding across a population (Bogdan & Biklen, 2007), the small sample size of 
this study presents challenges in ensuring the reach of findings across college SWD. Second, 
because the initial data collection was via survey through university disability service offices, 
the limited the ability to directly administer the survey to students across universities where 
the survey was asked to be disseminated. In total, the survey was disseminated to eleven 
institutions; however, more than 200 universities received the request to disseminate the 
survey. Third, college degree information and history (e.g., major, previous community 
college) was not systematically collected across participants. Finally, the findings of this 
study represent an array of disability diagnoses among the relatively small sample. 
Therefore, the findings of this study represent the experiences of a limited number of 
students among disability diagnosis. 
 
 
Declaration of Conflicting Interests 
The authors have no known conflicts of interests to disclose.  
 
Funding 
The authors have no funding sources to declare in this research.  
 
Human Participants 
The authors confirm informed consent was provided by the research participants and 
further ethical guidelines are observed based on the journal’s policy. 
 
Originality Note 
The authors confirm that the manuscript is their original work, and if others’ works are used, 
they are properly cited/quoted. 
 [ DOI: 10.61186/johepal.4.4.102 ] 
 [ Downloaded from johepal.com on 2026-10-04 ] 


College Choice & Students with Disabilities (SWD) 
 
 
 Journal of Higher Education Policy And Leadership Studies (JHEPALS) 
120 
References 
 
Aquino, K. C., & Bittinger, J. D. (2019). The self-(un)identification of disability in higher education. 
Journal of Postsecondary Education & Disability, 32(1), 5-19. 
https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ1217454.pdf 
Avery, C., & Hoxby, C. M. (2003). Do and should financial aid packages affect students’ college 
choices? NBER Working Paper Series. https://doi.org/10.3386/w9482 
Boatman, A., Evans, B. J., & Soliz, A. (2017). Understanding loan aversion in education: Evidence 
from high school seniors, community college students, and adults. AERA Open, 3(1), 1-16. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/2332858416683649 
Bogdan, R. C., & Biklen, S. K. (2007). Qualitative Research for Education: An Introduction to Theory 
and Methods (5th ed.). Pearson A & B. 
Burgstahler, S., & Russo-Gleicher, R. J. (2015). Applying universal design to address the needs of 
postsecondary students on the autism spectrum. Journal of Postsecondary Education and 
Disability, 28(2), 199-212. https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ1074670.pdf 
Cai, R. Y., & Richdale, A. L. (2016). Educational experiences and needs of higher education students 
with autism spectrum disorder. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 46(1), 31-
41.  https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-015-2535-1 
Callender, C., & Jackson, J. (2005). Does the fear of debt deter students from higher 
education? Journal of Social Policy, 34(4), 509-540. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S004727940500913X 
Callender, C., & Jackson, J. (2008). Does the fear of debt constrain choice of university and subject 
of study? Studies in Higher Education, 33(4), 405-429. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/03075070802211802 
Center for Collegiate Mental Health. (2019). 2018 Annual Report. Center for Collegiate Mental 
Health (CCMH). https://ccmh.psu.edu/assets/docs/2018-Annual-Report-9.27.19-FINAL.pdf 
Christie, H., & Munro, M. (2003). The logic of loans: Students’ perceptions of the costs and benefits 
of the student loan. British Journal of Sociology of Education, 24(5), 621-636. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/0142569032000127170 
Dang, T. T. M., Le, P. C. L., Tran, T. T. T. (2023). Emotional intelligence and social media site 
experiences’ effects on college choice behavior: The mediating role of brand attitude. In N. 
T. Nguyen, H. Le-Minh, C. P. Huynh, Q. V. Nguyen (Eds.), The 12th Conference on Information 
Technology and Its Applications. Lecture Notes in Networks and Systems: Vol 734. (pp. 141-
153). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-36886-8_12 
Department of Education (2021a). Over 323,000 federal student loan borrowers to receive $5.8 
billion in automatic total and permanent disability discharges.  U.S. Department of 
Education. https://www.ed.gov/news/press-releases/over-323000-federal-student-loan-
borrowers-receive-58-billion-automatic-total-and-permanent-disability-discharges 
Department of Education (2021b). Education Department announces relief for student loan 
borrowers with total and permanent disabilities during the COVID-19 emergency. U.S. 
Department of Education. https://www.ed.gov/news/press-releases/education-department-
announces-relief-student-loan-borrowers-total-and-permanent-disabilities-during-covid-19-
emergency 
Dryer, R., Henning, M. A., Tyson, G. A., & Shaw, R. (2016). Academic achievement performance of 
university students with disability: Exploring the influence of non-academic 
factors. International Journal of Disability, Development and Education, 63(4), 419-430. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/1034912X.2015.1130217 
 [ DOI: 10.61186/johepal.4.4.102 ] 
 [ Downloaded from johepal.com on 2026-10-04 ] 


Fujita, M., Francis, G. L., Duke, J. M., & Raines, A. 
 
 
 E-ISSN: 2717-1426 Volume: 4 Issue: 4 DOI: 10.61186/johepal.4.4.102 
121 
Eckel, C. C., Johnson, C., Montmarquette, C., & Rojas, C. (2007). Debt aversion and the demand for 
loans for postsecondary education. Public Finance Review, 35(2), 233-262. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1091142106292774 
Etikan, I., Musa, S. A., & Alkassim, R. S. (2016). Comparison of convenience sampling and purposive 
sampling. American Journal of Theoretical and Applied Statistics, 5(1), 1-4. 
https://doi.org/10.11648/j.ajtas.20160501.11 
Federal Student Aid. (2023). Total and permanent disability discharge. 
https://studentaid.gov/manage-loans/forgiveness-cancellation/disability-discharge 
Francis, G. L., Duke, J. M., Fujita, M., & Sutton, J. C. (2019). “It’s a constant fight:” Experiences of 
college students with disabilities. Journal of Postsecondary Education and Disability, 32(3), 
247-261. https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ1236871.pdf 
Francis, G. L., Stride, A., & Reed, S. (2018). Transition strategies and recommendations: 
Perspectives of parents of young adults with disabilities. British Journal of Special Education, 
45(3), 277-301. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8578.12232 
Fujita, M., Francis, G. L., & Duke, J. M. (2022). “I’m not prepared:” Experiences of professionals 
working with students with disabilities and co-occurring mental health disorders. Journal of 
the American Academy of Special Education Professionals, (Spring/ Summer), 26-44. 
Hatch, J. A. (2002). Doing Qualitative Research in Education Settings. State University of New York 
Press. 
Kognito. (2017). Increasing student retention through improved mental health. 
https://www.campussuicidepreventionva.org/Kognito-Student-Retention-White-Paper-
2017.pdf 
Kranke, D., Jackson, S. E., Taylor, D. A., Anderson-Fye, E., & Floersch, J. (2013). College student 
disclosure of non-apparent disabilities to receive classroom accommodations. Journal of 
Postsecondary Education and Disability, 26(1), 35-51. 
https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ1026808.pdf 
Lewis, S. (2015). Qualitative inquiry and research design: Choosing among five approaches. Health 
Promotion Practice, 16(4), 473-475. https://doi.org/10.1177/1524839915580941 
Mader, J., & Butrymowicz, S. (2017, November 11). The vast majority of students with disabilities 
don’t get a college degree. The Hechinger Report. https://hechingerreport.org/vast-majority-
students-disabilities-dont-get-college-degree/ 
Merriam, S. B., & Tisdell, E. J. (2016). Qualitative Research: A Guide to Design and Implementation 
(4th ed.). John Wiley & Sons. 
Moser, A., & Korstjens, I. (2018). Series: Practical guidance to qualitative research. Part 3: Sampling, 
data collection and analysis. European Journal of General Practice, 24(1), 9-18. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/13814788.2017.1375091 
National Center for Education Statistics. (2021). Digest of Education Statistics 2021. NCES 2018-
070, table 311.10. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for 
Education Statistics. https://nces.ed.gov/pubsearch/pubsinfo.asp?pubid=2023009  
National Center for Education Statistics. (2022). Use of supports among students with disabilities 
and special needs in college. NCES 2022-071. https://nces.ed.gov/pubs2022/2022071.pdf 
National Center for Educational Statistics. (2017). Bachelor’s degree attainment at first institution 
through June 2017 by disability. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, National 
Center for Education Statistics. 
National Council on Disability. (2015). Briefing paper: Reauthorization of the Higher Education Act 
(HEA): The implications for increasing the employment of people with disabilities. 
https://www.ncd.gov/publications/2015/05192015 
 [ DOI: 10.61186/johepal.4.4.102 ] 
 [ Downloaded from johepal.com on 2026-10-04 ] 


College Choice & Students with Disabilities (SWD) 
 
 
 Journal of Higher Education Policy And Leadership Studies (JHEPALS) 
122 
O'Shea, A., Kilcullen, J. R., Hayes, J., & Scofield, B. (2021). Examining the effectiveness of campus 
counseling for college students with disabilities. Rehabilitation Psychology, 66(3), 300-
310. https://doi.org/10.1037/rep0000349 
Patton. M. Q. (2002). Qualitative Research & Evaluation Methods (3rd ed.). Sage Publications. 
Perna L. W. (2006). Studying college access and choice: A proposed conceptual model. In J. C. 
Smart (Ed.), Higher Education: Handbook of Theory and Research (pp. 99-157). Springer. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/1-4020-4512-3_3 
Perna, L. W. (2008). Understanding high school students’ willingness to borrow to pay college 
prices. Research in Higher Education, 49(7), 589-606. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11162-008-
9095-6 
Perna, L. W., & Titus, M. A. (2004). Understanding differences in the choice of college attended: 
The role of state public policies. The Review of Higher Education, 27(4), 501-525. 
https://doi.org/10.1353/rhe.2004.0020 
Rehabilitation Act of 1973. Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended 29 U.S.C. § 
794. 
Reinicke, C. (2018). Offset: How the government improperly takes money from the disabled. CUNY 
Academic Works. https://academicworks.cuny.edu/gj_etds/293 
Taylor, Z., & Bicak, I. (2019). What is the FAFSA? An adult learner knowledge survey of student 
financial aid jargon. Journal of Adult and Continuing Education, 25(1), 94-112. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1477971418824607 
Wolcott, H. F. (1990). Making a study “more ethnographic”. Journal of Contemporary Ethnography, 
19(1), 44-72. https://doi.org/10.1177/089124190019001003 
Yoon, H., Yang, Y., & Morewedge, C. K. (2022). Early cost realization and college choice. Journal of 
Marketing Research, 59(1), 136-152. https://doi.org/10.1177/00222437211026337  
  
 
 
 
 [ DOI: 10.61186/johepal.4.4.102 ] 
 [ Downloaded from johepal.com on 2026-10-04 ] 


Fujita, M., Francis, G. L., Duke, J. M., & Raines, A. 
 
 
 E-ISSN: 2717-1426 Volume: 4 Issue: 4 DOI: 10.61186/johepal.4.4.102 
123 
 
 
Dr. Megan Fujita is the Vice President of Education at the Council on Social Work Education and holds a 
faculty affiliate appointment at George Mason University’s College of Education and Human Development. 
Her research focuses on mental health and college decision-making among students with disabilities. 
Dr. Grace L. Francis is an Associate Professor of Special Education at George Mason University. Her research 
interests include the influence of expectations on the transition to adulthood and family support policies 
and practices that result in a high quality of life for individuals with extensive support needs.  
Dr. Jodi M. Duke is an Associate Professor of Special Education in the College of Education and Human 
Development in the School of Education at George Mason University and serves as the Academic Program 
Coordinator for the Autism Spectrum Disorders Graduate Program and the General Curriculum Program. In 
these roles she teaches graduate level courses in Special Education and Autism, mentors doctoral students 
and coordinates the graduate programs. Her research focuses on postsecondary transition, supports and 
services for individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorder including mental health supports. 
Dr. Alexandra Raines is an Assistant Professor of Special Education in the College of Education and Human 
Development at George Mason University. Her research interests focus on belonging for students with low 
incidence disabilities.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International (CC BY-NC 4.0) which allows reusers to distribute, remix, adapt, 
and build upon the material in any medium or format for non-commercial purposes only, and only so long as 
attribution is given to the creator. 
 [ DOI: 10.61186/johepal.4.4.102 ] 
 [ Downloaded from johepal.com on 2026-10-04 ] 
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)