5 Ways Employers Can Attract 
and Retain Latino Millennials  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
By Stephanie Román* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* This paper was authored by Stephanie Román, Policy Analyst, Economic Policy Project, with 
assistance from Catherine Singley Harvey, Manager, Economic Policy Project. It was funded by The 
Rockefeller Foundation. The findings and conclusions presented are those of the authors and NCLR 
alone and do not necessarily reflect those of The Rockefeller Foundation. 


LATINO MILLENIALS AT WORK 
 
 
 
 
 
Key Findings and Recommendations for Employers 
 
 
Young Latinos have high career ambitions and value 
professional growth. 
 
Create opportunities for growth and advancement within companies 
and organizations in order to retain young Latino talent. 
 
 
The sacrifices of previous generations shape Latino 
millennials’ outlook on work. 
 
To engage and retain young, hardworking, motivated Hispanics, 
make the workplace one that recognizes the value of Latino’s 
unique perspective. 
 
 
Family and career fulfillment outranks higher salaries for many 
Latino millennials. 
 
Create more flexible work policies that contribute to a greater work-
life balance for employees. 
 
 
Hispanic millennials graduating from college still face steep 
hurdles to employment and financial security. 
 
Help young Latinos navigate the employment pipeline through paid 
work experiences for high school and college students. 
 
 
Young Latinos express anxiety about saving for retirement.  
 
Better advertise and explain benefits packages to young employees 
and provide one-on-one benefits counseling and enrollment 
assistance.  
 


LATINO MILLENIALS AT WORK 
 
 
Introduction 
 
Millennials—individuals between the ages of 16 and 34—make up the largest generation in the United 
States, representing nearly one-third of the total U.S. population.1 Latinos* are the fastest-growing 
subset of millennials. Nearly one in four millennials is Latino.2 Between 1980 and 2012, the population 
of Latino millennials age 15–34 tripled in size, and nearly 900,000 Latino citizen children will turn 18 
each year between 2011 and 2028.3 
 
Given their rapid growth, young Latinos are essential to meeting the future demands of the American 
labor market. Employers recognize the importance of attracting young Latino talent, but many report 
difficulty recruiting, hiring, and retaining Latino candidates. Most recently, Silicon Valley has made 
headlines for its “diversity problem.” Companies such as Google and Apple have expressed the need to 
diversify, yet they continue to employ few women and even fewer racial and ethnic minorities, including 
Latinos and Blacks.4 This disconnect has contributed to relatively high rates of unemployment and 
underemployment of Latino millennials,5 despite their improving educational outcomes.† The 
unemployment rate for Latino millennials age 16–24 (16.5%) is greater than the rates for their White 
and Asian peers (12.2% and 10.9%, respectively).6 
 
Gaps in employment have negative repercussions for millennials’ future earning potential and for the 
U.S. economy as a whole.7 For millennials age 20–24, a lack of work experience, periods of 
unemployment, and a weak labor market can translate into $22,000 in lost earnings over a lifetime. The 
effects of entering the labor market in a recession can result in lower pay for at least 15 years after 
starting a career.8 Millennial unemployment also affects the overall economy; one estimate calculates a 
total of $9 billion in lost tax revenue and benefits due to millennial unemployment.9  
 
To better understand and improve the Latino millennial employment outlook, the National Council of La 
Raza (NCLR) has built on its previous research in this area by speaking directly with Latino millennials 
and employers. This brief examines Latino millennials’ perceptions of career success, their employment 
prospects, differences between older and younger Latinos in the workforce, and the characteristics of 
desirable workplaces. It also includes the employer perspective on how millennials contribute to the 
workplace and effective strategies for recruiting and retaining Hispanic millennials. Based on this 
research, NCLR offers broad recommendations for employers on how to better recruit and retain young 
Latino talent.
                                                        
* The terms "Hispanic" and "Latino" are used interchangeably by the U.S. Census Bureau and throughout this document to 
refer to persons of Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban, Central and South American, Dominican, Spanish, and other Hispanic 
descent; they may be of any race. 
 
† The high school dropout rate for Latinos has continued a downward trajectory over the last several years, while college 
enrollment has increased substantially. According to a White House report, between 2008 and 2012 the number of Hispanic 
students enrolled in college increased by 45%. However, issues with Hispanic college retention and graduation persist. The 
harmful effects of not completing college coupled with the Great Recession still affect earnings and employment prospects for 
many Hispanic millennials.  


LATINO MILLENIALS AT WORK 
 
 
Findings and Recommendations for Employers 
 
Finding: Latino millennials have high career ambitions and value professional growth. 
 
NCLR’s focus groups revealed that young Latinos are ambitious and deeply invested in achieving the 
American Dream through hard work and dedication.* Hispanic millennials are hungry for career 
opportunities that will allow them to gain experience and grow professionally. In a July 2014 poll of 500 
Latinos’ views on the economy, nearly two in three (65%) respondents expressed concern about a lack 
of career advancement opportunities in the U.S.10 As one respondent explained: 
 
"Younger people are more career-oriented than before. We are more aggressive. We set our 
own professional goals. That is why we don't want to be complacent and stay at the same job—
we always want more." 
 
Millennials are often stereotyped as having little attachment or allegiance to employers.11 However, 
focus group participants reported that their loyalty is a two-way street. Young employees are interested 
in establishing careers with employers that offer tangible opportunities for growth and advancement:  
 
"I could see myself staying at the same place for 40 years, but again, there has to be 
opportunity for growth at that place. If not, then I gotta do what I gotta do." 
 
Recommendation: Create opportunities for growth and advancement within companies and 
organizations in order to retain young Latino talent. 
 
Given the value of career advancement to Latino millennials, employers would do well to make 
transparent the pathways and requirements to advance in their companies and industries. Employer-
provided training and learning opportunities are also a key strategy to maximize millennial employee 
retention.  
 
Some employers interviewed by NCLR understand that opportunities for advancement are influenced 
by who holds decision-making power in a company. Unconscious biases can affect an employee’s 
chances of success before he or she is even hired.12 A more recent analysis of hiring trends finds that 
the race and ethnicity of a hiring manager is a strong determinant of the racial and ethnic backgrounds 
of those who are hired.13 Investing in training and tools to minimize unconscious hiring bias is an 
important step employers can take to diversify their hiring and retention.† 
 
 
                                                        
* The data informing this brief are primarily drawn from focus groups with Hispanic millennials and personal interviews with 
human resources staff from U.S. employers. Focus groups were conducted in December 2014 by Hart Research Associates in 
Miami and Orlando with cohorts of eight to 10 Latino millennial women and men with various educational and career 
backgrounds. These two cities were among the 10 large metropolitan areas with the lowest employment rates for 21- to 30-
year-olds in 2010, one year after the official end of the recession. Since then, millennials in these cities have continued to face 
challenging employment prospects. This brief also uses NCLR survey and poll data: in July 2014 Latino Decisions on behalf of 
NCLR conducted a poll of 500 Latino voters’ views on the economy, and in August 2014 NCLR conducted a two-question 
survey of about 250 Latinos age 16–30 through its mobile network. The survey and poll samples are not statistically 
representative. For more information, see Anthony P. Carnevale, Andrew R. Hanson, and Artem Gulish, Failure to Launch: 
Structural Shift and the New Lost Generation (Washington, DC: The Georgetown Center for Education and the Workforce, 
2013). 
 
† Several large companies, such as the Royal Bank of Canada, have recently taken steps to educate and train thousands of 
employees on identifying and eliminating bias. See Elizabeth Olson, “How Corporate America Is Tackling Unconscious Bias,” 
Fortune, January 15, 2015, http://fortune.com/2015/01/15/how-corporate-america-is-tackling-unconscious-bias (accessed 
June 2015). 


LATINO MILLENIALS AT WORK 
 
 
Finding: The sacrifices of previous generations shape Latino millennials’ outlook on work. 
 
Young Hispanics are ambitious yet realistic about what it takes to achieve their career goals. 
Willingness to work hard and be adaptable is a key asset that they bring to the workplace. Focus group 
participants were grounded by the experiences of their parents and grandparents, many of whom had 
limited English proficiency and educational attainment. One Latina expressed her gratitude for her 
parents even as she identified having distinct, more career-oriented goals:  
 
"I actually see their life as a lesson. They decided to go with the family first, have the kids first, 
and then they started working on their careers too late in the game. And then you have three 
children sleeping in the same bed or the same bedroom. I don't want to go through that with my 
own kids. I want to make sure that I am stable so that my kids are happy so that I can give them 
a better future. So that is why I am trying to get myself settled first." 
 
An older generation of Hispanics has shaped Hispanic millennials’ views on the importance of 
perseverance, teaching them that success is not handed over, but hard-won. Speaking to the 
challenges of finding employment after completing a bachelor’s degree, one Latino participant 
explained the importance of persistence and adaptability:   
 
"Maybe your expectations are different when you go to college. You think, ‘Okay, I'll graduate 
and I'll get an awesome job and I'll do really, really well,’ but that is not the way the cookie 
crumbles. You often find after college that you have to go through a couple of jobs until you find 
something that gives you financial stability, and then you grow with that company little by little. 
You don't get that financial stability right away. It is something that you have to work and work 
for." 
 
Young Hispanics are embracing their cultural roots as they strive for successful careers in the post-
recession economy.   
 
Recommendation: To engage and retain young, hardworking, motivated Hispanics, make the 
workplace one that values Latinos’ unique perspective.  
 
By providing young Latino employees with mentors and Latinos in visible leadership positions, 
employers can better attract and retain this growing, competent, and optimistic group of young 
Americans. For example, Hispanics in management positions encourage younger Hispanic employees 
to see themselves as potential leaders. 
 
Latino millennials possess a range of unique hard skills that should be similarly valued. Compensating 
employees for their bilingualism, if relevant, is one arrangement that increases productivity and benefits 
both parties. Recognizing and rewarding the added value that Hispanics bring to the workplace is 
useful for attracting and retaining employees.   
 
Finding: Family and career fulfillment outrank higher salaries for many Latino millennials. 
 
NCLR’s focus groups revealed that young Hispanics prioritize meaningful work and spending quality 
time with family members. Work-life balance deeply resonated with respondents, who saw a tradeoff in 
career success at the cost of family happiness. One young Latina explained her equation for happiness 
in terms of career and family stability: 
 
"I want to be happy, and I think if family and finances are where you want them to be, then that 
brings happiness. We are only here for a certain number of years, and not everybody with 
wealth has happiness. So I think being happy is really important, and all those other things will 
fall into place." 


LATINO MILLENIALS AT WORK 
 
 
A similar sentiment was expressed in a survey of 250 Latinos age 16–30 conducted by NCLR.14   When 
asked whether they would rather make $40,000 a year working at a job they love or make $100,000 
working at a job they think is boring, over 60% of respondents agreed they would rather work at a job 
they love. Many of the focus group participants expressed frustration with the difficulty of finding work 
that connected to their career goals instead of merely providing a paycheck. Research shows that 
many millennials are facing similar circumstances—in an analysis of the 25 most common occupations 
for 18- to 29-year-old women and men, low-wage jobs in retail and food service were among the most 
common, while jobs with higher earnings and a clear career path were present, though less common.15  
 
Recommendation: Create more flexible work policies that contribute to a greater work-life balance for 
employees. 
 
In order to be more responsive to the needs of younger employees, employers should examine their 
scheduling and leave policies to ensure that they promote reasonable flexibility. Policies such as 
telework, paid time off, paid sick days, flexible hours, and employer-sponsored benefits resonate with 
Latino millennials. A comparison of millennials and members of Generation X at the same age16 found 
that millennials are more likely to stay with an employer for longer periods of time.17 Some employers 
interviewed by NCLR reported that in addition to good work policies, soft benefits such as a casual 
dress code and occasional free food helped to create a millennial-friendly work environment.  
 
Finding: Hispanic millennials graduating from college still face steep hurdles to employment and 
financial security.   
 
Hispanic millennials came of age in fraught economic times and have remained critical of a 
socioeconomic climate where higher education does not always guarantee success. Focus group 
participants perceived college as expensive, hypercompetitive, and providing no guarantee of 
employment success. Latinos experience a high degree of occupational segregation, meaning that they 
tend to be concentrated in certain “clusters” of the economy where they compete for lower-wage jobs 
with similarly qualified Latinos.18 
 
Even for Latinos who have gone to college, access to a full-time job opportunity can prove challenging 
if the occupations in their networks of friends and family are limited to low-wage or part-time work. 
Research shows that Latinos are more likely than Blacks and Whites to rely on relatives and friends to 
find jobs, as opposed to marketing themselves through résumés, searching job postings, or seeking 
assistance from employment agencies.19 One Latino millennial expressed these hardships:  
 
“I know people who have bachelor’s degrees and master’s degrees and all kinds of degrees and 
they don’t have work. It’s not easy.” 
 
Student debt is yet another pressing issue affecting Latino millennials, many of whom do not receive 
financial support from their parents and assume most educational debt on their own. The average 
millennial with a bachelor’s degree now graduates from college with $30,000 in student debt, a 
staggeringly high number given that median annual earnings for millennials is $32,400.20 For Latinos, 
especially first-generation college students, the pressure of being academically and financially 
successful is a heavy responsibility: 
 
"You get the impression that to go to law school you have to be a superhuman. You have to be 
able to balance life, work, extra things, saving the world. You have to do all these things to get a 
higher education and a higher-paying job. It is very frustrating and it puts a lot of pressure on 
people." 
 
 
 


LATINO MILLENIALS AT WORK 
 
Recommendation: Help young Latinos navigate the employment pipeline through paid work 
experiences for high school and college students.  
 
Employers in NCLR’s interviews reported that forming partnerships with community-based 
organizations and educational institutions served the mutually beneficial purpose of expanding the 
employer’s name in the Hispanic community and easing Hispanic millennials’ transition into a difficult 
labor market. Further, given that work experience is an important indicator of employability,21 creating 
targeted internship and volunteer programs would serve as an additional investment in the Latino 
community—and the future American workforce.  
 
Among companies interviewed by NCLR, one employer in the telecommunications industry has found 
that partnering with schools and community-based organizations has improved access to talent from 
underrepresented communities. This employer also offers college scholarships to promising young 
students, providing crucial support while building youth’s relationships with the company. Another 
employer in the financial industry offering paid internships to students from a partner high school has 
found that both parties benefit from such programs. Employers committed to recruiting talent from 
underrepresented communities stand to benefit from diverse backgrounds and experiences that 
generate new ideas.   
 
Finding: Young Latinos express anxiety about saving for retirement.  
 
Hispanic millennials face a double retirement challenge as young workers and members of a group with 
historically low participation in retirement savings plans. Hispanics overall tend to have less access to 
employer-sponsored retirement plans, and those who do have access to such a plan at work are less 
likely than their peers to participate in it.22  
 
A vast majority (80%) of millennials surveyed said the Great Recession taught them the importance of 
saving now to weather difficult economic situations later; more than half (55%) reported saving for 
retirement.23 Focus group participants’ views and practices echo these findings. One Latina expressed 
the importance of a financially secure retirement but confessed to the difficulty and apprehension of 
saving: 
 
"This conversation [about retirement] is giving me anxiety. Honestly, I don't know. I am 34, so I 
hadn't gotten that far. Now I'm worried." 
 
Millennials are generally less confident that traditional retirement programs, such as Social Security, will 
be available to them at the current retirement age. As a result, many expect to work later into their 
lives.24 One Latino shared his thoughts on expecting, and even looking forward to, working past the 
traditional retirement age:  
 
"I haven't even thought about it. I'm only 24…my company offers a retirement package after a 
certain number of years, but I like to work. It's just what I like to do." 
 
Recommendation: Better advertise and explain benefits packages to young employees and provide 
one-on-one benefits counseling and enrollment assistance.  
 
A Wells Fargo analysis of one million millennials eligible for retirement accounts found that 
automatically enrolling this group in retirement accounts increased their participation fivefold.25 In order 
to promote responsible retirement savings practices, employers should strive for auto-enrollment. In 
addition, providing one-on-one retirement benefits counseling and enrollment support to young 
Hispanic employees will encourage more young Hispanics to save at an earlier age.  
 


LATINO MILLENIALS AT WORK 
 
 
Conclusion  
 
Hispanic millennials are poised to contribute substantially to multiple facets of American life, especially 
through their involvement in the labor force. While this research offers a glimpse into the experiences 
and perceptions of today’s Latino millennial workforce, more research is needed to understand this 
complex and growing group of young American workers. 
 
Employers committed to developing workplaces that complement the needs and strengths of young 
Latino employees would do well to create opportunities for career advancement, recognize and value a 
Latino perspective, create flexible work policies, provide benefit enrollment assistance, and engage 
young Latinos early on. Many have already begun this process; in the words of one employer, their 
millennial employees are “helping us evolve and change.” Employers dedicated to creating diverse, 
millennial-friendly work environments should start by listening to the valuable voices of their own Latino 
employees.    


LATINO MILLENIALS AT WORK 
 
 
Endnotes 
                                                        
1 The exact age range of the millennial generation varies by source. For a discussion on how 
millennials compare to other generations, refer to Scott Keeter and Paul Taylor, “The Millennials,” Pew 
Research Center, December 10, 2009, www.pewresearch.org/2009/12/10/the-millennials (accessed 
March 2014); and The Council of Economic Advisors, 15 Economic Facts About Millennials. Executive 
Office of the President. Washington, DC, 2014, 
www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/docs/millennials_report.pdf (accessed June 2015).  
2 Experian, Millennials Come of Age (Dublin: Experian, 2014), www.experian.com/assets/marketing-
services/reports/ems-ci-millennials-come-of-age-wp.pdf (accessed June 2015).  
3 The Council of Economic Advisors, 15 Economic Facts About Millennials; and NCLR, “Latino Children 
Will Add Nearly 15.8 Million Potential Voters to the Electorate” (Washington, DC: NCLR, 2013), 
www.nclr.org/images/uploads/publications/Latinos_Turning_18_Factsheet.pdf (accessed May 2015).  
4 Amadou Diallo, “Silicon Valley’s Diversity Problem Goes Beyond Hiring Practices,” Al Jazeera, March 
16, 2015, http://america.aljazeera.com/articles/2015/3/16/silicon-valley-diversity-problem.html 
(accessed June 2015).  
5 Brenda Calderon, Latinos in New Spaces: Emerging Trends and Implications for Federal Education 
Policy (Washington, DC: NCLR, 2015), 
www.nclr.org/images/uploads/publications/2015latinoeducationstats.pdf (accessed June 2015).  
6 U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Employment and Unemployment Among Youth — Summer 2014,” 
news release, August 13, 2014, www.bls.gov/news.release/pdf/youth.pdf (accessed May 2015).  
7 Rory O’Sullivan, Konrad Mugglestone, and Tom Allison, In This Together: The Hidden Cost of Young 
Adult Unemployment (Washington, DC: Young Invincibles, 2014), 
http://younginvincibles.org/wpcontent/uploads/2014/01/In-This-Together-The-Hidden-Cost-of-Young-
Adult-Unemployment.pdf (accessed May 2015).  
8 The Council of Economic Advisors, 15 Economic Facts About Millennials. 
9 Rory O’Sullivan, Konrad Mugglestone, and Tom Allison, In This Together. 
10 Latino Decisions, “On Shaky Ground: Poll of Latino Views on the Economy,” 
www.nclr.org/index.php/publications/on_shaky_ground_poll_of_latino_views_on_the_economy 
(accessed May 2015).  
11 Karen K. Myers and Kamyab Sadaghiani, “Millennials in the Workplace: A Communication 
Perspective on Millennials’ Organizational Relationships and Performance,” Journal of Business and 
Phycology 25, no. 2 (2010): 225–238.  
12 Hiring bias is especially harmful to people of color; a landmark 2002 study found a 50% call-back gap 
between otherwise identical résumés with typically White-sounding names and typically Black-sounding 
names. Marianne Bertrand and Sendhil Mullainathan, “Are Emily and Greg More Employable Than 
Lakisha and Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination,” American Economic Review 
94, no. 4 (2004): 991–1013.   
13 Laura Giuliano, David I. Levine, and Jonathan Leonard, “Manager Race and the Race of New Hires,” 
Journal of Labor Economics 27, no. 4 (2009): 589-631.  
14 NCLR, “Labor Day Spotlight: Young Latinos Want Better Career Opportunities, but Face High 
Unemployment,” August 29, 2014, www.blog.nclr.org/2014/08/29/labor-day-spotlight-young-latinos-
want-better-career-opportunities-face-high-unemployment (accessed June 2015). 
15 Anthony P. Carnevale, Andrew R. Hanson, and Artem Gulish, Failure to Launch: Structural Shift and 
the New Lost Generation (Washington, DC: The Georgetown Center for Education and the Workforce, 


LATINO MILLENIALS AT WORK 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                
2013), www.cew.georgetown.edu/wp-content/uploads/2014/11/FTL_FullReport.pdf (accessed May 
2015).  
16 Generation X here is defined as people age 34–49 in 2014. The exact age range of Generation X 
varies by source. For a discussion on how Generation X compares to other generations, refer to Paul 
Taylor and George Gao, “Generation X: America’s Neglected ‘Middle Child,’” Pew Research Center, 
June 5, 2014, www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2014/06/05/generation-x-americas-neglected-middle-
child (accessed June 2015) 
17 The Council of Economic Advisors, 15 Economic Facts About Millennials.  
18 Olga Alonso-Villar, Coral Del Río, and Carlos Gradín, “The Extent of Occupational Segregation in the 
US: Differences by Race, Ethnicity, and Gender,” Industrial Relations 51, no. 2 (April 2012): 179–212.  
19 Edwin Meléndez and Luis M. Falcón, “Closing the Social Mismatch: Lessons from the Latino 
Experience,” in Moving Up the Economic Ladder: Latino Workers and the Nation’s Future Prosperity, 
ed. Sonia M. Pérez (Washington, DC: NCLR, 2000), 186–209. 
20 Ben Miller, The Student Debt Review: Analyzing the State of Undergraduate Student Borrowing 
(Washington, DC: New America Foundation, 2014), 
www.newamerica.org/downloads/TheStudentDebtReview_2_18_14.pdf (accessed May 2015); and 
Jennifer Wang and Portia Boone, Millennials and Student Debt (Washington, DC: New American 
Foundation, 2014), www./newamerica.org/downloads/Millennials_and_Student_Debt.pdf (accessed 
May 2015).  
21 Laura Brewer, Enhancing Youth Employability: What? Why? and How? Guide to Core Work Skills 
(Geneva: International Labour Organization, 2013), www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_emp/---
ifp_skills/documents/publication/wcms_213452.pdf (accessed June 2015).  
22 Prudential, The Hispanic American Financial Experience (Newark, NJ: Prudential, 2014), 
www.prudential.com/media/managed/hispanic_en/prudential_hafe_researchstudy_2014_en.pdf 
(accessed June 2015); and Catherine Singley Harvey, Enhancing Latino Retirement Readiness in 
California (Washington, DC: NCLR, 2015), 
http://www.nclr.org/index.php/publications/enhancing_latino_retirement_readiness_in_california 
(accessed May 2015).  
23 Wells Fargo, “Eight in Ten Millennials Say Great Recession Taught Them to Save ‘Now,’ Wells Fargo 
Survey Finds,” news release, June 10, 2014, www.wellsfargo.com/press/2014/20140610_millennials 
(accessed May 2015).  
24 Elliot Schreur, Millennials and Retirement (Washington, DC: New America Foundation, 2014), 
www.newamerica.org/downloads/Millennials_and_Retirement.pdf (accessed May 2015).  
25 Paula Aven Gladych, “Millennial 401(k) Participation Dependent on Auto-Enrollment,” BenefitsPro, 
December 12, 2002, http://www.benefitspro.com/2012/12/14/millennial-401k-participation-dependent-
on-auto-en (accessed May 2015).